MASSACHUSETTS. 



[CHAP. VI. 

From the arrival of Governor Shute in 1716, 
to the arrival of Governor Belcher in 1730. 

(Anno 1716.) COLONEL Shute arrived at 
Boston, October the 4th, 1716, in a merchant ship, 
and was received \vith the usual parade. He made 
the opposers of the bank his first acquaintance, the 
old governor s family in particular, and took his 
lodgings at Mr. Paul Dudley s. He had received 
very unfavourable impressions of the other party 
from Mr. Belcher and Mr. Dummer, in England, 
and vas considered, from his first arrival, as an 
enemy to the scheme, and the heads of the party 
were the heads of an opposition during the whole 
of his administration. In his first speech to the 
general court, November 7, he puts them in mind 
of the bad state of the trade of the province, an 
important article of any people s happiness, ow 
ing, as he supposed, to the great scarcity of mo 
ney, and recommends the consideration of some 
effectual measures to supply this want, and thereby 
to restore trade to a flourishing condition. This was 
pointing out to them a further emission of go 
vernment s bills, and the representatives, pleased 
with so easy a method of obtaining money, soon 
determined upon a second loan of 1 00,000 /. for 
iO years, to be put into the hands of commission 
ers appointed for each county in proportion to 
iheir taxes. This provision being made by the 

VOT,. III. 



government, there was the less pretence for private 
persons or companies issuing their bills ; but it gave 
no relief to the trade, the whole currency soon de 
preciating to that degree, as, with this addition, 
to answer the purposes of money very little more 
than if it had not been made. The governor be 
came sensible of it, and recommended to them to 
provide against it, which they were not able to do, 
and many of them would not have been willing if 
they had been able, being in debt, and by means 
of the depreciation discharging their debts by a 
nominal sum, perhaps of not more than one half 
of the real value of the debts. He soon found 
the effects of it upon his own salary, which they 
refused to advance as the bills sunk, and having 
recommended this measure in a public speech it 
became more difficult afterwards to refuse repeat 
ing it. 

The province had been at war with the e. In 
dians, except some short intervals, for about 40 
years. The prospect of a long peace between 
Great Britain and France encouraged it to hope 
for the like with the Indians, who had always 
been under French influence, but their father, 
Ralle , a Jesuit, was constantly instigating them to 
insult and annoy the new settlers, who, he pre 
tended, encroached upon the lands of the Indians, 
and by supplying them with strong drink de 
bauched their morals and prevented the progress 
of the good work he had began among them. A] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[treaty or conference was thought expedient to con 
firm them in their friendship with the English, 
and, if possible, to draw them from the Roman 
Catholic to the Protestant religion. 

(Anno 1717.) The governor, therefore, the 
first summer after his arrival, in August, at 
tended by several of the council both of Massa 
chusetts and New Hampshire, and other gentle 
men, met the Indians at Arowsick island. At the 
beginning of the conference he delivered them an 
English and an Indian bible, which he told them 
contained the religion of the English, and at the 
same time recommended to them Mr. Baxter, a 
minister who went down as a missonary, and told 
them he would explain the bible, and instruct 
them in the principles of religion. They were at 
no loss tor an answer. "All people, they said, 
loved their own ministers ; and as for the bible, 
they desired to be excused from keeping it : God 
had given them teaching, and if they should go 
from that they should displease God." They 
were fixed in their religion, and it would have 
been a loss of time to attempt to move them. 
The rest of the conference was upon the right of 
the English to settle in that part of the country. 
Upon complaint made by the Indians of encroach 
ments upon their lands, the governor produced 
one of the original deeds which had been given 
by their sachems. They acknowledged the lands 
to the w. of Kennebeck belonged to the English, 
but they were sure no sale had ever been made of 
any lands to the e. The governor told them the 
English would not part with an inch of land 
which belonged to them. The Indians were so 
oQ ended that they rose immediately, and, with 
out any ceremony, took to their canoes and went 
to another island where they had their head-quar 
ters, leaving behind an English flag which the 
governor had given them. In the evening seve 
ral of them returned to Arowsick with a letter 
from Halle to the governor, acquainting him, that 
the French king did not allow that in any treaty 
he had given away the land of the Indians to the 
English, and would protect the Indians against 
the English encroachments. The governor let 
them know, that he highly resented the insolence 
of the Jesuit., and the next morning ordered the 
signal for sailing. Ralle, in his letters, often la 
ments the unsteadiness of the Indians. They 
were afraid at this time of a new war. The old 
men were loth to quit their villages at Norridge- 
wock and Pcnobscot, where they lived at ease, 
and encamp in the woods, or, which was much 
worse, depend upon the French, who, they 
would often say, treated them like dogs when 



there was no immediate occasion for their service. 
This consideration induced them to send two of 
their number with a message to the governor, ac 
knowledging that yesterday they had been rude 
and unmannerly, and earnestly desiring to see him 
again. He let them know he would see them upon 
no terms, unless they quitted their pretensions to 
the lands which belonged to the English. This 
the messengers promised should be done, and de 
sired that the English colours which they had 
slighted might be returned them. In the even 
ing they came again to the conference, and ap 
pointed a new speaker as a mark of resentment 
against the former, who, they said, had behaved 
ill the day before, and, without entering into any 
dispute about particular limits or bounds, declared 
they were willing the English should settle where 
their predecessors had settled, desired to live in 
peace and to be supplied with necessaries, in a 
way of trade, confessed that some of their incon 
siderate young men had offered injuries to the Eng 
lish, and violated the treaty of Portsmouth in 
1713. After renewing that treaty, the conference 
ended. 

The beginning of an administration in the colo 
nies is generally calm and without ruffle. Several 
months passed, after Colonel Shute s arrival, 
without open opposition to any measures. The 
town of Boston, at the first election of their repre 
sentatives, left out such as bad been bank men, 
and chose such as were of the other party, but Mr. 
Cooke, who was at the head of the first party, 
had interest enough to obtain a place in council. 
It was, soon after, insinuated that the governor 
was a weak man, easily led away, and that he was 
in the hands of the Dudleys, men of high prin 
ciples in government, and it behoved the people to 
be very careful of their liberties. Mr. Cooke, who 
had the character of a fair and open enemy, was 
free in expressing his sentiments, and the governor 
was informed of some contemptuous language in 
private company, with which he was so much 
offended as to procure Mr. Cooke s removal from 
the place of clerk to the superior court. A dispute 
happening about the same time between Mr. 
Bridges, surveyor of the woods, and the inhabitants 
of the province of Maine, concerning the property 
of the white pine trees within that province ; Mr. 
Cooke immediately inserted himself in the contro 
versy, publicly patronized the inhabitants, and in 
a memorial to the house of representatives charged 
the surveyor with mal-conduct in threatening to 
prosecute all who without licence from him shall 
cut any pine trees in their own ground, which Mr. 
Cooke alleged they had good right to do, and] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



["he further charged the surveyor with permitting 1 
such persons as would pay him for it, to cut down 
the trees which were said to belong to the king. 

The surveyor thereupon preferred his memorial 
to the governor and council, justifying himself in 
the discharge of his trust, and complaining of 
Mr. Cooke, one of the members of the council, 
for officiously concerning himself with the affairs 
of the surveyor s office, and obstructing his mea 
sures for the service of the crown. Mr. Cooke 
had many friends in the house ready to support 
him, and this dispute was the beginning of the 
public controversy which continued until the end 
of Colonel Shute s administration ; parties were 
formed, new subjects for contention from time to 
time were furnished, until at length the governor 
was forced to leave the province. 

We do not find any vote of council upon this 
memorial, but the governor espoused the cause of 
the surveyor, and, to shew his resentment against 
Mr. Cooke, when the list of counsellors was pre 
sented at the next election, directed his speech to 
him in particular, and let him know he would 
excuse him from attending at the board for the 
ensuing year. 

(Anno 1718.) Mr. Cooke, soon after, presented 
his memorial to the council, in which he justified 
his own conduct, and charged Mr. Bridges with 
u using his utmost efforts to invade the rights and 
properties of the people in the province of Maine 
by his exorbitant actions, as well as basely betray 
ing the trust the crown had invested him with, 
by daily selling and bartering the very logs and 
timber, which he gave out was the king s, his 
master, whose bread he then eat." The council 
suffered the memorial to lay upon their table, but 
acted nothing upon it. Afterwards, upon the 
appointment of a committee by the house, they 
joined a committee of council to consider in general 
of Mr. Bridges s conduct. This committee, in their 
report, justified Mr. Cooke, and condemned the 
proceedings of the surveyor. The council put off 
the consideration of this report also, but the house 
voted their acceptance of it. The governor, of 
course, transmitted to the board of trade an account 
of all these proceedings, and very soon received 
an answer, censuring the house of representatives 
for countenancing and encouraging Mr. Cooke. 
This being laid before the house, they by a vote 
declared that a censure of the board of trade was 
occasioned " by sending home the papers on one 
side only, whereby their lordships were informed 
f.r parte." The house had avoided any direct 
attack upon the governor U7itil this vote, many 
of the principal members this year being well 



a fleeted to him, but the party, without doors, 
especially in Boston, had been increasing against 
him, and, at the next election for that town, they 
sent all new members, and a change was made 
in many other towns, unfavourable to the gover 
nor s interest. 

The famous projector Captain Coram, in the 
year 1718, was busy in a scheme for settling Nova 
Scotia and the lands between Nova Scotia and the 
province of Maine, and a petition was preferred by 
Sir Alexander Cairnes, James Douglass, arid Joshua 
Gee, in behalf of themselves and others, praying 
for a grant upon the sea-coast five leagues s. w. 
arid five leagues n. e. of Chibuctow harbour,, 
where they proposed to build a town, and to 
improve the country round it in raising hemp, in 
making pitch, tar, and turpentine, and they 
undertook to settle a certain number of families to 
consist of 200 persons in three years, the rest of 
his Majesty s subjects not to be prohibited fishing 
on the coasts under regulations. To this petition, 
Mr. Dummer, the Massachusetts agent, objected, 
because of the last clause, which laid a restraint 
upon the fishery. The lords of trade, however, 
reported in favour of it, but it stopped in council. 

Another petition was preferred by Willam Arm 
strong and others who had been officers and soldiers 
in the army, " praying for a grant of the lands 
between Nova Scotia and the province of Maine, 
the said tract of land having been conquered by 
the French in 1696 and possessed by them until 
1710, when it was recovered by the English, and 
by the treaty of Utrecht was with Nova Scotia 
given up by France to the British crown." The 
conquest in 1696 was the taking Pemaquid fort, 
and holding possession of the harbour two or three 
days. This, however, was made a serious affair, 
and the a"gent, Mr. Dummer, was several times 
heard before the lords of trade. The general court 
bein^ restrained from conveying these lands without 
consent of the crown, it was proposed, that if they 
would consent to resign the jurisdiction between, 
Kennebeck and Penobscot, the crown should con 
firm the property of the soil, but upon the pro 
posal s being communicated to the court, they 
instructed their agent to make no concessions. 

One Sarah Watts, setting forth that she was 
heir at law to Thomas Goft e, deputy governor 
and one of the 26 patentees of the old colony, 
claimed a 26th part of the colony, and the issues 
and profits for 80 or 90 years. She filed a bill of 
complaint in chancery against the province, and 
there was a commission of sequestration for several 
New England ships in the river, which cost the 
owners several guineas each to the sharpers who] 
it 2 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[had unjecl the woman to the suit. The agent was 
required to answer the bill, which, lie did by 
declaring that it" the complainant could make it 
appear that Thomas Goffe was once seized of a 
26th part of tin* colony, and that she was heir at 
law to him, which h&amp;lt;- did not believe she was able 
to do, yet he verily believed that when the paten 
tees, with others, "were incorporated into a body 
politic, their respective rights ceased and passed 
to th&amp;lt;- corporation, w ho hud granted the lands away. 
The poor woman was at last arrested for debt and 
sent to Newgate, where she perished. 

(Anno 1719.) The governor, in the beginning of 
the year 1718, had consented to an impost bill 
which laid a duty not only upon West India goods, 
wines, &amp;c. but "also upon English manufactures, 
and a duty of tonnage upon English ships. Before 
the session in May, the next year, he had received 
an instruction from the king to give all encourage 
ment to the manufactures of Great Britain. The 
house, however, passed a bill of the same tenor 
with that of last year, and sent it to the council 
for their concurrence. An amendment was pro- 
&amp;gt;!, viz. to leave out the duty upon English 
V.-SM-IS and goods, but the house adhered to their 
bill. A conference ensued, for the house were not 
then so exact as they have been since, in refusing 
to confer upon money bills. This produced 
nothing more than a proposal from the house to 
alter the word English to European, which, being 
trivial, was refused. It seems, the governor, a little 
out of time, had taken the opinion of the council 
upon this question, whether, consistent with his 
instruction, he could give his consent to the bill ? 
which they determined they could not, if it should 
be offered to him. The house then tried the 
council with the following resolve, " the house 
insist on their vote, forasmuch as the royal charter 
of this province gives power to the government 
to impose and levy proportionable and reasonable 
assessments, rates, and taxes upon the estates and 
ixrsons of all and every the proprietors and 
inhabitants of the same, which this government 
lias been in the free and uninterrupted exercise of 
ever since the enjoyment of the said charter. 
Sent to the upper house for their concurrence." 
The upper house was a new name for the council, 
and designed as a fleer and to intimate that they 
might consider themselves in another capacity 
than as a privy council. Perhaps if Cromwell s 
epithet for his house of lords had come into their 
minds, it would have been the other house. Taunts 
and language which tends to irritate, can upon no 
occasion be justifiable from one branch of the legisla 
ture to the other. Upon an agreement and har- 

2 



mony the interest of the people depends. Upon 
different apprehensions of this interest, if it be the 
real object, the several branches, by the persuasive 
voice of reason, will strive to convince each other, 
and be willing to be convinced as truth shall 
appear. 

The cpuncil thought themselves unkindly treat 
ed, and, by a message, desired the house to alter 
their vote, but they refused to do it, and gave their 
reasons for the new form. u The house have 
received new and unusual treatment from the board. 
1st, It is new and unusual for the council to give 
his excellency their advice upon a bill, till they 
have acted in concert with the house in concurring 
or non-concurring. 2d, It is likewise new and 
unusual for the council to desire a free conference, 
upon a subject matter, and then, at the manage 
ment, to inform the house that by a previous vote 
they had so far engaged themselves that they 
could not recede from it. 3d, It is likewise a new 
and unusual method for the honourable board, 
after a message to the house desiring several amend 
ments to a bill of rates and duties which were in a 
great measure agreed to by the house, immediately 
to non-concur the bill. 4th, It is likewise new 
and unusual for the honourable board to intermed 
dle so much with the grants and funds, which 
this house take fo be their peculiar province." 

The house having in this manner expressed 
their resentment returned to their old style, and 
then the council, by message, let them know that 
they would not give their concurrence to any bill 
laying a duty upon European goods, denied the 
charge made against them by the house, of inno 
vations, and intimated that any further messages 
would only tend to increase the misunderstanding 
and retard the affairs of the government, and desir 
ed the house rather to join with them in a diligent 
endeavour to bring the session to such a conclusion, 
as should promote his Majesty s honour and the 
interest of the province. 

Several weeks having been spent in these alterca 
tions, the governor thought it time to interpose, 
and, sending for the house to the council chamber, 
he made the following mild and healing speech to 
them. 

" Gentlemen, 

My design in sending for you up at this time, 

t you know how concerned I am at the 

unhappy misunderstandings that have been for 

many years between the council and your house 

relating to the impost bill, and to assure you that 

3 person here present can be more desirous of 

preserving the privileges of this people than 

myself, so far as is consistent with the late instruc-J 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



ftions I have received from my royal master, which 
have by his special direction been laid before this 
court. I am fully persuaded, that to act any way 
contrary thereto, after the many debates and votes 
which have been upon that head, would rather 
destroy than preserve those privileges we justly 
prize. Gentlemen, I desire your serious considera 
tion of what I have hinted, that so the important 
affairs of the province yet lying before you may 
have a speedy and happy conclusion." 

This speech which, a year or two after, when 
the prejudices against the governor were at the 
height, would have been excepted to as irregular 
and anticipating matters, which it would have 
been time enough for the governor to have declared 
his sense of when they came to be laid before him, 
had now a good effect, arid the house, the same 
day, resolved that a new impost bill should be 
brought in, and that the controverted clause in the 
former bill should be left out, but in the preamble 
to their resolve they make a heavy charge against 
the council for not concurring in their former bill. 

" Whereas this house have voted and passed a 
bill granting to his Majesty several rates and duties 
of impost and tonnage of shipping, in which was 
included one per cent, on European merchandize, 
for which article or clause the honourable council 
have several times non-concurred the said bill, 
notwithstanding all proper endeavours have been 
used by this house to attain the same, which have 
hitherto proved fruitless, whereby a considerable 
part of the revenue, which would have accrued to 
this province, is for this present session foregone, 
which also tends to the depriving this government 
of their just rights, powers, and privileges granted 
by the royal charter, Resolved," &amp;c. 

The council were fond of peace, and as soon as 
this resolve came to their knowledge, they sent a 
message to the house, desiring they would not print 
the resolve in their votes, as it would have an ill 
effect and would oblige the council, in their own 
vindication, to reply, although they wished that 
all controversy between the two houses might 
cease. The house printed it notwithstanding, and 
the next day the council sent the following an 
swer. 

u The board are very much concerned to find, 
among the votes of the honourable house, a de 
claration as if the council in non-concurring the 
bill of impost as it was first framed, had done that 
whereby a considerable part of the revenue, which 
would have accrued to this province, is for this 
present session foregone, which also tends to the 
depriving this government of their just rights, 



powers, and privileges granted by the royal char 
ter. 

" This declaration contains or implies such a 
charge as the council can, by no means, suffer 
themselves to lie under, without asserting and so 
lemnly declaring their integrity, and they are 
more surprised at the imputation of doing a thing 
which tends to deprive this government of their 
just rights, powers, and privileges granted by the 
royal charter, because on the 23d current the 
board sent down a message to the honourable 
house, that they were always ready and desirous 
to concur with the honourable house of representa 
tives in such proposals relating to an impost, as 
may not tend to alter or expose our present happy 
constitution under the royal charter;" so that it 
was from a sincere and just regard to the rights, 
powers, and privileges of this government granted 
by the royal charter, that the council chose rather 
to omit the duty of one per cent, on English goods 
for this session. 

" That the council apprehended the duty of one 
per cent, on English goods affected the trade of 
Great Britain, and so came within the meaning of 
his Majesty s late additional instruction is certain : 
and being of that opinion, it would have been in 
consistent for the board to concur the bill of impost 
as it was sent up, however, they can boldly and 
truly say, they have acted from a principle of duty 
to his Majesty, love and fidelity to their country, 
and have nothing more at heart than the just, wise, 
and careful preservation of those invaluable rights, 
powers, and privileges granted by the royal charter, 
which God long continue." 

This controversy being over, the court was pro 
rogued. 

Before the next sessions in November, the go 
vernor received a reprimand from the lords jus 
tices, the king being absent, for consenting to the 
duty on English goods, &amp;c. by the impost act in 
1718. This he laid before the court. The same 
house which had so long contended with the coun 
cil the session before, for this clause in the bill, 
now u readily acknowledge the exceptions taken 
to it are just and reasonable." An instruction to 
the governor to support the&amp;gt;surveyor of the woods 
in the execution ot his office, which was com 
municated to the house at the same time, was not 
so favourably received, and in an answer or re 
monstrance occasioned by the governor s speech 
they charge the surveyor with instances of very 
gross mal-conduct. What evidence they had 
of it does not now fully appear. The governor, 
by a message, desired they would not print their] 



6 MASSACHUSETTS. 

[.emonstrance. They sent a committee to acquaint without answers, attributing all the J "teas i 
km, they must insist upon the right they had to public affairs to the wrath and resentmcr t , the arts 
make it public. He made a very great mistake, and sinister views of a few particular persons but 
and told the committee, that his Majesty had given the voice of the people in general was agaii 

In the mother country, when disputes 



him the power of the pre, and he would not suffer 
it to be printed. This doctrine would have done 
well enough in the reigns of the Stuarts. In the 
present age it is justly exceptionable ; although 
bv the liberty of the press we are not to understand 
a liberty of printing every thing, however criminal, 
with impunity. The house had no opportunity to 
take notice of this declaration. Upon another oc 
casion they let him know they had not forgot it. 
The governor was so displeased with the proceed 
ings of the house that he put an end to the session, 
and they never met again. 

(Anno 1720.) We arc now arrived to the me 
morable year 1720. The contests and dissensions 
in the government rose to a greater height than 
they had done since the religious feuds in the year 
16:36 and 1637. 

The public affairs, in general, were in a very in 
different state. The Indians upon the e. frontiers 
were continually insulting and mcnacingthe English 
inhabitants, so that but little progress had been 
made in settling the country since the peace, and 
this year, most of the settlements which had been 
begun were deserted and a new war was every day 
expected. 

The trade of the province declined. There was 
a general cry for want of money, and yet the bills 
of credit, which were the only money, were daily 
depreciating. The depreciation was grievous to 
all creditors, but particularly distressing to the 
clergy and other salary men, to widows and 
orphans whose estates consisted of money at in 
terest, perhaps just enough to support them, and 
being reduced to one half the former value, they 
found themselves on a sudden in a state of poverty 
and want. Executors and administrators, and all 
who were possessed of the effects of others in trust, 
Ind a strong temptation to retain them. The in 
fluence a bad currency has upon the morals of the 
people is greater than is generally imagined. 
Numbers ot schemes for private and public emis 
sions of bills were proposed as remedies : the only 
perhaps effectual one* the utter abolition of the 
bilk, was omitted. 

By these calamities the minds of the people were 
prepared for impressions from pamphlets, courants, 



o-ovcrnor. in mu muiuci L,VUUHJ, 
arise between the branches of the legislature upon 
their respective rights, parties are formed, and the 
body of the people are divided ; for in a well con 
stituted government it is of importance to the peo 
ple that the share even of the popular part of the 
constitution should not be unduly raised to the 
suppression of the monarchical or aristocratical 
parts. From a regard to the common interest, 
therefore, in a dispute concerning prerogative and 
privilege, the people, ordinarily, arc divided in 
sentiment. The reason is obvious why it is less 
frequently so in a colony. There the people, in 
general, consider the prerogative as an interest, 
without them, separate and distinct from the in- 
terior interest of the colony. This takes their at 
tention from the just proportion of weight due to 
each branch in the constitution, and causes a bias 
in favour of the popular art. For the same reason, 
men fond of popular applause are more sure of 
success, with less degree of part, in a colony, than 
in a state not so connected, and consequently men 
who with unbiassed judgments discern and have 
virtue enough to pursue the real interest of their 
country, are more likely to be reproached and 
vilified. 

The first act of the house of representatives was 
the choice of Mr. Cooke for their speaker. A 
committee was sent to the governor, at his house, 
to acquaint him with the choice. They reported 
at their return, that his excellence said, " it was 
very well." In the afternoon, the governor being 
in council, sent the secretary to acquaint the 
house, that he was now in the chair and ready to 
receive their message respecting the choice of a 
speaker. They sent back an answer that his ex 
cellency, upon being informed of the choice in the 
morning, had said, " it was very well," and they 
had recorded his answer in the books of the house. 
The governor replied, that he would receive no 
message from the house but when be was in the 
chair. The house then proposed, by message to 
the council, to join with them in the business of 
the day, the choice of counsellors ; but upon the 
governor s telling their committee, who carried up 
the message, that no election should be made until 



and other newspapers, which were frequently pub- he was acquainted who was chosen speaker, the 

ishcd, in order to convince them, that their civil house sent a new committee to acquaint him with 

liberties and privileges were struck at, and that a the choice they had made. The governor replied 

general union was necessary. These did not pass to this committee, that Mr. Cooke had treated him] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[ill as the king s governor, and therefore, according 
to the power given him by the royal charter, he 
negatived the choice, and desired they would pro 
ceed to choose another person. They sent back 
their answer, that they had chosen a speaker, ac 
cording to their known and legal privileges, and 
therefore insisted upon the choice, and at the same 
time they renewed their motion to the council to 
join with them in the election. Tfie governor 
told the committee, that he had received a mes 
sage from the house, acquainting him with the 
choice they had made of a speaker, which choice 
had been negatived and he was no speaker. Upon 
this the house sent their committee to the board to 
acquaint them, that two messages having been 
sent to propose to the board to join in the choice 
of counsellors and no answer having been given, 
they now desired to know whether the board would 
join in the election or not. 

If there had been any further delay on the part 
of the board, it is very probable the house would 
have proceeded without them, which must have 
increased the perplexity. The governor there 
fore left the board, having first charged the secre 
tary with the following message to the house, 
" His excellency orders me to acquaint you, he is 
informed that Governor Dudley did, in the time of 
his government, disallow of a speaker chosen by 
the house, and that his proceedings therein were 
approved by the commissioners of trade and plan 
tations, and that he was thereupon directed by the 
said commissioners to acquaint the council, that it 
would not be thought fit that her Majesty s right 
of having a negative upon the choice of a speaker 
be given up, which was reserved to her Majesty, 
as well by the charter, as by the constitution of 
England." 

.Notwithstanding the warm disputes in the pre 
ceding year, between the two houses, only one 
new counsellor was chosen, John Burrill, Esq. of 
Lynn, who had been many years speaker of the 
house, but this year was sent to the board, in the 
room of Mr. Iligginson. The house had been as 
fond of this Mr. Burrill as of their eyes. His 
temperate spirit until now had engaged the whole 
house in his favour, and from year to year, pro 
cured htm a general vote, but this year the house 
were willing to part with him for a gentleman ob 
noxious to the governor, which measure, it was 
easy to forsee, must give a further occasion of con 
troversy. 

Two of the newly elected counsellors were nega 
tived, Nathaniel Byfield, who had been soliciting 
in England for the government when Colonel 
Shutewas appointed, and John Clark, who was a 



person of many valuable qualities, and obnoxious 
only, for being strongly attached to Mr. Cooke, 
and having been a great supporter of the cause. 

After the election, the governor made a further 
attempt to bring the house to a compliance by the 
following speech. " Gentlemen, at the opening 
of this session you thought fit to make choice of 
Elisha Cooke, Esq. for your speaker, and upon 
your reporting of it to me, 1 did declare my dis- 
acceptance of that election, and am firm in ray 
opinion that I had good right so to do, by virtue 
of his Majesty s commission and the powers re 
served by the royal charter, and am also confirmed 
in it by what I find transacted by the late Gover 
nor Dudley, during his administration, and also 
by the opinion of the right honourable the lords of 
trade and plantations in that matter. I must fur 
ther observe to you, that the person you have cho 
sen had invaded the king my master s rights in the 
woods of the province of Maine, though confirmed 
to his Majesty by an act of the British parliament, 
and I have received the thanks of the right ho 
nourable the lords of trade and plantations for re 
moving him out of the council. He has ill treated 
me, who am the king s governor, and has been 
censured by the council for it, which stands upon 
record in the council books. How acceptable this 
matter will be at home, considering the warning we 
have lately had from the court of Great Britain 
upon the account of passing the impost bill, will 
be worthy of your serious reflection. These 
things I thought necessary to acquaint you with, 
and advise you to return to your house and choose 
some other person speaker, with a reservation of 
your own rights, until you shall send to the court 
of Great Britain for the explanation of that part of 
your charter relating to the affair of a speaker." 

The house, immediately upon their return to 
their chamber, entered into a debate upon this 
speech, and the question being put, whether, for 
the reasons assigned by his excellency, the house 
will proceed to the choice of a new speaker ? it 
passed in the negative, nemine contradicente. 

The governor gave them no opportunity to prc- 
ceed on any other business, for the next day he 
sent for them up again, and after another short 
speech dissolved the court. " Gentlemen, out 
of a tender regard 1 have for the welfare of this 
province, I shall give you the following advice 
before we part ; that when it shall please God we 
meet again in a general assembly, which shall be 
as soon as possible, you will not let this province 
suffer by the perverse temper of a particular per 
son, but that you will choose one for a speaker that 
has no other view but that of the public good, one] 



s 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[that fears God and honours the king. It is irk 
some and disagreeable (o me to dissolve an assem 
bly, hut as matters now stand, I am forced to do it, 
or must give up the king my master s prerogative, 
which nothing shall ever oblige me to do, who am 
the king s governor. Gentlemen, I do not think 
it for the honour of his Majesty s government that 
this assembly should sit any longer, and therefore I 
shall dissolve you." 

Writs were issued for a new assembly to meet 
the 13th of July. The governor had no great 
reason to hope for a more favourable house. The 
people in general thought their privileges were 
attacked. The charter indeed was silent upon 
this point. In a dispute between the crown and 
the house of commons in the reign of king Charles 
II. an expedient was found which seemed to avoid 
the acknowledgment of the right of the crown to 
refuse a speaker, but a provincial law was princi 
pally relied upon, which declares, , that the repre 
sentatives assembled in any great and general court 
shall be the sole judges of the elections and quali 
fications of their own members, and may from time 
to time settle, order, and purge their own house, 
and make such necessary orders for the due regu 
lation thereof as they shall see occasion." Whe 
ther the legislators had in contemplation the right 
of the house to choose a speaker, exempt from the 
governor s negative, might well be questioned, but 
it was urged That the due regulation of the house 
rniijht very well include this right. 

The towns in general sent the former members. 
Boston discovered how they stood affected by 
leaving out Mr. Tay, who was one of those persons 
who serve upon a pinch, when a favourite cannot 
be carried by a party, to stop the gap and prevent 
an opposite candidate, and he came in several times 
upon such occasions. In his room the town now 
cho-i V.r. Clark, the negatived counsellor. 

The house was willing to sit and do business, 
which the choice of the former speaker would have 
prevented. They therefore pitched upon a per 
son less attached to party, Timothy Lindall, one 
of the representatives of Saloin, to whom no excep 
tion was taken. The governor in his speech re 
commended a peaceable session, but the house 
could not forget the late dissolution. They began 
vith a warm message or remonstrance to the go 
vernor, in which they tell him, " the last assem 
bly took no great pleasure in being dissolved, be 
fore they had gone th rough the usual necessary 
business ; their asserting and maintaining their 
just tight and ancient privilege of choosing their 
speaker, and not owning his excellency s power to 
negative bwri, was nothing but what they were 



strictly obliged to, and the new house are humbly 
of opinion, that whoever was of advice to his ex 
cellency, in the matter, did not consult his Ma. 
jesty s interest, nor the public weal and quiet of the 
government, but officiously endeavoured to beget 
unhappy misunderstandings between his excel 
lency and the house, and break off that desirable 
harmony which every one ought to keep up ; we 
earnestly hope and desire the province may never 
have an assembly that will willingly forego such a 
valuable privilege as King William and Queen 
Mary, of ever blessed memory, graciously favoured 
the province with, when they gave their royal as 
sent to a law directing and governing that affair." 

All the subsequent proceedings of this short ses 
sion shew how much the house was out of temper. 
An Indian war used to be universally dreaded. To 
prevent it, the governor and council had been 
treating with three of the Penobscot tribe, who 
were sent for or came to Boston, and the house were 
desired to make a grant for a present to them, but 
by a vote they refused to do it. Some time after 
they ordered a small sum, ten pounds only. To 
the controversy with the governor and the oppo 
sition made to the proposals which came from him, 
the war, which soon after broke out, was by the 
governor s friends attributed. 

There had been no public notaries in the pro 
vince, except such as derived their authority from, 
the archbishop of Canterbury. The house now 
first observed, that a notary public was a civil 
officer, which by the charter was to be chosen by 
the general court, and sent a message desiring the 
council to join with the house in the choice of 
such an officer in each port of the province. To 
all instruments which were sent abroad, not only 
the attestation of the notary himself would be ne 
cessary, but a certificate under the province seal, 
to shew the authority to attest ; the council there 
fore took time to consider of the expediency of ap 
pointing such an officer, and referred the matter to 
the next session, but the house immediately pro- 
reeded and chose the" officers by their own votes. 
The arguments to prove that an officer to be chosen 
by the whole court could derive an authority from 
the majority of the members of the house of repre 
sentatives have not been preserved. 

Being offended with the council, the house sent 
a message desiring, " that considering the low cir 
cumstances of the province, no draught be made 
upon the treasury fbrexpenccs at times of public 
rejoicing for the future." 

It had been usual to make a grant to the gover 
nor, for the salary of half the year, at the beginning 
of the session. The house deferred it until the] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



9 



[close, and then reduced it from 600/. to 500/. 
al( hough the currency was depreciated. To the 
lieutenant-governor, they used to make a present 
once a year, never less than 50/. they now reduced 
it to S5/. Mr. Dummer had so much spirit, that 
he inclosed (he vote in a letter to the speaker, ac 
quainting him that " having the honour to bear 
the king s commission for lieutenant-governor of 
the province, and having been annually more than 
50/. out of pocket in that service, he did not think 
it for his honour to accept of their grant." 

The governor took no public notice of the pro 
ceedings of the house. On the 23d of July he put 
an end to the session. 

During the recess of the court (August 7th) a 
part of the c. Indians fell upon Canso, within the 
province of Nova Scotia, but peopled every sum 
mer from the Massachusetts. The Indians sur 
prised the English in their beds and stripped them 
of every thing, telling them they carne to carry 
away what they could find upon their own land. 
Three or four of the English were killed. Some 
of the French of Cape Breton were in confederacy, 
and came with their vessels the next night, and 
carried off the plunder, together with about 2000 
quintals of fish. The English vessels in the har 
bour were not attempted. A sloop happening to 
arrive the next day, the master offered his service 
to go out and make reprisals, and being furnished 
with a number of men and two or three small ves 
sels for his consorts, for want of more ample autho 
rity, he took a commission from one Thomas 
Richards, a Canso justice, and went after the 
French and soon brought in six or seven small 
fishing vessels, having all of them more or less of 
the English property aboard. 

Mr. llenshawof Boston, a principal merchant at 
Canso, went to Louisbourg with a complaint to 
the French governor, who excused himself from 
intermeddling, the Indians not bring French sub 
jects, nor under his controul. The French pri 
soners were .sent to Annapolis Royal. The loss 
sustained by the Knglish was estimated at20,000/. 
currency. 

The fears of the people, in the e. parts of the 
Massachusetts, were increased -by this stroke upon 
Canso. In a short time after, the cattle were de 
stroyed and the lives of the owners threatened. 
The governor was still desirous of preserving 
peace, and by the advice of council, sent orders to 
Colonel Walton, the commanding officer of such 
forcrs as upon the alarm had been sent there, to in 
form the Indians, that commissioners should be 
sent to treat with them. The Indians liked the 
proposal and promised to attend the treaty. 

VOL. III. 



Before the time appointed, the general court 
met and the house passed a resolve, " that 150 
effective men, under suitable officers, be forthwith 
ordered to march up to Norridgewock and compel 
the Indians that shall be found there, or in other 
those parts, to make full satisfaction for the da 
mage they have done the English, by killing-their 
swine and sheep or carrying them away, or steal 
ing provisions, clothing, or any other way wrong 
ing them ; and that a warrant be- directed to 
Captain John Leighton, high sheriff of the county 
of York, who is to accompany the forces, for the 
apprehending and safe bringing Mr. Ralle to Bos 
ton, who is at present resident at or near Norridge 
wock in Kennebcck river in this province, and, if 
he be not to be found, that then the sheriff direct 
and command the Indians there, or in the parts 
adjacent, to bring in and surrender up the Jesuit 
to him the sheriff; and, upon their refusal to com 
ply with either of the said demands, that the com 
manding officer is to take the best and most effec 
tual way to apprehend and secure the Indians so 
refusing, and safe conduct them to Boston." 

The governor looked upon this resolve to be, in 
effect, a declaration of war and an invasion of the 
prerogative ; it necessarily prevented a treaty he 
had agreed to hold with the Indians, and a new 
war must be the consequence of such a measure. 
The council were fond of peace, and, when there- 
solve was sent to them for concurrence, they re 
jected it. The house were less averse to war. The 
charge of carrying it on, it was said, would be no 
burden to the province, the French now durst 
not join the Indians, and this would be the most 
favourable opportunity which could be expected 
to subdue or utterly extirpate them. That the 
charge should be no burden, seems to be a para 
dox, but a wild opinion had filled the minds of 
great part of the people of the province, that if 
bills of credit could be issued, the advantage to 
trade would be so great, that the taxes by which, 
at distant periods, they were to be drawn in again, 
would not be felt. Many schemes of public ex- 
pence were projected, and, among the rest, a bridge 
over Charles river, broader and much deeper than 
the Thames at London or Westminster. 

We shall take no pleasure in relating the pro 
ceedings of the general court in this and the two 
next years. The best excuse we can make for the 
house is, that the attempt made to deprive them of 
the exclusive right of choosing their own speaker, 
was deemed by them a grievance, that the royal 
governments insist upon this right, and there was 
nothing in Massachusetts charter which took it 
from them, that this attempt raised in their minds] 
c 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[a ji-alonsy of a design against their privileges ia 
gewral, and, in this state of mind, they were more 
i-a.silv prevailed upon by their principal directors, 
whose principal views were to distress the go 
vernor, to agree to such measures as under other 
circumstances they must have disapproved. The 
rule, perhaps, holds stronger with political bodies 
than with individuals, that when just bounds are 
once exceeded, the second step is as easy as the 
first, and so on, until at length they are drawn by 
degrees to such excesses as, per saltuni, they wor.ld 
Lave been incapable of. 

The public records of the general court are al- 
Avavs open to the inspection of any of the mem 
bers, but, that the house might have them under 
their more immediate view and charge, tiiey passed 
a vote, that the secretary should make duplicates 
of all public records, and that one set should be 
lodged in such place as the house should appoint. 
The council, willing to have duplicates for greater 
security, concurred with an amendment, viz. in 
such place as the general assembly should direct, 
but this amendment the house rejected. 

The house, finding the council a bar to their at 
tempts, resolved, in one instance, to act by them 
selves. There was a complaint or suggestion, that 
false musters were made by some of the ofiicers in 
the pay of province. The house taking the affair 
into consideration, resolved, " that one or more 
meet persons be appointed by this house clerk of 
the check, who shall, from time to time, have an 
inspection into the forts, garrisons, and forces, and 
take care that every one have their complement of 
men ; and the better to enable them to execute the 
trust reposed in them, that when and so often as 
they shall see reason, the commanders of the forts, 
garrisons, and captains of any of the companies, ia 
the pay of this government, shall call forth their 
men before them, and, if any do not appear, the 
commanding officer to give the reason of such ab 
sent men, and that no muster roll shall be accepted, 
and paid by the treasurer, unless approved of by 
the clerk of the check." The governor did not 
intend to admit this officer, appointed by the house, 
into the forts, garrisons, &amp;c. which by the charter 
the crown had reserved to the governor, but be 
kept silent. ,.., 

To another act of the house the council took ex-. 
ccption. A message was sent by the house to the 
council to let them know they had appointed a 
committee to prepare a bill for levying soldiers, 
" taking it to be their peculiar care." Lest it 
fehould l&amp;gt;e understood that this was to exclude the 
rouncil from concurring or non-concuring to such 
bill, or from advising to the levying soldiers upon 



an emergency in the reces of the court, the coun 
cil desired the house to withdraw those words, 
" taking it to be their peculiar care," which they 
a freed to. 

&amp; At this session, the house again withheld 1007. 
from the governor s usual half-year s salary. He 
had passed it over without notice before, but now 
he thought it proper to lay before them a royal in 
struction to recommend to the assembly to esta 
blish a sufficient allowance for him by a fixed sa 
lary. They sent him a reply, " that they humbly 
conceived what was granted him was an honour 
able allowance, and the affair of settling salaries 
being a matter of great weight and wholly new to 
the house, and many of the members absent, they 
did not think it proper to enter upon the cousidera- 
tioa of it, but desired the court might rise." The- 
governor complied with their request. 

(Anno 1721.) At the opening the next session, 
March 15th, the governor in bis speech recom 
mended measures to prevent the depreciation of the 
currency, to suppress a trade carried on with the 
French at Cape Breton, and to punish the authors 
of factious and seditious papers, to provide a pre 
sent for the Five Nations, and to enlarge his salary. 
They refused, directly or virtually, every pro 
posal. To the first the house tell him, in their an* 
swer, " they had passed a bill for issuing 100, 0001. 
more in bills of credit. This alone had a direct 
tendency to increase the mischief, but they add, 
that " to prevent their depreciation they had pro 
hibited the buying, selling, and bartering silver, 
at any higher rates than set by act of parliament." 
This certainly could have no tendency to lessen it. 
Such an act can no more be executed than an 
act to stop the ebbing and flowing of the sea. It 
would probably carry away and keep out all silver 
and gold. The depreciation of their currency, 
would, notwithstanding, have been as visible by 
the rise of exchange with foreign countries, and 
have beea as sensibly felt by every creditor among 
themselves. To his other proposals they ^ay r 
" they know of no trade carried on by any people 
of the province with Cape Breton, and do not 
think any law to prevent a trade there is necessary; 
and for seditious and scandalous papers, the best 
way to suppress or prevent them is, for the execu 
tive part of the government to bring the authors to 
condign punishment, and if proper measures had 
been takea to discover and punish the authors of a 
libel called News from Robinson Crusoe s Island, 
wherein the members of the house are grossly re 
flected upon, few or none would have dared, after 
wards, to publish any thing of that nature or tend 
ency j but to suffer no books to be printed without] 



M A S S A C H U S E T T S. 



11 



{licence from the governor will be attended with in 
numerable inconveniences and danger. As to the 
Five Nations, the house do not know enough of 
their number, nor what the other governments in 
tend to give, and therefore cannot judge what is 
proper for them to do ; and for the allowance to 
the governor, they think it as much as the honour 
and service of the government calls for, and believe 
the inhabitants of the several towns through the 
province are of the same mind." 

There never had been an instance of any gover 
nor s refusing or neglecting, at the beginning of the 
year, to appoint a fast, in conformity to the prac 
tice of the country, but the house now endeavoured 
to anticipate the governor, and appointed a com 
mittee to join with a committee of council to pre 
pare a proclamation for a public fast. The coun 
cil refused to join, and acquainted the house they 
could find no precedent ; but the house replied, 
that if such days had not the sanction of the whole 
court, people would not be liable to punishment 
for working or playing. The governor, willing to 
conform to the house so far as would consist with 
maintaining his right of issuing proclamations, 
mentioned in the proclamation which he soon after 
published, that the appointment was by advice of 
council, and upon a motion from the house of re 
presentatives ; but the house refused to meet him, 
and declared they had never made any such mo 
tion, and ordered that no members of the house 
should carry any proclamations to their towns, for 
the present. The day was, however, observed as 
usual, except that one of the representatives of 
Boston would not attend the public worship, but 
opened his warehouse as upon other days. 

Certain persons had cut pine trees upon that 
part of the province of Maine which had not been 
granted by the general court as private property. 
A deputy to the surveyor of the woods gave li 
cence to cut the trees, as belonging to the king. 
The house appointed a committee to join with a 
committee of council, which joint committee were 
to seize and secure, for the province, the same logs 
which had been cut by licence. The council con 
curred, with a " saving to his Majesty all such 
rights as are reserved by the royal charter and 
acts of parliament to trees for the royal navy." 

The house desired this saving might be with 
drawn, not that they apprehended the reservation 
made in the charter or the provision by act of par 
liament were of no force, but they alleged that the 
trees they designed to seize were cut by one de 
puted by the deputy of the surveyor of the woods, 
and cut, not for the royal navy, but for other uses, 



and therefore they did not come within reason of 
the reservation or provision. 

Finally, upon the council s refusing to join, the 
house appointed a committee of their own to seize 
the logs, and directed the attorney-general to pro 
secute those who had trespassed and made spoil 
upon the province lands. After they were seized, 
the house again desired the council to concur in a 
vote or order for securing and converting the logs 
to the benefit of the province. This, without any 
judicial determination, was still more irregular, and 
the council declined meddling with them. 

As the time approached for issuing writs for a 
new assembly, the governor made the following 
speech to them before their dissolution. 

" Gentlemen of the house of representatives, In 
my speech at the beginning of the session, I gave 
you the reasons of my meeting you at this time. 
I have since received your answer, which I shall 
take care to transmit, by the first conveyance, that 
his Majesty may see, not only how his governor of 
this province is treated and supported, but what 
sort of regard is paid to his own royal instructions. 
I shall also lay before the right honourable the 
lords commissioners of trade and plantations, the 
bill for prohibiting a trade to Cape Breton, which 
I recommended to you several sessions, and which 
had twice the concurrence of his Majesty s coun 
cil, but was as often thrown out in your house, not 
withstanding the message that accompanied that 
bill. 

" I am very much surprised you should refuse 
two other bills, which came down from the coun 
cil, the one to prevent riots, the other to prohibit 
the making and publishing libels and scandalous 
pamphlets, the passing of which would, in my 
opinion, have tended both to the honour of the go 
vernment and the public peace. 

16 But what gives me the greatest concern is, 
that the proceedings of your house, with respect to 
the woods in the province of Maine, arc directly 
contrary to the reservation of his Majesty s right 
in the royal charter and an act of parliament, which 
were both set forth in my proclamation, dated the 
Jst of November 1720, for preventing the destruc 
tion and spoil of his Majesty s woods. 

" I could heartily wish, that instead of oblig 
ing me to make such representations to the lords of 
trade, as I fear will not be to your advantage, you 
had acted with that calmness and moderation, 
which becomes the subjects of a prince, who pos 
sesses those qualities in an eminent degree, and 
which becomes the representatives of a province, 
that, without any encroachment on the royal pre-j 
c 2 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[rotative, enjoys as many and ns high privileges, 
as the greatest advocates for liberty can desire or 

expect* 

" I rnnst therefore recommend to you a loyal 
and peaceable behaviour, and to lay aside those 
misundersandings and animosities that of late pre 
vail so much among you, which you \vill find to 
be your truest and best interest." 

Doctor Noyes, one of the representatives of 
Boston, died while the court was sitting, March 
Itjth, after a short illness. He was very strongly 
attached to the popular party, and highly esteemed 
by them, was of a very humane obliging dispo 
sition, and, in private life, no man was more free 
from obloquy. Mr. William Hutchinsoa who 
Micceeded him was also a gentleman of a very fair 
character, sensible, virtuous, discreet, and of an in 
dependent fortune. He began his political life at 
a time when persons, thus qualified, were wanted 
for the service of their country, to moderate the 
passions of those who were less temperate and who 
had the lead in the house. In general, lie adhered 
to the popular party also, but lived but a little 
while. Longer experience might probably have 
convinced him, that he would have shewn his gra 
titude to his constituents, more by endeavouring to 
convince them that they were running to an ex 
treme, than by encouraging the same extremities 
himself. 

The session of the general court, in May, this 
year, began as unfavourable as any former session. 
The house chose for their speaker John Clarke, 
Esq. who the year before had been negatived by 
the governor as a counsellor. To prevent a nega 
tive, as a speaker, they projected a new form of 
message, directed to the governor and council 
jointly, to acquaint them " that John Clarke, Esq. 
is chosen speaker of the house, and is now sitting 
in the chair." This was undoubtedly a very ex 
traordinary contempt of the governor. Mr. John 
While, a gentleman of unspotted character, had 
been clerk of the house for many years. He was 
no zealous party man, but his most intimate friends, 
who esteemed him and sought his company for the 
sake of his valuable accomplish meats, were strongly 
attached to the governor. This alone was enough 
to dismiss liim, and Mr. William Payne, brother 
by marriage to Mr. Cooke, and who had formerly 
been of the bank party, was appointed clerk in 
his ktead. 

The governor was more wroth than upon any 
occasion before. He came to council in the after 
noon, and sent immediately for the house, no 
tloubt, with au intent to dissolve the court. He 



had several faithful advisers about him, and, whilst 
the house were preparing to come up, he sent a 
message to stop them and to let them know he ac 
cepted their choice of a speaker. This was giving 
a construction to their message which they did 
not. intend, and it was giving his consent before it 
was asked, but it was to be preferred to a dissolu 
tion ; for a dissolution of the court, before the elec 
tion of counsellors, according to the construction 
the house have sometimes put upon the charter, 
would have been a dissolution of the government, 
for one year at least, because the time mentioned 
for the first election was the last Wednesday in 
May. The counsellors named in the charter were 
to continue until others were chosen and appointed 
in their stead. We do not know of any words in the 
charter which would make the choice upon an 
other day invalid, although that be the day more 
particularly designed for that business. The house 
shewed their resentment against the lieutenant- 
governor and Mr. Belcher, who were both left 
out of the council. The rest were continued. 

The next step was the appointing a committee 
to carry a list of the new-elected counsellors to the 
governor ; but the committee was not to desire his 
approbation, though this form had never been 
omitted in any one instance. The governor sent 
the list back, and took notice of the omission. 
The house thereupon resolved, u that considering 
the small-pox was in Boston, and they were very 
desirous the court should be removed to Cam 
bridge, they would send the list in the usual terms, 
saving their right to assert their privileges at a 
more convenient time." What privileges they 
had in their minds it is difficult now to discover. 
Surely they could not imagine the election would 
have been valid without his consent. The go 
vernor negatived Colonel Byfield, the rest he con 
sented to. 

The court was adjourned to Cambridge. The 
governor, in his speech, took no notice of past 
differences. All was fair and smooth, and all 
was fair in the house also, the first fortnight, but 
on the 19th of June, the governor s speech at the 
dissolution of the last assembly was ordered to be 
read, and a committee was appointed u to vindi 
cate the proceedings of the house from the insinua 
tions made by the governor of their want of duty 
and loyalty to his Majesty." This committee 
made a report, not in the form of an address or 
message to the governor, but of a narrative and 
justification of the proceedings of the last assembly, 
and the house accepted it and ordered it to be 
printed.] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



13 



[To vindicate the past proceedings about the 
pine trees, a full consideration was now had of the 
several acts of parliament and the reservation to 
the crown in the province charter. The house 
did not deny a right in the crown to the trees, 
whilst they were standing and fit for masts, but 
supposed that, as soon as they were felled and cut 
into lengths fit for boards or timber only, the right 
of the crown ceased, and the owners of the soil re 
covered or acquired a new property in them. 
This, it was said, would render the provision 
made for the preservation of the trees, which at 
best was insufficient, to be of no effect, nothing be 
ing more easy than for the owners of the soil to 
procure the trees to be felled and cut into short 
logs, without possibility of discovery. However, 
they came to the following resolution, viz. u That 
inasmuch as a great number of pine trees have 
been cut in the province of Maine, which when 
standing were fit for masts for the royal navy, but 
are now cut into logs of about 20 feet in length, 
and although the cutting them should be allowed 
to be an infringement of his Majesty s rights re 
served in the charter, yet in the condition they 
are now in, being no longer capable of being used 
for masts, it is lawful for and behoves this govern 
ment to cause such logs to be seized and converted 
to their own use, and to bring the persons who cut 
down the trees to punishment." In consequence 
and for the purposes of this resolve a committee 
was appointed. 

The reservation in the charter is in these words, 
" For the better providing and furnishing of masts 
for our royal navy, we do hereby reserve to us, 
our heirs and successors, all trees of the diameter of 
24 inches, and upwards of 12 inches from the 
ground, growing upon any soil or tract of land 
not heretofore granted to private persons. And 
we restrain and forbid all persons whatsoever from 
felling, cutting, or destroying any such trees with 
out the royal licence of us, our heirs and successors, 
first had and obtained, upon penalty of forfeiting 
10(M. sterling unto us, our heirs and successors, for 
every such tree." 

It was said further upon this occasion, that al 
though the crown reserved the trees and restrained 
all persons from cutting them, which the necessity 
of the trees for national use and service might be 
suflicient to justify, yet it was not equitable to take 
them without a valuable consideration. The 
crown had made an absolute grant of the province 
of Maine to Gorges, from whom the Massachu 
setts purchased. The Massachusetts charter in 
deed was declared forfeited. Where the right 
was, after that, might be disputed, but this was a 



hard judgment, and it was the plain intent of the 
charter in general to restore rights, except that of 
the form of jurisdiction or administration of go 
vernment, to the former state. 

Be this as it may, it has however been thought 
by some judicious persons, that considering the 
extreme difficulty then existing of convicting tres 
passers of cutting the king s trees, and by such con 
viction putting a stop to the spoil and havoc 
continually making, it would have been good po 
licy to allow the owners or proprietors of these 
lands a sum for every tree felled for a mast, equal 
to what it would be worth when cut into logs for 
boards or timber. This would scarce have been a 
tenth part of the value of the tree for a mast, and 
yet would have taken away the temptation to cut it 
for logs, and would have encouraged the preserv 
ing and cultivating the young trees, which were then 
of lesser dimensions. Trees that are incapable of 
ever serving for masts, either from decay or other 
defects, although of sufficient diameter, might have 
been allowed to be cut for logs, and it would have 
been no prejudice to the crown. The trespassers 
used to make no distinction, and trees were con 
tinually cut worth 20/. sterling for a mast, which 
when cut into logs were scarce worth 20 shillings. 
Very few trees were cut for masts by trespassers. 
The notoriety of hailing, felling, and shipping 
masts has rendered it very difficult, when the bur 
den of proof where the masts were cut lay upon the 
person who claimed the property, to escape dis 
covery and conviction, where among the multi 
tude of logs which were continually let loose to 
float down rivers to saw mills, the greatest part of 
the trespasses used to escape notice. 

There are great numbers of white pines growing 
in parts of the country so remote from the sea or 
any river by which they can be floated to the sea, 
that the experice of bringing them thither Avould 
be 20 times the value of a martin England. It seems 
unnecessary to have deprived the inhabitants of 
such places from making use of the trees for tim 
ber and boards, when they must infallibly have 
decayed and died in the ground, if they were to 
serve for no other purpose but masts. 

But to return. 

The house neglected making any provision for 
the support of the governor, or the other officers 
of the government who depend upon the court 
for their salaries. They waited to see how far the 
governor would consent to their several acts and 
votes. On the other hand, the two houses having 
chosen the treasurer, impost officer, and other 
civil officers, the governor laid by the list and 
neither approved nor disapproved. Whenthel 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[house sent a message to (he council, to inquire 
whethrr (lie governor had passed upon the list, 
lip directed the committee to tell the house that he 
should take his own time for it. This occasioned 
a replv from (he house, and divers messages and 
answers passed upon the subject. At length the 
house, by a vole, determined they would not go 
into the consideration of grants and allowances 
before his excellency had passed upon (he acts, 
.resolves, and election of that session. Tins was in 
plain terms avowing what (lie governor at first 
charged them with tacitly intending. To have 
occurred to this instance would have laid the house 
under disadvantage in the dispute, some years 
after, about a fixed salary. To compel the go 
vernor to- any particular measure, by making his 
support, in whole or in part, depend upon it, is 
iaid to \K inconsistent with that freedom of judg 
ment, in each branch of the legislature, which 
is the glory of the English constitution. This 
was not all. The house withheld the support of 
all the other salary men, because the governor 
would not comply with the measures of tlie 
house. 

Resentment was shewn against some of the go 
vernor s friends. The agent in England, Mr. 
Dummer, in some of his letters, had informed the 
court of the sentiments of the ministry upon the 
proceedings of the house of representatives, and 
of the general approbation in England of the go 
vernor s conduct. A faithful agent would rather 
tell them the truth, than recommend himself to 
them by flattery and false representations. He 
lost the favour of the house, who upon the receipt 
of these letters voted, that it was not f.r the in 
terest of the province Mr. Dummer should be 
continued agent any longer, and therefore it was 
ordered that he should be dismissed. This vote 
they sent to the council for concurrence, who de 
sired the house to inform them of the grounds and 
reasons of this dismission. The house voted the 
message to be unprecedented, and insisted that 
the council had nothing else to do but to concur 
or non-concur, and then they non-concurred the 
vote ; but this was much the same with a dis 
mission, at least for a time, for an agent bavin" 
no fixed salary depends upon temporary grants , 
which the house refused to make after this 
vote. 

Paul Dudley, Esq. another of the governor s 
friends, had the misfortune also of falling under the 
displeasure of the house. He had been chosen, by 
a small majority, counsellor for Sagadahoc. By 
the charter, it was necessary for him to have been 
an inhabitant or proprietor of that part of the pro 



vince for which he was chosen. He dwelt in tire 
old colony of Massachusetts. It was suggested in 
the house that he had no lands at Sagadahoe, and 
they appointed a committee to inquire into this 
fact. Upon their applying to Mr. Dudley for 
evidence of his title, he told them it was too late, 
they should have inquired before the election. 
Perhaps he was in an error. He went on and told 
the committee IK; had a deed which he would not 
expose to the house, but he would shew it to two 
or three of the members. Upon this they sent 
another committee to inform him it was expected 
he should produce his deed, the next morning, to- 
be laid upon the speaker s table. He replied that 
he would not produce his deed before the house, 
for they might possibly vote it insufficient. In 
this part of the province there are scarce any lands 
which have not more than one claimer, and it is not 
improbable some of the members of the house 
claimed the lands in Mr. Dudley s deed. The 
vote of the house would not have determined his 
title, but might have undue influence upon a jury 
in a judicial proceeding. 

Mr. Dudley s answer was unsatisfactory, and 
the house voted that it was an affront, that his de 
clining to produce his deeds gave sufficient grounds 
to believe that he was no proprietor, arid it was 
therefore resolved that his election be declared null 
and void. This vote being sent to the council 
was by them unanimously non-concurred. 

No grants had been made and no officers for the 
ensuing year had been constituted ; the house, 
notwithstanding, sent a message to the governor to 
desire the court might rise. lie refused to gratify 
them. Thursday the 13th of July had been ap 
pointed for a public fast. The members desired 
to be at home with their families, and on Wednes 
day* y a vote, they adjourned themselves to 
Tuesday in the next week. The house of com- 
mons adjourn for as long time, without any im 
mediate act of royal authority, but we presume, 
never contrary to a signification of the mind of the 
king ; and the adjournments over holidays are as 
much established, by ancient usage, as (he ordi 
nary adjournments from day to day, and being 
conformed to by both houses of parliament, no 
inconvenience can arise. But (he charter was 
urged by the governor to be the rule in this assem 
bly, not the analogy between a Massachusetts 
house of representatives and the commons of Great 
Britain. The governor, by charter, has the sole 
power of adjourning, proroguing, and dissolving 
the general court. Taken strictly, it would be 
extremely inconvenient, for the act of the gover 
nor would be necessary every day Upon a rea-1 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[sonable construction, therefore, the house had 
always adjourned from day to day, but never for 
so great a number of days. The council, who 
were obliged to spend near a week without busi 
ness, unanimously voted, upon hearing the house 
had adjourned, that such adjournment without his 
excellency s knowledge and consent, was irregular 
and not agreeable to the charter. 

The governor afterwards made this adjournment 
one of the principal articles of complaint against 
the house. 

Upon Tuesday, like the first day of a session, 
there was scarcely a house for business. The next 
morning some votes passed, which were offered to 
the governor, and which he would not suffer to be 
laid before him until he had sent for the house and 
told them they had made a breach upon his Ma 
jesty s prerogative, which he was under oath to 
take care of, and he insisted upon an acknowledg 
ment of their error before they proceeded to busi 
ness. 

The house, by a vote or resolve, declared they 
had no design to make any breach upon the prero 
gative, but acknowledged they had made a mis 
take in not acquainting his excellency and the 
board with the adjournment. 

The governor observed to them, that they had 1 
industriously avoided acknowledging that the sole 
power of adjourning, as well as proroguing and 
dissolving the general assembly, is vested in his 
Majesty s governor, by the royal charter. They 
thereupon agreed to the following message : " The 
house of representatives do truly acknowledge, 
that by the royal charter your excellency and the 
governor for the time being have the sole power 
and authority to adjourn, prorogue, and dis 
solve the general court, and the house further ac 
knowledge, that your excellency ought to have 
been acquainted with the design and intention of 
the house in their adjournment from Wednesday 
the 12th to Tuesday the 18th instant, before they 
did adjourn, and that it was so- designed and casu 
ally omitted." 

The house carefully distinguished between the 
power of adjourning the general court and ad 
journing the house of representatives, one branch 
only, and seem to suppose, that their only mistake 
was their not acquainting the governor and the 
board with their intention, which was by no means 
satisfactory to the governor, and he immediately 
ordered the house to attend him in the council 
chamber. The speaker ordered all the members 
of the house to be called in, and expecting a disso 
lution, they resolved, " that all the votes of the 
bouse in the present session, more especially re 



lating to any misunderstanding or difference that 
hath arisen between his excellency and the house, 
shall be prepared to be sent home, and thai the 
speaker transmit them to William Tailor, Esq. 
HOW resident in London, or in his absence, to such, 
meet persons as he shall think fit, desiring them 
to lay the same before his Majesty in council, or 
any where else, if need require, to obviate any 
complaint that may be made by his excellency 
the governor against the proceedings of tins house, 
for their just and necessary vindication." So 
much time was taken up in this vote or resolve, 
that the governor was highly offended and scuta 
second time, requiring them to attend him forth 
with. It has always been the practice of the house, 
before and since, upon a message from the go 
vernor, to stop all business and go up without de 
lay. The speaker, at this time, was among the 
forwarclest in the opposition. There was no need 
of four or five members to hold him, as the speaker 
of the house of commons was once held, in the 
chair until a number of strong resolutions had 
passed the house. 

The governor directed his speech to the house 
only. " Gentlemen of the house of representa 
tives, 1 am very much concerned to find in the 
printed journal of the house, first, an order to 
appoint a committee to draw a memorial upon, or 
representation of my speech, made before the 
dissolution of the assembly in March last, and 
afterwards, the memorial itself, signed by Mr. 
Cooke in the name of the committee. 

" This treatment is very surprising, from a 
house of representatives that profess so much 
loyalty arid respect to his Majesty s government. 
It appears to me to be very irregular that the pre 
sent house of representatives, whereof John 
Clarke, Esq. is speaker, and which consists of a 
majority of new members, should take upon them 
to answer my speech made to a former house of 
representatives, whereof Timothy Lindall, Esq. 
was speaker. These proceedings are not only 
improper, but without precedent from any former 
assembly. 

" 1 must also observe to you, that you have not 
shewn that respect which is due to me as governor 
of this province, by suffering this order or memo 
rial to go into the press before it wns communicated 
to me, which if you had done, I could have con 
vinced you, that it would have been very much 
for the service of your constituents, that neither 
the order nor the memorial should have appeared 
in print. 

" It is my opinion, that you will quickly be 
convinced how much you have been wanting in] 



16 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[your duly and interest, by disowning the authority 
of the right honourable board which his Ma 
jesty has constituted to superintend the affairs of 
the province and all the other plantations. 

" For these reasons 1 should have dissolved the 
L meral court when the memorial first appeared, 
but I was in hopes the house might have been 
brought to correct or expunge it. Instead of 
making this use of my tenderness, you have gone 
on in the most undutiful manner to withdraw from 
his Majesty s and your country s service, by ad 
journing yourselves for near a week, without my 
knowledge and consent, contrary to the royal 
charter, which absolutely vests in the governors 
of this province the power of adjourning, pro 
roguing, and dissolving ; and that at a time when 
I thought it for the interest of the colony to ad 
journ you for two days only, having 1 an affair of 
the greatest consequence to communicate to the 
house, which was to persuade you to take some 
effectual measures to prevent the plague coming 
among us, there being nothing so likely to bring 
it in as the French silk and stuffs which are con 
stantly brought into this province. 

" These your unwarrantable proceedings oblige 
me to dissolve this assembly." 

Thisspeech,and the dissolution which followed, 
further alienated the minds of the people from the 
governor. Some of his friends wished he had 
carried his resentment no further than putting an 
end to the session and giving time to deliberate. 
There was no room to expect a change for the 
betier, upon a new election. 

There was yet no open war with the Indians, 
but they continued their insults. The French in 
stigated them and furnished them with ammunition 
and provisions. Governor Shute published a 
proclamation requiring the inhabitants to remain 
upon their estates and keep possession of the 
country. No wonder the proclamation was not 
obeyed. We know no authority he had to require 
them to remain. If the preservation of their own 
proper! v u.v not sufficient to keep them there, it 
could not be expi cted they would remain merely 
as a barrier ion the rest of the province. 

In the month of August, 200 Indians with 
two French Jesuits came to George town upon 
Arowsick island, armed and under French colours, 
an;!, alter some parley with the inhabitants, 
left letter to be delivered to the governor, in 
which they ni.ik&amp;gt;- a h -avy charge against the 
F:i lir&amp;gt;h for unjustly invading the properly of the 
Indians and taking from them the country which 
(jod hitd given them. 

Halle, their spiritual father, was their patron also 



in their temporal concerns. Either from a con 
sciousness of their having conveyed the country 
to the English, or from a deire of peace and quiet, 
they were averse to engaging in war. When they 
were at their villages, the priests were continually- 
exciting them to act vigorously and drive all the 
English to the w. of Kennebeck, and such was their 
influence over them that they would often set out 
from home, with great resolution to persist in their 
demands, and in their parleys with the com 
manders of forts, as well as at more public treaties, 
would appear, at first, to be very sturdy, but were 
soon softened down to a better temper, and to agree 
that the English should hold the lands without 
molestation. When they returned home, they 
gave their father an account of great firmness they 
had shewn in refusing to make any concessions, 
and to this we are to impute the erroneous relation 
of these treaties by Charlevoix and others. 

But about this time Toxus, the Norridgewock 
chief, died. When they came to choose another 
Toxus, the old men, who were averse to war, 
contrary to Halle s mind, pitched upon Ouikoui- 
rourneuit, who had always been of the pacific 
party. They took another very disagreeable step, 
and submitted to send four hostages to Boston, 
sureties for their good behaviour and for the pay 
ment of the damaoes the English had sustained. 
Vaudrenil, the governor of Canada, was alarmed, 
and thought it necessary to exert himself upon this 
occasion. He writes to Father Ralle, of the 15th 
of June, " I was at Montreal, my reverend father, 
when your letters of the 16th and 18th of May 
came to my hands, informing me of the bad step 
taken by the Norridgewocks, in choosing Ouikoui- 
roumenit successor to the deceased Toxus, of the 
great loss which the whole Abenakis nation hath, 
sustained by his death, and the divisions prevail- 
ing among the Norridgewocks, many of whom, 
and especially their chiefs, have betrayed the 
interest of their tribe in openly favouring the 
pretensions of the English to the country ofNor- 
ridgewock. The faint hearts of your Indians in 
giving hostages to the English, to secu re payment 
of the damage they have sustained, and the auda 
cious language which they have used to the 
1 ndians, in order to keep possession of their country 
and to drive you out of it, fully convinced me that 
every advantage would be taken, of the present 
state of affairs, to subject them to the English, if 
the utmost care should not be immediately taken 
to prevent so great a misfortune. Without a 
moment s delay, I set out, in order to apply my 
self to the business at Montreal, and from thence to 
st. I&amp;lt;rau9ois and Becancour, where I prevailed] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



17 



[with the Indians of those villages vigorously to 
support their brethren of Norridgcwock, and to 
send two deputies for that purpose, to be present 
at the treaty and to let the English know, that they 
will not have to do with the Norridgewocks alone 
if they continue their injuries to them. The 
intendant and 1 have joined in a letter, to desire 
Father le Chase to take a journey to Norridgewock, 
in order to keep those Indians in their present 
disposition and to encourage them to behave with 
firmness and resolution. He will also go to 
Penobscot, to engage them to send some of their 
chiefs also, to be present on this occasion and to 
strengthen their brethren." 

Begoir, the intendant, writes at the same time to 
Ralle, " 1 wrote, my reverend father, to Monsieur 
de Vaudreuil, who is at Montreal, the sentiments 
of Father de la Chase and my own, viz. what we 
think convenient to be done, until we hear from 
the council of the marine whether the French shall 
join the Indians to support them openly against the 
English, or shall content themselves with supply 
ing ammunition, as the council has advised that 
M. Vaudreuil might do, in case the English should 
enterprise any thing against them. He thought 
it more proper to send the reverend Father la Chase, 
than Monsieur de Croisil, lieutenant, &amp;c. because 
the English can have no room to except to one 
missionary s visiting another, the treaty of peace 
not forbidding it, whereas, if a French officer Avas 
sent, they might complain that we sent French 
men into a country, which they pretend belongs 
to them, to excite the Indians to make war upon 
them. 

* it is to be wished that you and your Indians 
may be suffered to live in quiet until we know the 
king s intentions whether we shall openly join the 
Indians if they are attacked wrongfully ; in the 
mean time we shall assist them with ammunition, 
which they may be assured they shall not want. 
&amp;gt; " P. S. Since 1 wrote the foregoing the Indians 
of St. Francois and Becancour have desired M. 
Vaudreuil that M. de Croisil may go with them to 
be a witness of their good disposition, and he has 
consented to join him with Father de la Chase." 

The Massachusetts people made heavy com 
plaints of the French governor, for supporting 
and stirring up enemies against them in time of 
peace between the two crowns, but he justified 
himself to his own master. Halle was ranked by 
the English among the most infamous villains, and 
his scalp would have been worth an hundred 
scalps of the Indians. His intrepid courage and 
fervent zeal to promote the religion he professed, 
and to secure his neophytes or converts to the 

VOL. III. 



interest of his sovereign, were the principal causes 
of these prejudices. The French, for the same 
reasons, rank him with saints and heroes. He 
had been, near 40 years, a missionary among the 
Indians, and their manner of life had become 
quite easy and agreeable to him. They loved and 
idolized him, and were always ready to hazard 
their own lives to preserve his. His letters, upon 
various subjects, discovered him to have been a 
man of superior natural powers, which had been 
improved by an education in a college of Jesuits. 
The learned languages he was master of. His 
Latin is pure, classical, atid elegant. He had 
taught many of his converts, male and female, to 
write, and corresponded with them in their own 
language, and made some attempts in Indian 
poetry. When lie was young he learned to speak 
Dutch, and so came move easily to a smattering of 
English, enough to be understood by traders and 
tradesmen who had been employed in building a 
church and other work at Norridgewock. He 
corresponded, in Latin, with one or more of the 
ministers of Boston, and had a great fondness for 
shewing his talent at controversy. Pride was his 
foible, and he took great delight in raillery. The 
English idiom and the flat and bald Latin, in 
some of his correspondent letters, afforded him 
subject. Some of his contemporaries, as well as 
Cotton, Norton, Mitchel, and others of the first 
ministers of the country, would have been a match 
for him. He contemned and often provoked the 
English, and when threatened with destruction by 
them, if they should ever take Norridgewock, he 
replied if. We shall see, by and by, that he 
met with the same fate with others long before 
him, who by the like Laconic and insulting answers 
had unnecessarily provoked their enemies. 

The English charged the Indians with perfidy 
and breach of the most solemn engagements. The 
Jesuit denies it and justifies their conduct, from 
their being under duresse, at such times, and 
compelled to agree to whatever terms are propos 
ed to them ; particularly, when they met Governor 
Shute, at Arowsick, in 1717, he says, the body 
of the Norridgewocks had fully determined, that 
the English should settle no farther upon Kenne- 
beck river than a certain mill ; for all the pretence 
they had to go beyond that, was a bargain of this 
sort, made by some Englishman with any Indian he 
happened to meet with, " 1 will give you a bottle 
of rum if you will give me leave to settle here, or 
if you will give rne such a place ; give me the 
bottle, says the Indian, and take as much land as 
you have a mind to : The Englishman asks his 
name, which he writes down and the bargain is] 



IS 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



{"finished. Such sort of bargains being urged 
against the Indians, at the treaty, they rose in a 
body and wont away in great wrath, and, although 
they met again the next day and submitted to the 
governor s terms, yet when they came home all 
Ihey had done was disallowed by the body of the 
nation and rejected." Whilst the English kept 
within the mill the Jesuit forbad the Indians 
molesting them, but if any settled beyond those 
bun nds he allowed and encouraged the Indians to 
kill their cattle and to make other spoil. 

The consideration made by the purchasers of 
Indian lands was not always so inconsiderable as 
the Jesuit mentions, and the purchases were from 
chiefs or reputed chiefs or sachems, and possession 
had been taken and improvements made scores of 
miles beyond the limits he would restrain the Eng 
lish to, more than sixty years before. 

The French governor, Vaudreuil, in his manu 
script letters, arid the French historian, Charlevoix, 
in print, suppose the English settlers to be mere 
intruders, and charge the English nation with 
great injustice in dispossessing the Abanakis of 
their country. The European nations which have 
their colonies in America, may not reproach one 
another upon this head. They all took possession 
contrary to the minds of the natives, who would 
gladly have been rid of their new guests. The 
best plea, viz. that a small number of families laid 
claim to a greater part of the globe than they were 
capable of improving, and to a greater proportion 
than the general proprietor designed for so few 
people, who therefore had acquired no such 
right to it as to exclude the rest of mankind, will 
hold as well for the English as any other nation. 
The first settlers of the Massachusetts and Ply 
mouth were not content with this, but made con 
science of paying the natives to their satisfaction 
for all parts of the territory which were not 
depopulated or deserted and left without a claimer. 
Gorges, the original patentee of the province of 
Maine, made grants or conveyance of great part of 
the sea-coast and rivers of that province without 
purchase from the natives, other parts had been 
purchased from them by particular persons, and 
the remaining part, as well as the country e. of 
it, the government claimed by conquest ; but it 
nni^t be confessed that, in the several treaties of 
peace this right had not been acknowledged by 
the Indians nor insisted upon by the English, 
this controversy l&amp;gt;eing about those parts of the 
country which the English claimed by purchase, 
and no mention made of a right to the whole by 
conquest. 

The governor, immediately after the dissolution 
o 



of the general court, issued writs for a new house 
of representatives, and the court met, the 23d of 
August, at the George tavern, the extreme part of 
Boston, beyond the isthmus or neck, the small-pox 
then prevailing in the town. The house chose 
Mr. Clarke, their former speaker, and informed 
the governor of it by message, and he sent his 
approbation, in writing, to the house. They 
passed a resolve, that they intended no more by 
their message than to inform the governor and 
council of the choice they had made, and that they 
had no need of the governor s approbation. 

The first act of the house gave new occasion for 
controversy. They were so near the town as to 
be in danger, and, instead of desiring the governor 
to adjourn or prorogue the court to some other 
place, they passed a vote for removing the court 
to Cambridge and sent it to the council for con 
currence. The council non-concurred in the vote. 
The governor let the house know, that he should 
be very ready to gratify them if he was applied to 
in such manner as should consist with the sole 
right in him of adjourning, proroguing, and dis 
solving the court. They replied, that they were 
very willing to acknowledge his right, so far as 
respected time ; but as to place, by the law of the 
province the court was to be held in Boston, and 
therefore an act or order of the three branches 
was n&amp;lt; c ssary to remove it to any other place. 
They let the governor know further, that although 
they had convened in consequence ot his summons, 
yet, as many of the members apprehended their 
lives in danger, they would leave the court and 
go home. There was a quorum, however, who 
chose to risk their lives rather than concede that 
the governor had power, by his own act, to remove 
the court from Boston to any other town in the 
province, or risk the consequence of refusing to 
remain a sufficient number to make a house. 

The governor had received from England the 
opinion of the attorney-general, that he had good 
right to negative the speaker, and the lords com 
missioners of trade and plantations had wrote to 
him and signified their approbation of his proceed 
ings. These papers he caused to be laid before the 
house. The house drew up a remonstrance, in 
which they justify their own conduct and that of 
former assemblies, in their controversies with the 
governor, and with a great deal of decency declare, 
that, with all deference to the opinion of the 
attorney-general, they must still claim the right 
of solely electing and constituting their speaker, 
ami they humbly presumed that their so doing 
could not be construed a slight of or disrespect 
to his Majesty s instructions, or bearing upon the] 



M A S S A C H U S E T T S. 



19 



froyal prerogative* The governor gave them a 
short and very moderate answer; that he had 
made his Majesty s instructions and the royal 
charter the rule of his administration, that he did 
not desire to be his own judge, the former house 
had voted to send an account of their proceedings 
to England, and it would be very acceptable to 
him, if the present house would state the case and 
send it home to persons learned in the law, and 
give them directions to appear for the house, 
that his Majesty might judge between his governor 
and them, but in the mean time it was liis duty 
to follow his instructions until they were counter 
manded. 

Here seems to have been a calm interval. The 
flame was abated but the fire not extinguished. 
Fresh fuel soon caused a fresh flame. The grant 
to the governor afforded proper matter. It was 
said the house were bad economists. To save lUO/. 
in the governor s salary they put their constitu 
ents to the expencc of 500/. for their own wages. 
If the governor s demand was unreasonable, the 
house might be justified although the wages of 
the members for the time spent in the debate 
amounted to much mere than the sum in dispute. 
The currency also continued to depreciate, but 
this is a consideration which never had its just 
weight. Twenty shillings one year must be as 
good as 20*. another. They received and paid their 
private dues and debts in bills of credit according 
to their denominations, why should not the govern 
ment s debts be paid in the same manner ? A 
majority of the house were prevailed upon to vote 
no more than 500/. for half a year s salary, equal 
to about ISO/, sterling. 

The governor was irritated, instead of obtaining 
an established salary of 1000/. per annum, which 
he had been instructed to insist upon, his whole 
perquisites from the government would not afford 
him a decent support, and they were growing less 
every day by the sinking of the currency in its 
value. 

The house, from an expectation that the governor 
would, from time to time, make complaints to the 
ministry, voted 500/. sterling, to be paid into the 
hands of such persons as should be chosen to 
defend their rights in England, but the council 
refused to concur the vote, because it was not 
expressed by whom the persons should be chosen. 
At the close of the session, the house and council 
came into a vote, and the governor was prevailed 
with to consent to it, " that 300 men should be 
sent to the head-quarters of the Indians, and that 
proclamation should be made commanding them, on 
pain of being prosecuted with the utmost severity, 



to deliver up the Jesuits and the other heads and 
fbmentersof their rebellion, and to make satisfaction 
for the damage they had done, and, if they refused 
to comply, that as many of their principal men as 
the commanding officer should judge meet should 
be seized, together with Ralle, or any other Jf suit, 
and sent to Boston, and, if any opposition should 
be made, force should be repelled by force." 
Judge Sewall, one of the council, scrupled the 
lawfulness of this proceeding against the Indians 
and entered his dissent. After the general court 
was prorogued, the governor, notwithstanding he 
had consented to the vote, suspended the prose 
cution until the Indian hostages escaped from the 
castle, but a war being then deemed inevitable, 
orders were given for raising the men. The 
hostages were taken and sent back to their con 
finement, and the orders were recalled. 

A promise had been made, by the governor, to 
the Indians, that trading houses should be built, 
armourers or smiths sent down, at the charge of 
the province, and that they should be supplied 
with provisions, clothing, &amp;c. for their furs and 
skins. The compliance with this promise was 
expected from the general court, and, at any other 
time, it would have been thought a well judged 
measure, but the unhappy controversy with the 
governor would not suffer any thing, from him, to 
be approved of, and the private traders provoked 
the Indians by their frauds and other injuries, and 
it seems the governor, as well as good Mr. Sewall, 
scrupled whether a declaration of war against them 
was just or prudent. This house and council 
chose to call the proceedings against them a 
prosecution for rebellion ; but, if a view be taken 
of all the transactions between the English and 
them from the beginning, it will be difficult to say 
what sort of subjects they were, and it is not certain 
that they understood that they had promised any 
subjection at all. 

The house, dissatisfied with the governor for 
not carrying into execution a vote of the whole 
court, resolved at the beginning of the next session, 
" that the government has still sufficient reason 
for prosecuting the c. Indians for their many 
breaches of covenant." The rote being sent up 
for concurrence, the council desired the house to 
explain what they intended by prosecution, but 
they refused to do it, and desired the council either 
to concur or non-concur. The house refusing to 
explain their meaning, the board undertook to 
explain it, and concurred the vote with a declara 
tion that they understood it to be such a prosecution 
as had been determined the former session. This 
no doubt was irregular in the council, and left room] 
D 2 



20 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[to question whether it was a vote of the court, the 
house not having agreed to it as the council 
qualified it. However, in consequence of it, a 
party of men were ordered up to Norridgewock, 
and returned with no other success than bringing 
oil some of Halle s books and papers, his faithful 
disciples having taken care to secure his person 
and to fly with him into the woods. This insult 
upon their chief town and the spoil made upon 
their prie.^t will not long remain un revenged. 

The session began at Boston the 3d of Novem 
ber. The governor prorogued the court to meet 
at Cambridge, the 7th ; and before they proceeded 
to business, to avoid any dispute about the place 
of meeting, which would have obstructed the 
important affairs of the province, he gave his 
consent to a vote of the two houses, that by this 
instance of the governor s adjourning the court, no 
advantage should be taken in favour of his sole 
power of removing the court from place to place. 
In his speech he had taken no notice of party 
disputes, and only recommended to them to raise 
money for the service of the government, and par 
ticularly of their exposed frontiers. 

The house, in their vote for supply of the trea 
sury, brought in a clause which had not been in 
former votes, and which the council supposed 
would lay such restraint upon the money in the 
treasury, that it would not be in the governor s 
power, with their advice and consent, so much 
as to pay an express without a vote of the whole 
court ; they therefore non-concurred in the vote, 
and the house refused any provision without that 
clause. In the midst of the dispute, Mr. Hut- 
chinson, one of the members for Boston, was 
seized with the small-pox and died in a few days. 
The speaker, Mr. Clarke, was one of the most 
noted physicians in Boston, and, notwithstanding 
all his care to cleanse himself from infection after 
visiting his patients, it was supposed brought the 
distemper to his brother member, which so terri 
fied the court, that after the report of his being 
seized it was not possible to keep them together, 
and the governor found it necessary to prorogue 
them. At the next session in March, the house 
insisting upon the form of supply which they 
had voted in the last session, the council con 
curred. 

An affair happened during this session which 
shewed the uncertainty of the relation the Indians 
stood in to the English. Castine, son by an In 
dian woman to the Baron de St. Castine, who 
lived many years in the last century at Penobscot, 
had appeared among the Indians, who were in 
arms at Arowsick. By an order of court he had 



been afterwards seized in the e. country and brought 
to Boston, and put under close confinement. 

The house ordered that he should be brought 
upon trial in the county of Suffolk, before the su 
perior court, and that the witnesses who saw him 
in arms should be summoned to attend. This, no 
doubt, would have been trying in one country a 
fact committed in another. The council non-con 
curred and voted to send for witnesses, that the 
court might judge in what manner to proceed 
against him, but this was not agreed to by the 
house. Some time after a committee was ap 
pointed to examine him. Castine was a very 
subtle fellow and made all fair with the committee. 
Me professed the highest friendship for the Eng 
lish, and affirmed that he came to Penobscot to 
prevent the Indians from doing mischief, and 
promised to endeavour to influence all that tribe to 
keep peace. The committee, therefore, reported, 
and the two houses accepted the report, that he 
should be set at large. The governor approved of 
this proceeding. He had yet hopes of preserving 
peace. To have punished him as a traitor would 
have destroyed all hopes of an accommodation. It 
mightalso be very well questioned whether it would 
have been justifiable. The tribe or nation with 
which he was mixed has repeatedly, in words of 
which they had no adequate ideas, acknowledged 
themselves subjects ; but, in fact, in concomitant 
as well as precedent and subsequent transactions 
with them, had always been considered as free and 
independent, and, although they lived within the 
limits of the charter, the government never made 
any attempt to exercise any civil authority or ju 
risdiction over them, except when any of them 
came within the English settlements, and dis 
putes had arisen between them ami the English 
subjects. 

The house, who, the Inst session, were for prose 
cuting the Indians, and could not reasonably have 
supposed that they would bury, as they express 
themselves, the late march of the English to Nor- 
ridgewock, seem, notwithstanding, to be suddenly 
changed from vigorous measures for bringing 
them to terms, to schemes for appeasing and soften 
ing them ; and a present was ordered to be *ent to 
Bomaseen, the Norridgewock captain, to engage 
him in favour of the English. 

The small-pox this year made great havoc in 
Boston and some of the adjacent towns. Having 
been prevented spreading for near 20 years, all 
born within that time, besides many who had 
escaped it before, were liable to the distemper. 
Of 5889 which took it in Boston, 844 died. Ino 
culation was introduced upon tins occasion, con-] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[trary to the minds of the inhabitants in general, 
uncl not without hazard to the lives of those who 
promoted it, from the rage of the people. Dr. 
C. Mather, one of the principal ministers of Bos 
ton, had observed, in the Philosophical Transac 
tions, a letter of Timonius, from Constantinople, 
and a treatise of Pylarinus, Venetian consul at 
Smyrna, giving- a very favourable account of the 
operation, and he recommended a trial to the 
physicians of the town, when the small-pox first 
began to spread, but (hey all declined it except 
Dr. Boylston, who made himself very obnox 
ious. To shew the confidence lie had of success 
lie began with his own children and servants. 
Many sober pious people were struck with horror, 
and were of opinion that if any of his patients 
should die he ought to be treated as a murderer. 
The vulgar were enraged to that degree that his 
family was hardly safe in his house, and he often 
met with affronts and insults in the streets. 

The faculty, in general, disapproved his con 
duct, but Dr. Douglass made the most zea 
lous opposition. He had been regularly bred in 
Scotland, was assuming even to arrogance, and 
in several fugitive pieces, which he published, 
treated all who differed from him with contempt. 
He was credulous, and easily received idle reports 
of persons who had received the small-pox by 
inoculation taking it a second time in the natural 
way, of others who perished in a most deplorable 
manner from the corrupt matter, which had so in 
fected the mass of blood as to render the patient 
incurable. At other times, he pronounced the 
eruption from inoculation to be only a pustnlary 
fever, like the chicken or swine pox, nothing ana 
logous to the small-pox, and that the patient, 
therefore, had not the least security against the 
small-pox afterwards by ordinary infection. 

Another practiscr, Lawrence Dalhonde, who 
had been a surgeon in the French army, made 
oath, that at Cremona, about the year J696, (he 
operation was made upon 13 soldiers, four of whom 
died, three did not take the distemper, the other 
six hardly escaped, and were left with tumors, 
inflammations, gangrenes, &amp;c. and that about 
the time of the battle of Almanza, the small-pox 
being in the armj , two Muscovians were inocu 
lated, one without any immediate effect, but six 
weeks after Avas seized with a frenzy, swelled all 
over his body, and was supposed to be poisoned, 
and, being opened after his death, his lungs were 
found ulcerated, which it was determined was 
caused by inoculation. 

The justices of the peace and select men of the 
town called together tho physicians, who, after ma 



ture deliberation, came to the following conclu 
sions. " That it appears by numerous instances, 
that inoculation has proved the death of many per 
sons soon after the operation, and brought dis 
tempers upon many others, which, in the end, 
have proved deadly to them. That the natural 
tende?icy of infusing such malignant filth in the 
mass of blood is to corrupt and putrefy it, and if 
there be not a sufficient discharge of that malignity, 
by the place of incision or elsewhere, it lays a 
foundation for many dangerous diseases. That 
the continuing the operation among us is likely to 
prove of the most dangerous consequence. * Tlu: 
practice was generally condemned. 

The common people imbibed the strongest pre 
judices, and such as died by inoculation were no 
more lamented than self-murderers. Dr. Mather, 
the first mover, after having been reproached and 
vilified in pamphlets and newspapers, was at length 
attacked in a more violent way. His nephew, 
Mr. Walter, one of the ministers of Hoxbury, 
having been privately inoculated in the doctor s 
house in Boston, a villain, about three o clock iu 
the morning, set fire to the fuse of a granado 
shell, filled with combustible stuff, and threw it 
into the chamber where the sick man was lodged. 
The fuse was fortunately beat off by the passing 
of the shell through the window, and the wild 
fire spent itself upon the floor. It was generally 
supposed that the bursting of the shell by that 
means was prevented. A scurrilous menacing 
writing was fastened to the shell or fuse. 

The moderate opposers urged that the practice 
was to be condemned as trusting more to the ma 
chination of men than to the all-wise providence 
of God in the ordinary course of nature, and as 
tendingto propagate distempers to the destruction of 
mankind, which proved it to be criminal in its nature 
and a species of murder. The magistrates, we mean 
those in Boston, supposed it had a tendency to in 
crease the malignity and prolong the continuance 
of the infection, and that therefore it behoved 
them to discountenance it. 

At length the house of representatives laid hold 
of if, and a bill was brought in and passed to pro 
hibit all persons from inoculation for the small 
pox, but the council were in doubt and the bill 
stopped. 

Such is the force of prejudice. All orders of 
men, in that day, in greater or lesser proportion, 
condemned a practice which is now generally ap 
proved, and to which many thousands owe the 
preservation of their lives. 

Boylston continued the practice in spite of all 
the. opposition. About 300 were inoculated in] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[Boston and the adjacent towns. It is impossible 
to determine the number which died by it. Doug 
lass would have it (here was one in 14, whilst the 
favourers of the practice would not allow more 
than one in 70 or 80. It was evident from the 
speedy eruption, that many had taken the dis 
temper before they were inoculated. Indeed, 
where persons have continued in an infected air 
for months together, no true judgment can ever be 
made of the experiment. 

(Anno 172 L 2.) The new house of representa 
tives, in May, chose the former speaker, and the 
governor declared his approbation in the same 
manner he had done before. He negatived two 
of the counsellors elect, Colonel Byfield and 
Mr. William Clark. Mr. Clark, being a mem 
ber of the house for Boston, had ever adhered 
closely to Mr. Cooke. The governor shewed his 
resentment by refusing to admit him to the coun 
cil, but did not serve his own interest, Mr. 
Clark s opposition being of greater consequence 
in the house. 

The Indians were meditating mischief from the 
time the English were at Norridgewock, but com 
mitted no hostilities until June following. They 
came then with about 60 men, in 20 canoes, into 
Merrymeeting bay, and took prisoners nine fami 
lies, but gave no marks of their usual rage and 
barbarity. Some of their prisoners they released 
immediately, and others in a short time after. 
Enough were retained to be a security for the re 
turn of their hostages from Boston. Another 
small party of Indians made an attempt upon a 
fishing vessel belonging to Ipswich, as she lay in 
one of the e. harbours, but the fishermen being 
armed they killed two or three of the Indians and 
the rest retreated. The collector of the customs 
at Annapolis Royal, Mr. Newton, with John 
Adams, son of one of the council for Nova Sco 
tia, were coming from thence with Captain Blin 
to Boston, and putting into one of the Passima- 
quadies, went ashore with other passengers, and 
were all seized and made prisoners by about 12 
Indians and as many French ; the people left 
on board the sloop cut their cables and fled to 
Boston. 

Another party of the Indians burned a sloop at 
St George s river, took several prisoners, and at 
tempted to surprise the fort. 

Intelligence of these several hostile acts came to 
Boston whilst the general court was sitting, but 
there seemed to be no disposition to engage in war. 
Instead of the former vigorous resolves, upon 
lesser provocations, the house proposed that a mes 
sage should be sent to the Norrigewock Indians 



to demand the reasons of this behaviour, restitu 
tion of the captives, and satisfaction lor damages, 
and acquaint them that if they refused, effectual 
methods would be taken to compel them. The 
hostages given by the Indians were sent down to 
the e. and upon the restoring the English captives 
they were to be set at liberty. 

The friends of the English captives were impor 
tunate with the government to take measures for 
their redemption, and a view to effect this seems 
to have been the chief reason which delayed a de 
claration of war. But soon after the prorogation 
of the court news came that the Indians had burnt 
Brunswick, a village between Casco bay and Ken- 
nebeck, and that Captain Harman, with part of 
the forces posted upon the frontiers, had pursued 
the enemy, killed several, and taken 15 of their 
guns. Immediately after this news, July 25, the 
governor, by advice of council, caused a decla 
ration of war to be published. 

Foreign wars often delivered Greece and Rome 
from their intestine broils and animosities, but this 
war furnished a new subject for contention. The 
governor often charged the party in the house 
with assuming the direction of the war, and taking 
into their hands that power which the charter 
gives to the governor. He gave them a hint in his 
speech, August 8th, at the opening the next ses 
sion. " One thing I would particularly remark 
to you, which is, that if my hands and the coun 
cil s be not left at a much greater liberty than of 
late they have been, 1 fear our affairs will be car 
ried on with little or no spirit. Surely every per 
son who wishes well to his country will think it 
high time to lay aside all animosities, private 
peeks, and self-interest, that so we may unani 
mously join in the vigorous prosecution of the 
weighty affairs which are now upon the carpet." 

The house, in an address to the governor, 
signified their sentiments of the necessity of this 
declaration of war, and promised " all necessary 
and chearful assistance." A committee of the two 
houses settled the rates of wages and provisions for 
the forces, to which no exception was taken, but 
they went further and determined the service in 
which they were to be employed, 500 men to be 
sent npon an expedition to Penobscot, and the rest 
to be posted at different places on the frontiers, 
and qualified their report by desiring the gover 
nor to give orders accordingly. He let them know 
that the king his master and the royal charter had 
given him the sole command and direction of the 
rnilitia and all the forces which might be raised on 
any emergency, and that he would not suffer them 
to be under any direction but his own and those of-] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[ficcrs he should think fit fo appoint. The house 
made him no answer. The destination of the mi 
litary forces in this manner, and making the esta 
blishment of their wages depend upon a com 
pliance with it, had not been the practice in former 
wars and administrations, but the governor found 
he must submit to it, or the frontiers would be 
without defence. He gave up his own opinion 
with respect to the Pcnobscots, and had laid the 
same plan which the committee had reported, and 
he intended to prosecute it, which made his com 
pliance more easy. The house being dissatisfied 
with Major Moody, who had the command of the 
forces, passed the vote desiring the governor to 
dismiss him. The council non-concurred in this 
vote, " because he was condemned unheard," 
and substituted another vote to desire the governor 
to send for him that he might attend the court, but 
this the house would not agree to, and sent a sepa 
rate message to the governor to desire him to sus 
pend the major from his post. The governor told 
tliem he was surprised they should desire so high 
a piece of injustice as the punishing a man with 
out hearing what he had to say for himself, and 
let them know he would inquire into the grounds 
of their complaint. Several other votes passed 
relative to the forces, which the governor did not 
approve. 

At the next session, November 15, he recom 
mended a law to prevent mutiny and desertion, for 
want of which the men were daily running away. 
The house thought it necessary to be first satisfied 
whether the desertion in the army was not owing 
lo the unfaithfulness of the officers, and appointed 
two committees, one to repair to the head-quarters 
on the e. and other on the w. frontiers, with powers 
to require the officers to muster their companies, 
when an exact list was to be taken of the men that 
appeared, an account of all deserters, and of all 
such as were absent upon furlough, or had been 
dismissed, or had been exchanged, together with 
divers other powers. They then applied to the go 
vernor to give orders to all in command to pay a 
proper deference to the vote and order of the house 
respecting repeated abuses and mismanagements 
among the forces, &amp;c. 

This the governor thought he had good right 
to except to, and lie made the vote itself, as well 
as the manner in which it was to be executed, an 
article of complaint against the house to the king, 
but he was prevailed upon to consent to it, and 
either made or intended to make this condition, 
that the committees should make report to him. 
The house urged this consent against him, but 



in England it was not thought a sufficient justifi 
cation. 

The conceding in one point naturally led to a 
demand of the like concessions in others. 

It was thought a salutary measure to send for 
delegates from the Iroquois, who were in friend 
ship with us, and to desire them to use the in 
fluence they had over the e. Indians, in order to 
their making satisfaction for the injuries done, and 
to their good behaviour for thetime to come. When 
the delegates came to Boston, the house voted that 
the speech to be made to them by the governor 
should be prepared by a committee of the two 
houses. The governor had prepared his speech, 
and he directed the secretary to read it to the house 
of representatives, but this was not satisfactory, 
and they sent a message to desire that what the se 
cretary had read might be laid before the house. 
The governor refused at first, but upon further 
consideration consented, desiring they would spee 
dily return it. They sent it back to him, and let 
him know they would not agree to it, unless he 
would speak in the name of the general court, 
and the house of representatives might be present 
when the speech was delivered. This was dis 
agreeable to him and a novelty to the Indians, who 
had always considered in their treaties the gover 
nor of Pennsylvania as well as the governor of 
New York, to be treating 1 with them in their own 
names, or the name of the king, and not of their 
respective assemblies, but he submitted. 

In consequence of the vote of the house in the 
last session, the governor had directed an expe 
dition to Penobscot, although it was not altogether 
agreeable to his own judgment. It seems he had 
hopes of an accommodation with that tribe at least. 
Colonel Walton, who had the command on the e. 
frontiers, selected forces proper for the purposej 
and they had actually begun their march when in. 
telligence arrived to the colonel that Arowsick was 
attacked by a great number of Indians. He im 
mediately sent an express with orders to the forces 
to return, and acquainted the governor with his 
proceedings. The council advised to keep the 
whole forces for the defence of our o\vn inhabi 
tants, and to suspend acting upon the offensive 
until winter, which they judged a more proper 
season for the expedition ; and the men, inconse 
quence of this new advice, were employed in 
marches upon the back of the frontiers. But the 
house were dissatisfied, and sent a message to the 
governor " to desire him to order, by express, 
Colonel Walton to appear fort i \vith before the 
house, to render his reasons why the orders relat-] 
iiij.uvul /&amp;gt; jow^j 4""&amp;gt;W .;) u: int.- id t*. 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[ing to the expedition had not been executed." 
This was not only to take Walton from the com 
mand, as long as the house should think fit to de 
tain him, but the orders " relating to the expe 
dition" miffht be understood to mean the orders 
which had been given by the house, and not what 
he had received from the captain-general.. The 
governor told the committee that he would take no 
notice of (he message from the house unless it was 
otherwise expressed ; besides, he and the council 
were well satisfied, and he thought every body 
else was. lie added, that he intended the oflicers 
should jjive an account " to him" of their conduct. 
The next day, Nov. 20th, they sent another mes 
sage to him to desire him to inform the house whe 
ther lie would send for Walton as they had de 
sired. He then told the committee lie would send 
his answer to the house when they thought proper. 
Upon this they seem to have appointed a messen 
ger to goto the e. upon what occasion does not 
appear, and the next day passed the following ex 
traordinary vote, " Whereas this house did on 
Thursday last appoint a committee to wait on his 
excellency the governor, praying his orders for 
Colonel Walton s appearance before the house, 
and renewed their request to him yesterday, and 
his excellency has not yet seen cause to comply 
with that vote, and the denial of Colonel Wal 
ton s being sent for has extremely discouraged the 
house in projecting any further schemes for carry 
ing on the war, under any views of success. And 
this house being zealously inclined to do what in 
them lies to bring this people out of the calamities 
and perplex itics of the present war, and to spare 
no cost and charge to effect so great a good, were 
some things at present remedied ; We do, there- 
lore, once more, with the greatest sincerity and 
co ncern for our country s good, apply to your 
excellency for your speedy issuing your orders 
concerning Colonel Walton, to be dispatched by 
the messenger of this house going into those parts." 
The governor did not like to be so closely pressed, 
and when the committee came to his house he told 
them, he would not receive the vote, and, as it is 
inserted in the report and journal of the house, " he 
went his way." They then appointed their 
speaker and eight principal members, a committee 
to wait upon the governor and desire him to re 
turn to the chair, " on some important affairs 
which lay before the house," but he refused to 
see the committee, and directed his servant to tell 
them he would not then be spoke to by any body. 
Walton was a New Hampshire man, at the head 
of the forces, a small part only of which were 



raised in that government. This might prejudice 
many, but there was a private grudge against him 
in some of the leading men of the house, and 
they never left pursuing him until they effected 
his removal. 

The house finding the governor would not com 
ply, all their messages to him being exceptionable, 
as founded upon a supposed right in the house to 
call the oflicers out of the service to account before 
them whensoever they thought proper, and also to 
order the particular services in which the forces 
should be employed, without leaving it in thcgover- 
nor s power to vary, they made some alterations in 
the form of their request, and (Dec. 4th) passed the 
following vote, " Whereas this house have been 
informed of divers miscarriages in the manage 
ment of the war in the e. country, voted that his 
excellency the governor be desired to express to 
Colonel Walton, that he forthwith repair to Boston, 
and when he hath attended upon his excellency, 
that he would please to direct him to wait on this 
house, that they may examine him, concerning his 
late conduct in prosecuting the war, more espe 
cially referring to the late intended expedition to the 
fort of Penobscot." This being more general, and 
not confined to the laying aside the expedition, 
which was known to be in consequence of orders, 
the governor was willing it should be construed 
favourably, and sent for Walton. 

The council having steadily adhered to the 
governor, he took this opportunity to recommend 
to the house to act jointly with the council in mes 
sages to him of general concern, and at the same 
time, in a verbal message by the secretary, endea 
voured to soften the temper of the house. " Mr. 
speaker, his excellency commands me to acquaint 
this honourable house that he has taken into con 
sideration the several messages relating to Colonel 
Walton, and thinks it most agreeable to the con 
stitution, and what would tend to keep up a good 
agreement between the council and house of re 
presentatives, for all their messages, of a public 
nature and wherein the whole government is con 
cerned, to be sent up to the council for their con 
currence and not immediately to himself; however, 
that he will give order for Colonel Walton s com 
ing up to town, and, when he has received an ac 
count of his proceedings, the whole court shall 
have the hearing of him if they desire it." In this 
way the governor intended to guard against any 
undue proceeding, there being no danger of the 
council s condemning a measure to which a little 
while before they had given their advice and con 
sent, but the house improved the hint to a veryl 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



f different purpose, and on the 5th December voted, 
u that a committee, to consist of 11 members of 
the two houses, seven of the house of representa 
tives and four of the council, shall meet in the re 
cess of the court, once in 14 days, and oftener if 
occasion should require, to concert what steps and 
methods shall be put in practice, relative to the 
war, and having agreed upon any projections or 
designs, to lay them before his excellency for his 
approbation, who is desired to take effectual care 
to carry them into speedy execution." In affairs 
of government, of what nature soever, this was an 
innovation in the constitution, but in matters rela 
tive to the war it was taking the powers from 
the governor, which belonged to him by the con 
stitution, and vesting them in a committee of the 
two houses. The council unanimously non-con 
curred in the vote, and altercation ensued between 
them and the house, but the council persevered. 
In the mean time the governor was engaged with 
the house in fresh disputes. 

The committee of the house which had been 
sent to the e. frontiers returned, and, instead of 
making their report to the governor, which was 
the condition of his consent to their authority and 
of his orders to the officers to submit to them, they 
made their report to the house. This was disin 
genuous. It would not do to urge that he had no 
right to make conditions to their votes, for he had 
given no consent, unless it was conditional, and 
without his consent they could have no authority. 
As soon as he heard of the report, he sent to the 
house for his original order, which he had de 
livered to the committee. They answered that they 
were not possessed of it, but the chairman of the 
committee had left an attested copy on their files, 
which he might have if he pleased, but he refused 
the copy and insisted upon the original. He then 
sent for John Wainw right, the chairman of the com 
mittee, to attend him in council, and there de 
manded the return of the original order. Wain- 
wright, in general, was what was called a preroga 
tive man, but the house had enjoined him not to 
return the order. He acknowledged he had the 
order in his possession, but desired to be excused 
from delivering it, the house having directed him 
to deliver no original papers. The original vote 
of the house, and the governor s order in conse 
quence of it, are as follows : 

" In the house of representatives, Nov. II, 1712. 
" Whereas this house have been informed of re 
peated abuses and mismanagements among the of 
ficers now in pay, tending greatly to the dishonour 
and damage of the government, and are desirous 
to use all proper and suitable methods for the full 
VOL, in. 



discovery thereof, and, to effect the same, have 
sent a committee from the house to inquire into 
these rumours and report how they find things, 
we the representatives do most earnestly ue- 
sire your excellency s orders, by the same com 
mittee, to the commanding officer and all others in 
command there, to pay all proper deference to 
the vote and order of this house respecting that 
matter. 

JOHN CLARKE, speaker." 

" Boston, Nov.&amp;gt; To the officer commanding in 
17th, 1722. chief at the eastward. 

a I do hereby give orders to the commanding 
officers and all other inferior officers to pay defer 
ence to the committee, and do expect that the com 
mittee lay first before me their report as captain- 
general, and afterwards, upon the desire of the 
house of representatives, it shall be laid before 
them. 

SAMUEL SHUTE." 

The house expected the governor would com 
plain of them for usurping a military power, and 
might refuse to part with the original votes or 
orders by which he had signified his consent to 
it, the condition not preceding the exercise of such 
power. 

Soon after (Dec. 18th) Colonel Walton came to 
town, and the house sent their committee to desire 
the governor to direct him to attend the house the 
next morning, but the governor refused to give 
such orders, and told the committee, that if his 
officers were to answer for their conduct, it should 
be before the whole court. They then sent their 
door-keeper and messenger to Walton, to let him 
know the house expected his attendance. He went 
immediately, but refused to give any account of 
his proceedings, without leave from the governor. 
The next day, Walton was ordered to appear be 
fore the whole court, arid the governor sent a mes 
sage by the secretary, to acquaint the house, that 
they might then ask any questions they thought 
proper, relative to his conduct, but they resolved, 
that their intent in sending for him was, that he 
should appear before them. The next day, he sent 
another message to acquaint the house that Walton 
Mas then before the governor and council, with his 
journal, and if the house inclined to it, he desired 
them to come up, and ask any questions they 
thought proper. They returned for answer, that 
they did not think it expedient, for they looked 
upon it not only their privilege, but duty, to de 
mand, of any officer in the pay and service of the 
government, an account of his management while 
employed by the public. 

This perhaps, in general,, was-net .the cause of] 



OP 1 Tflrt 




I7ER3JTT 






MASSACHUSETTS. 



[dispute, but the question was, whether he was cul 
pable for observing the orders which the governor 
had given contrary to I lie declared mind and order 
of the house ? They then passed an order for 
Walton forthwith to lay his journal before the 
house. This was their last vote relative to this 
affair whilst the governor was in the province. 
He had, without making it public, obtained his 
Majesty s permission to leave the province and go 
to England. The prejudice, in the minds of the 
common people, increased every day. It was 
known to his friends, that as he sat in one of the 
chambers of his house, the window and door of a 
closet being open, a bullet entered, through the 
window and door passages, and passed very near 
him. If some thought this a mere accident, yet 
as he knew he had many virulent enemies, he 
could not be without suspicion of a wicked design ; 
but his principal intention in going home, was to 
represent the conduct of the house, to call them to 
answer before his Majesty in cou.icil, and to ob 
tain a decision of the points in controversy, and 
thereby to remove all occasion or pretence for fur 
ther disputes. His departure was very sudden. 
The Seahorse man of war, Captain Durrell, lying 
in Nantasket, bound to Barbadocs to convoy the 
Saltortugas fleet, the governor went on board her 
December 27th, intending to go from Barbadoes 
the first opportunity for London. Not one mem 
ber of the court was in the secret, nor indeed any 
person in the province except two or three of his 
domestics. The wind proved contrary for three 
or four days, during which the owners of the ship 
Ann, Captain Finch, which was then loading for 
London, by employing a great number of hands, 
had her fitted for sea and sent her to Nantasket, 
and offered the governor his passage in her, and he 
went on board and sailed the first of January. 

Upon a review of this controversy with (iovernor 
Shute, we are apprehensive some of our readers 
will be apt to doubt the impartiality of the rela 
tion. Such steps and so frequent by one party, 
without scarce any attempts by the other, are not 
usual, but we have made the most diligent search 
into the conduct of the governor, as well as the 
house, and we are not sensible of having omitted 
any material fact, nor have we designedly given a 
varnish to the actions of one party, or high colour 
ing to those of the other. Colonel Shute had the 
character of being humane, friendly, and benevo 
lent, but somewhat warm and sudden upon provo 
cations received, was a lover of ease and diver 
sions, and for the sake of indulging his inclina 
tions in those respects, would willingly have 
avoided controversy with particular persons or 



orders of men in the government; but it was his 
misfortune to arrive when parties ran high and the 
opposition had been violent. With great skill in 
the art of government, it might not have been im 
possible for him to have kept both pirties in sus 
pense, without interesting himself on either side, 
until he had broke their respective connections or 
the animosity had subsided ; but, void of art, with 
great integrity, he attached himself to that party 
which appeared to him to be right, and made the 
other his irreconcilable enemies. His negativing 
Mr. Cooke, when chosen to the council, was no 
more than what he had an undoubted right to do 
by charter ; but the refusal to accept him as 
speaker, perhaps, was impolitic, the country in 
general supposing it to be an invasion of the rights 
of the house, and it would have been less excep 
tionable to have dissolved them immediately, which 
he had a right to do, than to dissolve them after an 
unsuccessful attempt to enforce his negative when 
his right was doubtful in the province, although not 
so with the attorney arid solicitor general, who sup 
posed the house of representatives claimed a pri 
vilege, which the house of commons did not. 
The leading men in the house of representatives 
did not think so. That point had not been in ques 
tion in England since the reign of King Charles II. 
when it was rather avoided than determined, and 
it was not certain that the house of commons in 
the reign of King George I. would more readily 
have given up the point than their predecessors in 
the time of King Charles. The house, in the other 
parts of the controversy, had less to say for them 
selves, and with respect to the attempts upon his 
military authority, were glad to be excused by an 
acknowledgment of their having been in the wrong. 
The clipping his salary, which at the highest 
would no more than decently support him, was 
highly resented by him, and his friends were 
heard to say, that he would have remained in the 
government and waited, the decision of the other 
points, if the 200/. equal to about 50/. sterling, 
the deduction made, had been restored. 

Under an absolute monarch the people are with 
out spirit, wear their chains despairing of freedom. 
A change of masters is the sum of their hopes, and 
after insurrections and convulsions, they still con 
tinue slaves. In a government founded upon the 
principle of liberty, as far as government and li 
berty can consist, such are the sweets of liberty, 
that we often see attempts for a greater degree of 
it than will consist with the established constitu 
tion, although anarchy, the greatest and worst of 
tyrannies may prove the consequence, until the 
eyes of the people are opened and they see the ne-] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[cessity of returning &amp;lt;o their former happy state of 
government and order. 

The lieutenant-governor took the chair, under 
the disadvantage of being obliged to maintain the 
same cause which had forced his predecessor out of 
it. Personal prejudice against the governor was 
the cause of assuming rights reserved by charter to 
the crown. The cause now ceased, but power 
once assumed is not willingly parted with. Mr. 
Dummer had demeaned himself very discreetly. 
His attachment to the cause of the governor lost 
him some friends and proved a prejudice to him 
and to his successors, for it had been usual to make 
an annual grant or allowance 1o the lieutenant-go 
vernor, in consideration of his being at hand, or, as 
they expressed it, ready to serve the province, in 
case of the governor s absence, but alter the two or 
three first years from his arrival, they withheld it. 
Without any mention of the unhappy state of 
affairs, in a short speech to the two houses, he let 
them know that he would concur with them in 
every measure for his Majesty s service and the 
good of the province. An aged senator, Mr. Se- 
wall, the only person alive who had been an assist 
ant under the old charter, addressed himself to the 
lieutenant-governor with great gravity and sim 
plicity, in primitive style, which, however obsolete, 
may be worth preserving. " If your honour and 
the honourable board please to give me leave, I 
would speak a word or two upon this solemn occa 
sion. Although the unerring providence of God has 
brought your honour to the chair of government 
in a cloudy and tempestuous season, yet you have 
this for your encouragement, that the people you 
have to do with are a part of the Israel of God, 
and you may expect to have of the prudence and 
patience of Moses communicated to you for your 
conduct. It is evident, that our almighty Saviour 
counselled the first planters to remove hither and 
settle here, and they dutifully followed his advice, 
and therefore he will never leave nor forsake them 
nor theirs ; so that your honour must needs be 
happy in sincerely seeking their happiness and 
welfare, which your birth and education will in 
cline you to do. Diffiiilia quce pu/chra. 1 pro 
mise myself, that they who sit at this board will 
yield their faithful advice to your horour, accord 
ing to the duty of their place." 

The house thought it necessary to take imme 
diate measures for their defence and vindication in 
England. Tin governor had mentioned nothing 
more to their lieutenant-governor, than that he 
was embarked iind intended to return to his go 
vernment early in the fall. This the i .-utemiit-go- 
vernor communicated to the council, and the coun 



cil to the house. They sent a committee imme 
diately to the lieutenant-governor, to pray him to 
inform them what he knew of the governor s in 
tended voyage ; but he could tell them no more. 
They then appointed another committee " to pre 
pare and lay before the house what they think 
proper to be done in this critical juncture, in their 
just and necessary vindication at the court at 
home," and a ship, Captain Clark, then ready to 
sail for London, was detained until the dispatches 
were ready. Anthony Sanderson, a merchant of 
London, had been recommended by Mr. Popple, 
of the plantation oltice, in a letter to the speaker, as 
a proper person for the province agent. To him 
the house sent their papers, to be improved as they 
should order. 

(Anno 1723.) The house was loth suddenly to 
recede, and the day after the governor sailed, they 
appointed a committee, to join with a committee of 
council, to consider of proper ways for carrying 
into execution the report of a committee of war. 
This was the province of the captain -general, and 
the council refused a concurrence. The house 
then passed another vote, protesting against carry 
ing on an offensive war unless Walton, the colonel, 
and Moody, the major, should be removed and 
other suitable persons appointed. Before the 
council passed upon this vote, the two obnoxious 
persons were prevailed upon to write to the lieute 
nant-governor and desire a dismission, provided 
they might be paid their wages, and the letters 
being communicated to the council, they passed 
another vote, desiring the lieutenant-governor to 
dismiss the officers, agreeable to the letters received 
from them. In this vote the house non-concurred, 
and insisted upon their own vote, in which, the coun 
cil then non-concurred. The S rouse then passed a 
resolve, that, unless Walton and Moody were dis 
missed, they should be necessiated to draw off 
part of the forces, and sent their " resolve to be 
laid upon the council tabie. The liriiteiiant-go- 
vernor, by a message, let the house know, that the 
king had appointed him general of the forces, and 
that he only had the power to draw them off, and 
added, that he expected all messages from the 
house should be properly addressed to him, other 
wise he should pay no regard to them. The house 
were sensible they had gone loo far, and appointed 
a committee to w;it upon the lieutenant-" overnor, 
to desire they might have leave to withdraw their 
resolve, and declared that, however ex pressed, they 
intended only that they would not vote any fur 
ther pay and subsistence. They periled, how 
ever, in their refusal to provide for t!ie pay of the 
two oilicers, whose disnussion they required, norj 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[would they make provision for further carrying on 
the war until other officers were appointed. 

Among the other instances of additional power 
to the house, they had by degrees acquired from 
the governor and council the keys of the treasury, 
and no moneys could be issued without the vote of 
the house for that purpose. This is no more than 
some colonies, without charters, claim and enjoy, 
but by the charier, all moneys are to be paid out of 
the treasury " by warrant" from the governor with 
advice and consent of the council. The right of 
the house to originate all acts and orders for 
raising moneys from the people, and to appropriate 
such moneys to such services as they thought pro 
per, was not disputed, but they went further and 
would not admit that payment should be made for 
such services until they had judged whether they 
were well performed, and had passed a special 
order for such payment. Thus they kept every 
officer dependent, and Walton, because he had 
not observed their orders to go to Penobscot, but 
had -conformed to the governor s orders, from 
whom he derived all the authority he had to march 
any where, was denied his pay. Other matters 
were alleged against Walton in the course of the 
dispute, but this seems to have been the prin 
cipal. 

The exposed state which the frontiers must have 
been in, if the forces had been drawn oft , and they 
could not be kept there without pay, induced the 
lieutenant-governor to dismiss Walton and to ap 
point Thomas Westbrooke colonel and commander 
in chief, whereupon an establishment was settled 
by the house, premiums were granted for Indian 
scalps and prisoners, and an end was put to the 
session. 

The Indians, we have observed, were instigated 
by the French to begin the war. The old men 
were averse to it. Halle with difficulty prevailed 
upon the Norridgewocks. The Penobscots were 
still more disinclined, and after hostilities began, 
expressed their desires of an accommodation. 
The St. Francois Indians, who lived upon the bor 
ders of Canada, and the St. John s, as also the 
( ape Sable Indians, were so remote as not to fear 
the destruction of their villages by the English. 
They mixed with the Norridgewocks and Penob 
scots, and made the war general. In the latter 
part of July the enemies surprised Canso and other 
harbours near to it, and took 16 or 17 sail of fish 
ing vessels, all belonging to the Massachusetts. 
Governor Phillips happened to be at Canso, and 
caused two sloops to be manned, partly with vo 
lunteer sailors from merchant vessels which were 
loading with fish, aud seat them, under the com 



mand of John Eliot of Boston, and John Robinson 
of Cape Ann, in quest of the enemy. Eliot, as he 
was ranging the coast, espied seven vessels in a 
harbour called \Y innepaug, and concealed all his 
men, except four or five, until he came near to one 
of the vessels, which had about 40 Indians aboard, 
who were in expectation of another prize falling 
into their hands. As soon as he was within hear 
ing, they hoisted their pennants and called out, 
" strike English dogs and come aboard, tor you are 
all prisoners." Eliot answered, that he would 
make all the haste he could. Finding he made no 
attempt to escape, they began to fear a turter and 
cut their cable, with intent to run ashore, but he 
was too quick for them and immediately clapped 
them aboard. For about half an hour they made 
a brave resistance, but at length, some of them 
jumping into the hold, Eliot threw his hand gra- 
nadoes after them, which made such havoc, that 
all which remained alive took to the water, where 
they were a fair mark for the English shot. From 
this or alike action, probably took rise a common 
expression among English soldiers and sometimes 
English hunters, who, when they have killed an 
Indian, make their boast of having killed a black 
duck. Five only reached the shore. 

Eliot received three bad wounds, and several of 
the men were wounded and one killed. Seven 
vessels, with several hundred quintals of fish, and 
15 of the captives, were recovered from the enemy. 
They had sent many of the prisoners away, and 
nine they had killed in cold blood. The Nova 
Scotia Indians had the character of being more 
savage and cruel than the other nations. 

Robinson retook two vessels, and killed several 
of the enemy. Five other vessels the Indians had 
carried so far up the bay, above the harbour of 
Malagas!], that they were out of his reach, and he 
had not men sufficient to land, the enemy being 
very numerous. 

The loss of so many men enraged them, and 
they had determined to revenge themselves upon 
the poor fishermen, above 20 of whom yet remained 
prisoners at Malagash harbour, and they were all 
destined to be sacrified to the mimes of the slain 
Indians. The powowing and other ceremonies 
were performing when Captain Blin, in a sloop, 
appeared off the harbour, and made the signal or 
sent in a token which had been agreed upon be 
tween him and the Indians, when he was their 
prisoner, should be his protection. Three of the 
Indians went aboard h&amp;lt;s vessel, and agreed for the 
ransom both of vessels and captives, which were 
delivered to him and the ransom paid. In his way 
to Boston he made prisoners of three or four In- 1 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[dins near cape Sable, and about the same time, 
Captain Southack took two canoes with three In 
dians in each, one of which was killed and the 
other five brought to Boston. 

This Neva Scotia affiiir proved very unfortunate 
for the Indians. The Massachusetts frontiers af 
forded them less plunder, but they were in less 
danger. On the 16th of September, between 400 
arid 500 Indians were discovered upon Arowsick 
island, by a party of soldiers employed as a guard 
to the inhabitants while at their labour. They 
immediately made an alarm, by firing some of 
their guns, and the inhabitants of the island, by 
this means, had sufficient notice to shelter them 
selves in the fort or garrison-house, and also to se 
cure part of their goods, before the enemy came 
upon them. 

They fired some time upon the fort and killed 
one man, after which they fell to destroying the 
cattle, about 50 head, and plundering the houses, 
and set fire to 26 houses, the flames of which the 
owners beheld from the fort, lamenting the insuf 
ficiency of their numbers to sally out and prevent 
the mischief. 

These were the Indians which put a stop to the 
march to Penobscot. There were in the fort about 
40 soldiers, under Captain Robert Temple and 
Captain Penhallow. Captain Temple was a jjentlc- 
man, who came over from Ireland with an intent to 
settle the country with a great number of families 
from the n. of Ireland, but this rupture with the 
Indians broke his measures, and having been an 
officer in the army, Colonel Shute gave him a com 
mand here. Walton and Harman, upon the first 
alarm, made all the dispatch they could, and be 
fore night, came to the island in two whaleboats 
with 30 men more. With their joint force the 
English made an attempt to repel the enemy, but 
the disproportion in numbers was such, that in a 
bush-fight or behind trees, there was no chance, 
and the English retreated to the fort. The enemy 
drew oft the same night, and passing up Kenne- 
beck river, met the province sloop, and firing upon 
her, killed the master, Bartholomew Stretton, and 
then made an attempt upon Richmond fort, and 
from thence went to the village of Norridgewock, 
their-head quarters. 

A man was killed at Berwick, which was the 
.last mischief done by the enemy this first year of 
the war. 

When the general court met in May, next year, 
no advice had been received of any measures taken 
by the governor in England. The house chose 
their speaker and placed him in the chair without 
presenting him to the lieutenant-governor, which. 



he took no notice of. They continued their claim 
to a share in the direction of the war, and insisted 
that if any proposals of peace should be made by 
the Indians, they should be communicated to the 
house and approved by them. They repeated also 
a vote for a committee of the two houses to meet 
in the recess of the court, and to settle plans for 
managing the affairs of the war, which the lieute 
nant-governor was to carry into execution, but in 
this the council again non-concurred. The lieute 
nant-governor s seal being affixed to a belt given 
to the delegates from the Iroquois, who came to 
Boston to a conference, the house passed a resolve, 
" that the seal be defaced and that the seal of the 
province be affixed to the belt, as the committee 
of the two houses have agreed," and sent there- 
solve to the council for their concurrence. The 
council, instead of concurring, voted, as well they 
might, that the resolve contained just matter of 
offence, and therefore they desired the house to 
withdraw it. This produced another resolve from, 
the house still higher, " that the attix ing a private 
seal, contrary to the agreement of a committee, was 
a high affront and indignity to them, and therefore 
they very justly expected the advisers and pro 
moters thereof to be made knoAvn to the house." 
There was a double error in this transaction of the 
house, the lieutenant-governor having the unques 
tionable right of ordering the form of proceeding 
in treaties or conferences of this kind, and the 
house having no authority to direct the king s seal 
to be applied to any purpose, the governor being 
the keeper of the seal, and although in common 
parlance called the province seal, which we sup 
pose led to the mistake, yet was it properly speak 
ing the king s seal for the use of the province. 

The lieutenant-governor took no public excep 
tion to any votes of the house this session, which 
we must presume to be owing to his apprehensions 
that in a short time, a full consideration would be 
had in England of matters of the same nature dur 
ing Colonel Shute s administration. Before the 
next session of the general court (Oct. 23d) the 
agent Mr. Sanderson transmitted to the speaker, 
copy oi the heads of complaint exhibited against 
the house for encroaching upon his Majesty s pre 
rogative in seven instances. 

" 1st, In their behaviour with respect to the trees 
reserved for masts for the royal navy. 

" 2d, For refusing to admit the governor s nega 
tive upon their choice of a speaker. 

" 3d, Assuming power in the appointment of 
days for fasting and thanksgiving. 

" 4th, Adjourning themselves to a distant day by 
their own act.] 



30 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[" 5th, Dismantling forts and directing the artil 
lery and warlike stores to other than the custody 
of the captain-general or his order. 

" 6th, Suspending military officers and refusing 
their pay. 

" 7th, Appointing committees of their own to 
direct and muster his Majesty s forces." 

The house voted the complaint groundless, and 
ordered 100/. sterling to be remitted to Sanderson, 
to enable him to employ counsel to justify the pro 
ceedings of the house. The vote being sent to the 
council was unanimously non-concurred in. 

The house then prepared an answer to the se 
veral articles of complaint and an address to the 
king, to which they likewise desired the concur 
rence or approbation of the council, but they wore 
disapproved and sent back with a vote or message, 
that " in faithfulness to the province and from a 
tender regard to the house of representatives, the 
board cannot but declare and give as their opinion, 
that the answer is not likely to recommend this go 
vernment and people to the grace and favour of 
his Majesty, but, on the contrary, has a tendency 
to render us obnoxious to the royal displeasure." 

The house, however, ordered the answer and 
address to be signed by the speaker and forwarded 
to Mr. Sanderson, to be improved as they should 
order. 

The council thereupon prepared a separate ad 
dress to his Majesty and transmitted it to the go 
vernor. The non-concurrence of council with 
these measures of the house was resented, and the 
house desired to know what part of their answer 
had a tendency to render the government and 
people obnoxious. Here the council very pru 
dently avoided engaging in controversy with the 
house. " It was not their design to enter into a 
detail, but only to intimate their opinion, that con 
sidering the present circumstances of affairs, some 
better method might be taken than an absolute 
justification." They had shewn their dissatisfac 
tion with the conduct of the house, in every article 
which furnished matter for the complaint, except 
that of the speaker, and did all in their power to 
prevent them, but now this conduct was im 
peached, the arguments used by the council in a 
dispute with the house might be sufficient to jus 
tify the council, and set their conduct in an ad 
vantageous light, but they would strengthen and 
increase the prejudice against the country in gene 
ral. This was an instance of public spirit worthy 
of imitntion. 

The house then resolved, " that being apprehen 
sive that the liberties and privileges of the people 
arc struck at by Governor Shute s memorial to his 



Majesty, it is thereforetheir duty as well as interest 
to send some suitable person or persons from hence, 
to use the best method that may be to defend the 
constitution and charter privileges." They had 
no power over the treasury without the council, 
and therefore sent this vote for concurrence, but it 
was refused, and the following vote passed in 
council instead of it : " The liberties and privi 
leges of his Majesty s good subjects of this pro 
vince being in danger, at this present critical con 
juncture of our public affairs at the court of Great 
Britain, and it being our duty as well as interest 
to use the best methods that may be in defence of 
the same; and whereas Jeremiah Uummer, Esq. 
the agent of this court, is a person of great know 
ledge and long experience in the affairs of the 
province, and has greatly merited of this people, 
by his printed defence of the charter, and may 
reasonably be supposed more capable of serving 
us in this exigence than any person that may be 
sent from hence, voted, that the said Mr. agent 
Dumrner be directed to appear in behalf of the 
province for the defence of the charter, according 
to such instructions as he shall receive from this 
court." This vote plainly intimated, that by the 
late conduct of the house the charter of the pro 
vince was in danger, but the house seem to have 
overlooked it and concurred with an amendment, 
" that Mr. Sanderson and a person sent from hence 
be joined with Mr. Dunimer." The council 
agreed that a person should be sent home, but re 
fused to join Sanderson. Before the house passed 
upon this amendment, they made a further trial to 
obtain an independency of the council, and voted, 
that there should be paid out of the treasury, to 
the speaker of the house, 300/. sterling, to be ap 
plied as the house should order. Near three weeks 
were spent in altercations upon this subject, be 
tween the council and the house, at length it was 
agreed that 100/. should be at the disposal of the 
house, and 200/. to be paid to such agents as 
should be chosen by the whole court. The house 
were in arrears to Sanderson, which they wanted 
this money to discharge, and then were content to 
drop him. 

The manner of choosing civil officers had been 
by a joint vote or ballot of council and house. 
This gives a great advantage to the house, who are 
four times the number of the board. But to be 
more sure of the person the majority of the house 
wcr fond of, they chose Mr. Cooke for agent, and 
sent the vole to the board for concurrence. The 
council non-concurred, and insisted on proceeding 
in the usual way, which the house were obliged 
to comply with. The choice, however, fell upon] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[the same person, and he sailed for London the 
18th of January. 

Colonel Westbrook with 230 men set out from 
Kennobeck the 1 Ith February this year, with 
small vessels and whale-boat, and ranged the 
coast as far e. as mount Desert. Upon his return 
he went up Penohscot river, where, about 32 miles 
from the anchoring place of the transports, he 
discovered the Indian castle or fortress, walled 
with stockadoes, about 70 feet in length and 50 in 
breadth, which inclosed 23 well finished wigwams. 
"Without, was a church 60 feet long and 30 broad, 
very decently finished within and without, also a 
very commodious house in which the priest dwelt. 
All was deserted, and all the success attending 
this expedition was the burning the village. The 
forces returned to St. George s the 20th of 
March. 

Captain Harman was intended, with about 120 
men, for Norridgewock at the same time, and 
set out the 6th February, but the rivers were so 
open and the ground so full of water, that they 
could neither pass by water nor land, and having 
with great difficulty reached to the upper falls of 
Amascoggin, they divided into scouting parties 
and returned without seeing any of the enemy. 
An attempt was made to engage the Six Nations 
the Scatacook Indians in the war, and com 
missioners were sent to Albany empowered to pro 
mise a bounty for every scalp if they would go out 
against the enemy, but they had no further suc 
cess than a proposal to send a large number of 
delegates to Boston. 

The commissioners for Indian affairs in Albany 
had the command of the Six Nations, and would 
not have suffered them to engage in war if they 
had inclined to it. The Massachusetts commis 
sioners were amused, and a large sum was drawn 
from the government in valuable presents to no pur 
pose. No less than 63 Indians came to Boston, 
August 21st, the general court then sitting. A 
very formal conference was held with them, in the 
presence of the whole court, but the delegates 
would not involve their principals in war ; if any 
of their young men inclined to go out, with any 
parties of the English, they were at liberty and 
might do as they pleased. Two young fellows 
offered their service, and were sent down to fort 
Richmond on Kennebeck river. Captain Heath the 
commander ordered his ensign, Coleby, and three 
of the garrison, to go up the river with them. 
After they had travelled a league from the fort, they 
judged by the smell of fire, that a party of the 
enemy must be near. The Mohawks would go no 
further until they were strengthened by more men, 



and sent to the fort for a whale-boat, with as many 
men as she could carry. Thirteen men were sent, 
and soon after they had joined the first party, 
about 30 of the enemy appeared, and, after a 
smart skirmish, fled to their canoes, carrying off 
two of their company dead, or so badly wounded 
as to be unable to walk, and leaving their packs 
behind. Coleby, who commanded the party, was 
killed and two others wounded. The Mohawks 
had enough of the service, and could not be pre 
vailed on to tarry any longer, and were sent back 
to Boston. 

Small parties of the enemy kept the frontiers 
in constant terror, and now and then met with 
success. 

In April, they killed and took eight persons at 
Scarborough and Falmouth. Among the dead 
was the serjeant of the fort, Chubb, whom the In 
dians took to be Captain Harman, and no less than 
15 of them aimed at him at the same time, and 
lodged 11 bullets in his body. This was lucky 
for the rest, many more escaping to the fort than 
would otherwise have done. In May, they killed 
two at or near Berwick, one at Wells, and two 
travelling between York and Wells. In June, 
they came to Roger Bering s garrison at Scarbo- 
borough, killed his wife and took three of his 
children, as they were picking berries, and killed 
two other persons. In July, Dominicus Jordan, 
a principal inhabitant and proprietor of Saco, was 
attacked in his field by five Indians, but keeping 
his gun constantly presented without firing, they 
did not care to close in with him, and after re 
ceiving three wounds he recovered the garrison. 
In August, the enemy appeared ZE. and the I3th 
killed two men at Northfield, and the next day a 
father and four of his sons, making hay in a mea 
dow at Rutland, were surprised by about a dozen 
Indians. The father escaped in the bushes, but 
the four sons fell a prey to the enemy. Mr. YVil- 
lard, the minister of Rutland, being abroad, armed, 
fell into their hands also, having killed one and 
wounded another before he was slain himself. The 
last of the month, they killed a man at Cocheco, 
and killed or carried away another at Arundel. 
The 1 1th of October, about 70 of the enemy at 
tacked the block-house above Northfield, and 
killed and wounded four or five of the English. 
Colonel Stoddard marched immediately with 50 
men from Northampton to reinforce Northfield, 
50 men belonging to Connecticut having been 
drawn off the day before. J ustice should be done 
to the government of Connecticut. Their frontiers 
were covered by the Massachusetts, and if they 
had not contributed to the charge of the war, it] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[was not probable that the Massachusetts people 
would have drawn in and left Connecticut frontiers 
exposed. Nevertheless, they generally, at the 
request of the Massachusetts, sent forces every 
year during the summer in this and former wars, 
and paid their wages, the provisions being fur 
nished by this government. 

In October, the enemy surprised one Cogswell 
and a boat s crew which were with him at mount 
Desert. December 25th, about 60 Indians laid 
siege to the fort at Muscongus or St. George s. 
They surprised and took two of the garrison, who 
informed them the fort was in a miserable condi 
tion, but the chief officer there, Kennedy, 

being a bold resolute man, the garrison held out 
until Colonel Wcstbrook arrived with force suffi 
cient to scatter the besiegers and put them to 
flight. 

This summer also, July 14th, the Indians sur 
prised one Captain Watkins, who was on a fishing 
voyage at Canso, and killed him and three or four 
of his family upon Durell s island. 

Douglass and other writers applaud the admi 
nistration for conducting this war with great skill. 
The French could not join the Indians, as in 
former wars. Parties of the English kept upon 
the march, backwards and forwards, but saw no 
Indians. Captain Moultori went up to Norridge- 
wock and brought away some books and papers 
of the Jesuit Ralle, which discovered that the 
French were the instigators of the Indians to the 
war, but he saw none of the enemy. He came off 
without destroying their houses and church. 
Moulton was a discreet as well as brave man, and 
probably imagined this instance of his moderation 
would provoke, in the Indians, the like spirit to 
wards the English. 

(Anno 1724.) The next year was unfavourable 
to the English in the former part of it, and the 
losses, upon the whole, exceeded those of the 
enemy ; but a successful stroke or two against 
ilx-iu in the course of the year made them weary 
of uar, and were the means of an accommodation. 
The 2-&amp;gt;d of March, they killed one Smith, ser- 
jeant of the fort at cape Porpoise. In April, one 
Mitchell was killed at Black point and two of his 
sons taken, and about the same time John Felt, 
William Worm well, and Ebenezer Lewis were 
killed at a saw mill on Kcnncbeck river, and one 
Thomson at Berwick met with the sa-ne fate in 
May, and OTIC of his children was carried into 
captivity, another child was scalped and left on 
the ground for dead, but soon after was taken up 
and carried home alive. In the same month they 
killed elder Knock, at Lamprey river, George 



Chapley and a young woman, at Oyster river, as 
they were going home from public worship, and 
took prisoners a man and three boys at Kingston. 
The beginning of June, a scout of 30 men, from 
Oyster river, were attacked before they left the 
houses, and two men were shot down : the rest 
ran upon the Indians and put them to flight, 
leaving their packs and one of their company who 
was killed in the skirmish. One Englishman was 
killed and two taken prisoners at Hatfield, another 
with a friend Indian and their horses were killed 
between Northfield and Deerfield. 

This month news was brought to Boston of the 
loss of Captain Josiah W inslow and 1 3 of his com 
pany, belonging to the fort at St. George s river. 
There went out 17 men in two whale-boats, April 
30. The Indians, it seems, watched their motions 
and waited the most convenient time and place to 
attack them. The next day, as they were upon 
their return, they found themselves on a sudden 
surrounded with 30 canoes, whose complement 
must be 100 Indians. They attempted to land 
but were intercepted, and nothing remained but 
to sell their lives as dear as they could. They 
made a gallant defence, and the bravery of their 
captain was in an especial manner applauded. 
Every Englishman was killed. Three Indians, 
we suppose of those called the Cape Ann Indians, 
who were of the company, made their escape and 
carried to the fort the melancholy news. 

Encouraged by this success, the enemy made a 
still greater attempt by water, seized two shallops 
at the isles of Shoals, and afterwards other fishing 
vessels in other harbours, and among the rest, a 
large schooner with two swivel guns, which they 
manned, and cruised about the coast. A small 
force was thought sufficient to conquer these raw 
sailors, and the lieutenant-governor commissioned 
Dr. Jackson, of the province of Maine, in a 
small schooner with 20 men, and Silvanus Lake- 
man, of Jpswich, in a shallop with 16 men, to go 
in quest of them. They soon came up with them, 
and not long after returned with their rigging 
much damaged by the swivel guns, and Jackson 
and several of his men wounded, and could give 
no other account of the enemy than tluit they had 
gone into Penobscot. 

The Seahorse mzui of war, Captain Durrell, 
being then upon the Boston station, the lieutenant, 
master, and master s mate, each of them took the 
command of a small vessel with 30 men each, and 
went after the Indians, but it is probable they 
were soon tired of this new business, for they were 
not to be found, nor do we meet with any further 
intelligence about them. They took 1 ( vessels j 



MASSACHUSETTS 



33 



[with 45 men, 22 of whom they killed, and carried 
23 into captivity. 

At Grotoa they killed one man and left dead one 
of their own number. August 3d, they killed 
three, wounded one, and made another prisoner at 
Rutland. The 6th, four of them came upon a 
small house in Oxford, which was built under a 
hill : they made a breach in the roof, and as one 
of them was attempting 1 to enter, he received a 
shot in his belly from a courageous woman, the 
only person in the house, but who had two mus 
kets and two pistols charged, and was prepared 
for all four, but they thought fit to retreat, carry 
ing oft* the dead or wounded man. The 16th, a 
man was killed at Berwick, another wounded, and 
a third carried away. The 26th, one was killed 
and another wounded at Northampton, and the 
27th, the enemy came to the house of John Han 
son, one of the people called Quakers, at Dover, 
and killed or carried away his wife, maid, ami six 
children, the man himself being at the Friends 
meeting. 

Discouraged with the ineffectual attempts to in 
tercept the enemy, by parties of the forces march 
ing upon the back of the frontiers, another expe 
dition was resolved upon, in order to surprise 
them in their principal village at Norridgewock. 

Four companies, consisting in the whole of 208 
men, were ordered up the river Kennebeck, under 
Captain Harman, Captain Moulton, Captain 
Bourn, and Lieutenant Bean. Three Indians of 
the Six Nations, were prevailed with to accompany 
our forces. The different accounts given by the 
French arid English of this expedition may afford 
some entertainment.. Charlevoix, who we sup 
pose was about that time in Canada, and might 
receive there or from thence the account given by 
the Indians themselves, relates it in this manner : 
" The 23d of August 1724, 1100 men, part Eng 
lish, part Indians, came up to Norridgewock. 
The thickets, with which the Indian village was 
surrounded, and the little care taken by the inha 
bitants to prevent a surprise, caused that the 
enemy were not discovered, until the very instant 
when they madeageneral discharge of their guns and 
their shot had penetrated all the Indian wigwams. 
There were not above 50 fighting men in the vil 
lage. These took to their arms and ran out in con 
fusion, not with any expectation of defending the 
place against an enemy who were already in pos 
session, but to favour the escape of their wives, 
their old men and children, and to give them time 
to recover the other side of the river, of which the 
English had not then possessed themselves. 

" The noise and tumult gave Father Rallc 
VOL. in. 



notice of the danger his converts were in. Not 
intimidated, he went to meet the enemy, in hopes 
to draw all their attention to himself and secure 
his flock at the peril of his own life. He was not 
disappointed. As soon as he appeared, the Eng 
lish set up a great shout, which was followed by a 
shower of shot, and he fell down dead near to a 
cross which he had erected in the midst of the vil 
lage, seven Indians, who accompanied him to 
shelter him with their own bodies, falling dead 
round about him. Thus died this kind shepherd, 
giving his life for his sheep, after a painful mission 
of 37 years. The Indians, who were all in the 
greatest consternation at his death, immediately 
took to flight and crossed the river, some swim 
ming and others fording-. The enemy pursued 
them until they had entered far into the woods, 
where they again gathered together to the number 
of 150. Although more than 2000 shot had been 
fired upon them, yet there were no more than 30 
killed and 14 wounded. The English, finding 
they had nobody left to resist them, fell first to 
pillaging and then burning the wigwams. They 
spared the church, so long as was necessary for 
their shamefully profaning the sacred vessels and 
the adorable body of Jesus Christ, and then set 
fire to it. At length they withdrew, with so great 
precipitation that it was rather a flight, and they 
seemed to be struck with a perfect panic. The 
Indians immediately returned to their village, 
where they made it their first care to weep over 
the body of their holy missionary, whilst their 
women were looking out for herbs and plants for 
healing the wounded. They found him shot in a 
thousand places, scalped, his skull broke to pieces 
with the blows of hatchets, his mouth and eyes full 
of mud, the bones of his legs fractured, and all his 
members mangled an hundred different ways. 
Thus was a priest treated in his mission, at the 
foot of a cross, by those very men who have 
so strongly exaggerated the pretended inhumanity 
of our Indians, who have never made such carnage 
upon the dead bodies of their enemies. After his 
converts had raised up and oftentimes kissed the 
precious remains, so tenderly and so justly be 
loved by them, they buried him in the same place 
where, the evening before, he had celebrated the 
sacred mysteries, namely, where the altar stood 
before the church was burnt." 

Besides the great error in the number of the 
English forces, there are many embellishments in 
this relation in favour of the Indians and injurious 
to the English. Not satisfied with the journal 
alone which was given in by Captain Harman, we 
took from Captain Moulton as minute and cir-] 
F. 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[cumstantial an account as he could give of this 
affair. 

The forces left Richmond fort on Kennebeck 
river, the 8&amp;lt;h of August, O. S. The 9th, they 
arrived at Taconick, where they left their whale- 
boats, with a lieutenant and 40 of the 208 men to 
guard them. With the remaining forces, the JOth, 
they began their march by land for Norridgcwock. 
The same evening, they discovered and fired 
upon two Indian women ; one of them, the daugh 
ter of the well known Bomazcen, they killed, the 
other, his wife, they took prisoner. From her they 
received a full account of the state of Norridge- 
wock. The 12th, a little after noon, they came 
near to a village. It was supposed that part of 
the Indians might be at their corn-fields, which 
were at some distance, and therefore it was thought 
proper to divide this small army. Harman, with 
about 80 men, chose to go by the way of the fields, 
and Moulton, with as many more, were left to 
march straight to the village, which about three 
o clock suddenly opened upon them. There was 
not an Indian to be seen, being all in their wig 
wams. The men were ordered to advance softly 
and to keep a profound silence. At length an In 
dian came out of one of the wigwams, and as he 
was making water, looked round him and dis 
covered the English close upon him. He imme 
diately gave the war whoop and ran in for his gun. 
The whole village, consisting of about 60 warriors, 
besides old men, women, and children, took the 
alarm, and the warriors ran to meet the English, 
the rest fled to save their lives. Moulton, instead 
of suffering his men to fire at random through the 
wigwams, charged every man not to fire, upon 
pain of death, until the Indians had discharged 
their guns. It happened as he expected ; in their 
surprise they overshot the English and not a man 
was hurt. The English then discharged in their 
turn and made great slaughter, but every man 
still kept his rank. The Indians fired a second 
volley and immediately fled towards the river. 
Some jumped into their canoes, but had left their 
paddles in their houses, others took to swimming, 
and some of the tallest could ford the river, which 
was about 60 feet over, and the waters being low, 
it was no where more than six feet deep. The 
English pursued, some furnished themselves with 
paddles and took the Indian canoes which were 
left, others waded into the river. They soon 
drove the Indians from their canoes into the river, 
and shot them in the water, and they conjectured 
that not more than 50 of the whole village landed 
on the other side, and that some of them were 
killed before they reached the woods. 



The English then returned to the town, where 
they found the Jesuit in one of the wigwams, 
firing upon a few of our men who had not pursued 
after the enemy. He had an English boy in the 
wigwam with htm, about 14 years of age, who 
had been taken about six months before. This 
boy he shot through the thigh, and afterwards 
stabbed in the body, but by the care of the sur 
geons he recovered. We find this act of cruelty 
in the account given by Harman upon oath. Moul 
ton had given orders not to kill the Jesuit, but by 
his firing from the wigwam, one of our men bein- 
wounded, a lieutenant Jaques stove open the door 
and shot him through the head. Jaques excused 
himself to his commanding officer, alleging that 
Ralle was loading his gun when he entered the 
wigwam, and declared that he would neither give 
nor take quarter. Moulton allowed that some 
answer was made by Ralle which provoked Jaques, 
but doubted whether it was the same as reported, 
and always expressed his disapprobation of the 
action. Mog, a famous old chief among the In 
dians, was shut up in another wigwam, and firing 
from it killed one of the three Mohawks. His 
brother was so enraged that he broke down the 
door and shot Mog dead. The English, in their 
rage, followed and killed the poor squaw and two 
helpless children. Having cleared the village of 
the enemy, they then fell to plundering and de 
stroying the wigwams. The plunder of an Indian 
town consisted of but a little corn, it being not far 
from harvest, a few blankets, kettles, guns, and 
about three barrels of powder, all which was 
brought away. New England Puritans thought it 
no sacrilege to take the plate from the altars of the 
Roman Catholic church, and this we believe was 
all the profaneness offered to the sacred vessels. 
There were some expressions of zeal against idola 
try, in breaking the crucifixes and other imagery 
which were found there. The church itself, a few 
years before, had been built by carpenters from 
New England. Beaver and other Indian furs and 
skins set up the church, and a zeal against a sup 
posed false religion destroyed the ornaments of it. 

Harman and the men who went to the corn 
fields did not come up till near night, when the 
action was over. They all of both parties lodged 
in the wigwams, keeping a guard of 40 men, the 
next morning they found 26 dead bodies, besides 
that of the Jesuit, and had one woman and three 
children prisoners. Among the dead were Boma- 
zeen, Mog, Job, Carabesett, Wissememet, and 
Bomazeen s son-in-law, all noted warriors. They 
marched early for Taconick, being in some pain 
for their men and whulc-boats, but found all safe.] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



35 



[Christian, one of tbe Mohawks, was sent, or of his 
own accord returned, after they had began their 
march, and set fire to the wigwams and to the 
church, and then joined the company again. The 
16th, they all arrived at Richmond fort. Harman 
went to Boston with the scalps, and being chief in 
command, was made a lieutenant-colonel for an 
exploit in which Mouiton was the principal actor, 
who had no distinguishing reward, except the 
applause of the country in general. This has often 
been the case in much more important service. 
The Norridgewock tribe never made any figure 
since this blow. 

Encouraged by this success Colonel West- 
brook was ordered to march with 300 men across 
from Kennebeck to Penobscot, which he performed 
with no other advantage than exploring the coun 
try, which before was little known. Other parties 
were ordered up Amaseconti Amariscoggin, and 
a second attempt was made upon Norridgewock, 
but no Indians were to be found. 

The frontiers, however, continued to be infested. 
September the 6th, an English party of 14 went 
from Dunstable in search of two men who were 
missing. About 30 Indians lay in wait and shot 
down six and took three prisoners. A second 
party went out and lost two of their number. The 
w. frontier seems to have been better guarded, for 
although often alarmed, they were less annoyed. 

(Anno 1725.) The government increased the 
premium for Indian scalps and captives to 100/. 
This encouraged John Lovewell to raise a com 
pany of volunteers, to go out upon an Indian 
hunting. January 5th, he brought to Boston a 
captive and a scalp, both which he mot with above 
40 miles beyond Winnepesiaukee lake. Going 
out a second time, he discovered ten Indians 
round a fire all asleep : he ordered part of his 
company to fire, who killed three ; the other seven, 
as they were rising up, were sent to rest again by 
the other part of the company reserved for that 
purpose. The ten scalps were brought to Boston 
3d of March. Emboldened by repeated success, 
he made a third attempt and went out with 33 
men. Upon the 8th of May, they discovered 
an Indian upon a point of land which joined to a 
great pond or lake. They had some suspicion 
that he was set there to draw them into a snare, 
and that there must be many Indians near, and 
therefore laid down their packs that they might be 
ready for action, and then marched near two miles 
round the pond to come at the Indian they had 
seen. The fellow remained, although it was cer 
tain death to him, and when the English came 



within gun-shot, discharged his piece, which was 
loaded with beaver shot, and wounded Lovew 11 
and one of his men, and then immediately fell 
himself and was scalped. His name ought to have 
been transmitted as well as that of M. Curtius, who 
jumped into the gulf or chasm, upon less rational 
grounds, to save his country. 

The Indians who lay concealed seized all the 
English packs, and ihen waited their return at a 
place convenient for their own purpose. One of 
the Indians being discovered, the rest, being about 
80, rose, yelled and fired, and then ran on with 
their hatchets with great fury. The English 
retreated to the pond to secure their rear, and 
although so unequal in numbers, continued five 
or six hours till night came on. Captain Lovewell, 
his lieutenant Farewell, and ensign Robins were 
soon mortally wounded, and witli five more were 
left dead on the spot. Sixteen escaped and return 
ed unhurt, but were obliged to leave eirht of th ir 
wounded companions in the woods without pro 
visions ; their chaplain, Mr. Fry of Aridover, was 
one, who had behaved with great bravery and 
scalped one Indian in the heat of the action, but 
perished himself for want of relief. 

One of the eight afterwards carne into Berwick, 
and another to Saco. This misfortune discourag 
ed scalping parties. But Indians as well as 
English wished to be at peace. After Ralie s 
death, they were at liberty to follow their incli 
nations. The Penobscot tribe, however, being 
best disposed, were first sounded. An Indian 
hostage and a captive were permitted, upon their 
parole, to go home in the winter of J724, and they 
came back to the fort at St. George s the 9th of 
February, accompanied with two of the Vibe, one 
a principal sachem or chief. They brought an, 
account that, at a meeting of the Penobscots, it 
was agreed to make proposals of peace. -The 
sachem or chief was sent back, with the other 
Indian, and promised to return in 23 days, and 
bring a deputation, to consist of several other 
chiefs, with him, but Captain Heath, having gone 
out upon a march from Kennebeck, across the 
country, to Penobscot, fell upon a deserted village 
of about 50 Indian houses, which he burned, but 
saw none of the inhabitants. The Indians who 
went from St. George s knew nothing of this 
action until they came home, and it seems to have 
discouraged them from returning according to their 
promise, and the treaty, by this means, was retard 
ed. But upon new intimations, in June following, 
John Stoddard and John Wainwright, Esqs. were 
commissioned by the lieutenant-governor and sent} 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[down to St. George s, to treat with such Indians 
as should come in there, and settle preliminaries 
of peace. 

A cessation of arms was agreed upon, and four 
delegates came up soon after to Boston, and signed 
a treaty of peace, and the next year, the lieutenant- 
governor in person, attended by gentlemen of the 
court and others, and the lieutenant-governor of 
New Hampshire, with gentlemen from that pro 
vince, ratified the same at Falmonth in Casco bay. 
This treaty has been applauded as the most judicious 
which has ever been made with the Indians. A 
Jong peace succeeded it. 

The pacific temper of the Indians, for many 
years after, cannot be attributed to any peculiar 
excellency in this treaty, there being no articles 
in it of any importance, differing from former 
treaties. It was owing to the subsequent acts of 
government in conformity to the treaty. The 
Indians had long been extremely desirous of 
trading houses to supply them with necessaries 
and to take off their furs, skins, &amp;c. This was 
promised by Governor Shute, at a conference, but 
the general court, at that time, would make no 
provision for the performance. Mr. Dummer 
promised the same thing. The court then made 
provision for trading houses at St. George s, Kenne- 
beck and Saco rivers, and the Indians soon found 
that they were supplied with goods upon better 
terms than they could have them from the French, 
or even from private English traders. Acts or 
laws were made, at the same time, for restraining 
private trade with the Indians, but the supplies, 
made by the province at a cheaper rate than 
private traders could afford, would have broke up 
their trade without any other provision, and laws 
would have signified little without that. Mr. 
Dummer engaged that the Indians should be sup 
plied with goods at as cheap rates as they were 
sold at Boston. This was afterwards construed 
favourably for the government. The sroocls, 
being bought by wholesale, were sold to the Indians 
at the retail price in Boston, and a seeming profit, 
by the commissary s account, accrued to the 
government ; but, when the charge of trading 
houses, truck masters, garrisons, and a vessel 
employed in transporting goods, was deducted, the 
province was still a tributary to the Indians every 
year. However, it was allowed to be a well 
judged measure, tended to preserve peace, and was 
more reputable than if a certain pension had been 
every year paid for that purpose. 

Delegates from all the tribes of Indians, parti 
cularly the Norridgewocks, not having been 



present at this first treaty, another was thought 
necessary the next year, when the former was 
renewed and ratified. It was most acceptable to 
the Indians to hold their treaties near their own 
settlements, and, in a proper season of the year, it 
was an agreeable four to the governors or com 
manders in chief and the gentlemen accompanying 
them. 

To bring this war to a close, we have passed 
over the other affairs of the government for a yca\ 
or two past. Soon after Mr. Cooke s arrival in 
London, Governor Shute exhibited a second 
memorial against the house of representatives, for 
matters transacted after he left the province. The 
principal articles of complaint were the several 
orders relative to the forts and forces, which, he 
says, the house had taken out of the hands of the 
lieutenant-governor, and the affront offered to the 
lieutenant-governor in ordering his seal to be effaced 
upon the belt of wampum. Several other things 
seem to be brought in to increase the resentment 
against them, as their choosing Mr. Cooke, who 
had been at the head of all the measures complain 
ed of in the first memorial, for their agent ; their 
refusing to confer with the council upon a money 
bill ; their endeavouring by their votes to lessen 
the members of the council in the esteem of the 
people ; their withholding his salary in his absence; 
and their assuming more and more the authority 
of government into their hands. The council, in 
this memorial, are also complained of, they having 
put their negative to the vote for choosing Mr. 
Cooke, and yet afterwards joined in election with 
the house, when they had reason to suppose, by 
the great superiority of the house in number, that 
he would be the person. 

Mr. agent Dummer, who was to act jointly with 
Mr. Cooke, made an attempt to reconcile the 
governor to him, but he refused to see him, and the 
attempt offended Mr. Cooke also, and occasioned 
warm discourse between him and Dummer, which 
caused the latter to refuse to act in concert, 
especially as Mr. Cooke had shewn him a private 
instruction from the house, by which their defence 
against the charge of invading the royal prero 
gative was committed to Mr. Cooke and Mr. 
Sanderson, to the exclusion of Mr. Dummer. 

After divers hearings upon (lie subject matter of 
the complaints, the reports of the attorney and so 
licitor general, of the lords committee, and finally 
the determination of his Majesty in council, were 
all unfavourable to the house of representatives. 

The several acts or votes of the house relative 
to the king s woods, and to the forts and forces,"] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[seem to have been generally deemed indefensible, 
the agents were advised to acknowledge them 
to be so, and it was so far relied upon, that they 
would be so acknowledged in the province, as 
that no special provision was thought necessary 
for the regulation of their future conduct, the char 
ter being express and clear. But the governor s 
power to negative the speaker, and the time for 
which the house might adjourn, were points not 
so certain. What was called an explanatory 
charter was therefore thought necessary, and such 
a charter accordingly passed the seals. By this 
charter, the power of the governor to negative a 
speaker is expressly declared, and the power of 
the house to adjourn themselves is limited to two 
days. With respect to the latter, perhaps, this 
new charter may properly enough be called 
explanatory, the governor having the power, by 
the principal charter, of adjourning the assembly, 
and yet, from the nature of the thing, it was 
necessary that the house, a part of that assembly, 
should have the power of adjourning themselves, for 
a longer or shorter time ; but the power of negativ 
ing a speaker seems to be a new article, wherein 
the charter is silent ; so that whatever right it 
might be apprehended the king had to explain 
his own patents, where there was ambiguity, yet 
when an alteration is to be made in the charter, or 
a new rule established in any point wherein the 
charter is silent, the acceptance of the people, 
perhaps, is necessary. This seems to have been 
the reason of leaving it to the option of the 
general court, either to accept or refuse the 
explanatory charter. It was intimated at the same 
time that, if the charter should be refused, the 
whole controversy between the governor and the 
house of representatives would be carried before 
the parliament. Had the two points mentioned in 
the explauatory charter, or the conduct of the 
house relative to them, been all that was to be 
carried into parliament, the general court, probably, 
would not have accepted this charter. They 
would have urged that it was not certain that a 
house of commons would have determined that the 
king, by his governor, had a right to negative 
the speaker of a house of representatives in the 
.colonies, especially as the attorney-general had 
inferred this right from the right of negativing the 
speaker of the house of commons ; but it was 
their misfortune that in the other articles of com 
plaint the house was generally condemned in 
England, the ministry were highly incensed, and it 
was feared the consequence of a parliamentary 
inquiry would be an act to vacate the charter of 
the province. The temper of the house was 



much changed, and although there were several 
members, who had been active in all the measures 
which brought this difficulty upon the country, 
still resolute to risk all, rather than by their own 
act give up any one privilege, yet a major vote 
was carried in the house for accepting the charter, 
and in such terms as would induce one to imagine 
it rather the grant of a favour than the deprivation 
of a right. It has been said that the English are 
islanders, and therefore inconstant. Transplanted 
to the continent, they are nevertheless Englishmen. 
When we reflect upon the many instances of 
frequent sudden changes, and from one extreme 
to the other, in ancient times, in the parliament ot 
England, we may well enough expect, now and 
then, to meet with the like instances in the assem 
blies of the English colonies. This was the issue 
of the unfortunate controversy with Governor 
Shnte, unless we allow that it was the occasion also 
of the controversy with his successor, which is not 
improbable. 

The governor was offended with Mr. Durnmer, 
for receiving grants from the court made to him 
for his service as commander in chief, it being 
expected that when the governor is absent with 
leave, his salary should be continued, one half of 
which, by a royal instruction, is to be allowed to 
the lieutenant-governor ; but the house took a 
more frugal method, and made grants, of little more 
than one half of the governor s usual salary, to the 
lieutenant-governor immediately, any part of 
which he could very ill afford to spare from his 
own support. His pacific measures and accom 
modation or suspension of some of the controverted 
points might be another cause of coldness, at least, 
between the governor and him. 

Another afrair occasioned a mark of royal dis 
pleasure upon the lieutenant-governor. Synods 
had been frequent under the first charter, either 
for suppressing errors in principles, or immoralities 
in practice, or for establishing or reforming church 
government and order, but under a new charter 
no synod had ever been convened. A convention 
of ministers had been annually held at the time 
for election of the council. This might have 
been in many respects useful, but it was thought 
could not have that weight for promoting any 
of the forementioned purposes which a synod 
convened, and perhaps their result ratified by 
the government, would have. There were divers 
ancient members in both homes who had not then 
lost their affection for the platform, and an appli 
cation made by the ministers lor calling a s^nod 
was granted in council, but the house did not 
concur. Afterwards, by a vote of both houses, it] 



38 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[was referred to the next session, to which the 
lieutenant-governor gave his consent. Opposition 
was made by the Episcopal ministers, but a doubt 
of success, in the province, caused them to apply 
in England, we suppose to the bishop of London. 
The king being abroad, an instruction came from 
the lords justices to cease all proceedings, and 
the lieutenant-governor received a reprimand for 
" giving his consent to a vote of reference, and 
neglecting to transmit an account of so remarkable 
a transaction." A stop was put to any further 
proceeding in the affair, nor has any attempt for a 
synod been made since. 

(Anno 1726.) The remainder of Mr. Bum 
mer s short administration was easy to him. The 
war being over, the principal ground of dispute, 
the ordering the forces, ceased; Other affairs 
relative to the treasury, the passing upon accounts 
and the form of supplies, he suffered to go on 
according to the claim of the house. Mr. Cooke, 
the first election after his return from England, 
May 1726, was chosen of the council. This was a 
mark of the house s approbation of his conduct 
in the agency, although it had not been attend 
ed with success. The lieutenant-governor did 
not think it convenient to offend the house by a 
negative. The small allowance made him as a 
salary, about 250/. sterling per annum, he also 
acquiesced in for the sake of peace. The gover 
nor was expected by almost every ship for a 
year or two together, but by some means or other 
was delayed until the summer of 1727, when he 
was upon the point of embarking, but the sudden 
death of the king prevented. The principal cause 
of delay seems to have been the insufficiency of 
the salary which had been granted for his support, 
and the uncertainty whether the assembly would 
make an addition to it. 

Upon the accession of King George II. a gentle 
man who, it is said, was in particular esteem with 
the king himself, was appointed governor of New 
York and the Jerseys, in the room of Mr. Burnet, 
whose administration had, in general, been very 
acceptable to those colonies and approved in Eng 
land. The bishop, his father, had likewise been 
a most steady friend to the house of Hanover. 
Governor Burnet s fortune being reduced in the 
general calamity of the year 1720, he parted with 
a place in the revenue of 1200/. per annum, and 
received commissions for these governments, with 
a view to his retrieving his fortune in a course of 
years. He thought it hard, in so short a time, to 
be superseded, for although the Massachusetts and 
New Hampshire were given to him, yet he was to 
part with very profitable posts for such as, at best, 



would afford him no more than a decent support,, 
an easy administration for one which he foresaw 
would be extremely troublesome. He complained 
of his hard fate, and it had a visible effect upon 
his spirits. Colonel Shute was provided for, more 
to his satisfaction than if he had returned to his 
government, a pension of 400/. sterling per annum 
being settled upon him, to be paid out of the 4 
per cent, duty raised in theVV . India islands. The 
VV. Indians, who would perhaps have been content 
if it had been applied to one of their own gover 
nors who had been superseded, had taken excep 
tion to the payment of it to a governor of the n. 
colonies. 

(Anno 1727.) The earthquake on the 29th of 
October 1727, although not confined to the Massa 
chusetts, was so remarkable an event in Providence 
that we may be excused if we give a circumstantial 
account of it. About 40 minutes after 10 at night, 
when there was a serene sky and calm but sharp 
air, a most amazing noise was heard, like to the 
roaring of a chimney when on fire, as some said, 
only beyond comparison greater ; others compared 
it to the noise of coaches upon pavements, and 
thought that 10,000 coaches together would not 
have exceeded it. The noise was judged by some 
to continue about half a minute before the shock 
began, which increased gradually, and was thought 
to have continued the space of a minute before it 
was at the height, and, in about half a minute more, 
to have been at an end by a gradual decrease. 
When the terror is so great, no dependence can be 
placed upon the admeasurement of time in any 
person s mind, and we always find very different 
apprehensions of it. The noise and shock of this 
and all earthquakes which preceded it in New Eng 
land were observed to come from the w. or n. w* 
and go off to the e. or s. e. At Newbury and 
other towns upon Merrimack river the shock was 
greater than in any other part of Massachusetts,, 
but no buildings were thrown down, part of the 
walls of several cellars fell in, and the tops of many 
chimneys were shook off. At New York it seems 
to have been equal to what it was in the Massa 
chusetts, but at Philadelphia it was very sensibly 
weaker, and in the colonies s. it grew less and 
less until it had spent itself or become insensible. 
The seamen upon the coast supposed their vessels 
to have struck upon a shoal of loose ballast. More 
gentle shocks were frequently felt in most parts of 
New England for several months after. There 
have seldom passed above 15 or 20 years without 
an earthquake, but there had been none, very 
violent, in the memory of any then living. There 
was a general apprehension of danger of destruc-] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[tion and death, and many, who had very little 
sense of religion before, appeared to be very serious 
and devout penitents, bat, too generally, as the 
fears of another earthquake went off, the religious 
impressions went with them, and they, who had 
been the greutest penitents, returned to their former 
course of life. 13 j x \ 

The trade of the province being in a bad state, 
and there being a general complaint of scarcity of 
money, the old spirit revived for increasing the 
currency by a further emission of bills of credit. 
It would be just as rational, when the blood in the 
human body is in a putrid corrupt state, to in 
crease the quantity by luxurious living, in order 
to restore health. Some of the leading men among 
the representatives were debtors, and a depreciat 
ing currency was convenient for them. A bill 
was projected for fortifying the sea-ports. The 
town of Boston was to expend 10,000 /. in forts 
and stores, and to enable them to do it, 30,000 /. 
was to be issued in bills, and lent to the town for 
13 years: Salem, Plymouth, Marblehead, Charles- 
town, Glocester, and even Truro, on the cape, 
were all to be supplied with bills of credit for the 
like purposes. After repeated non-concurrence 
and long altercation, the council were prevailed 
upon to agree to the bill. When it came to the 
lieutenant-governor, he laid the king s instruction 
before the council, and required their opinion, 
upon their oaths, whether consistent with the in. 
struction he could sign the bill, and they answered 
he could not. Not only the lieutenant-governor, 
but several of the council, were dependent upon 
the house for the grant of their salaries, and this 
dependence was improved, as in divers instances 
it nad been formerly. The house referred the con 
sideration of allowance to the next session, and 
desired the court might rise. The lieutenant-go 
vernor let them know, by a message, that he ap 
prehended his small support was withheld from 
him because he would not sign a bill contrary to 
his instructions. They replied, that he had re 
commended to them the making provision for for 
tifying the province, and now they had passed a 
bill for that purpose he refused to sign it, and 
they were obliged, in prudence and faithfulness to 
their principles, to come into a vote referring al 
lowances and other matters to another session, 
when a way might be found to enable the inhabitants 
to pay into the treasury again such sums as should 
be drawn out for gratuities and allowances. After 
a recess of about a fortnight an expedient was 
found. Instead of a bill for fortifying, another 
was prepared with a specious title, " An act for 
raising and settling a public revenue for and 



towards defraying the necessary charges of the 
government by an emission of 60,000/. in bills of 
credit." This was done to bring it within the 
words of the instruction, which restrained the go 
vernor from consenting to the issuing bills of credit, 
except for charges of government. The interest 
of four per cent, or 2400J. was to be applied an 
nually to the public charges, and gave colour for 
issuing the principal sum of 60,000 /. The lieu 
tenant-governor was prevailed upon to sign it, 
and the same day the house made the grant of his 
salary and the usual allowance to the judges, most 
of whom were members of the council, and to the 
other officers of the government. This was after 
wards alleged to be a compulsion of the lieute 
nant-governor and such of the members of coun 
cil as were salary men, to comply with the house 
of representatives, by withholding from them their 
subsistence. The eagerness of the body of the 
people for paper bills, more easily acquired in this 
way than the righteous way of industry and fru 
gality, no doubt facilitated a compliance. 

The council upon this occasion declined an 
swering upon their oath as counsellors, when the 
lieutenant-governor asked their advice. They 
swear, that to the best of their judgment they will 
at all times freely give their advice to the gover 
nor for the good management of the public affairs 
of the government. The lieutenant-governor pro 
posed the following question to them in writing^ 
" Gentlemen, 1 find it necessary, in order to my 
signing the bill entitled, * An act for raising and set 
tling a revenue, &amp;c. which has passed both houses, 
to have your advice whether 1 can sign the said 
bill without the breach of the instruction of the 
lords justices of Great Britain, dated the 27th of 
September 1720, and the order of the lords com 
missioners of trade and plantations, dated the 8th 
of February 1726-27. W. DUMMER, February 
17, 1727." Upon which the council came to the 
following vote, " In council, February 19, 1727, 
Read, and as the council have already, as they 
are one part of the general court, passed a con 
currence with the honourable house of representa 
tives upon the said bill, they cannot think it pro 
per for them to give your honour any further ad 
vice thereupon, nor do they apprehend the oath 
of a counsellor obliges them.thereto. At the same 
time they cannot but think it will be for the good 
and welfare of the province, and the necessary 
support of the government thereof, if the bill be 
consented to by your honour. 

J. WILLARD, Secretary." 

They had given their advice or opinion, the 
same session, upon the bill for fortifying, after J 



40 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[they had passed it, that it was contrary to the in 
struction, and instances of.the like kind have been 
frequent before and since this time. 

The lieutenant-governor had a further opportu 
nity, before Mr. jinrnet s arrival, of meeting the 
assembly in May for election or counsellors. 

The house discovered, in one instance, this ses 
sion, a desire to amplify their jurisdiction. The 
council and house had made it a practice, ever 
since the charter, to unite in the choice of the 
treasurer, impost, oilicer, and other civil officers, 
the appointment whereof is reserved to the gene 
ral assembly. The council, being in number less 
than a thin! part of the house, hud by this means 
no weight in such elections except when there were 
two or more candidates for an office, set up by 
the tiou.sc, and then the balance of power, if they 
were united themselves, might be with them. This 
seems to have been an old charter practice, and 
handed down. The two houses, when parties to 
any petition or cause desire to be heard, often meet 
in one house, which no doubt also came from the 
old charter, but after they are separated, they vote 
separately upon the subject matter of the hearing. 
In this session, after a hearing of this sort, the 
house passed a vote, " that when a hearing shall 
be had on any private cause before both houses to 
gether, the subject matter shall be determined 
by both houses conju nelly." They might as well 
have voted, that after a conference between the 
two houses, the subject matter should be deter 
mined conjunctly. The council were sensible this 
was taking from the little weight they had, and 
unanimously non-concurred the vote. 

The manner of choosing civil officer s is a defect 
in the constitution which does not seem to have 
been considered at the framing the charter, and 
as, by charter, oih cers must annually be elected, 
it is a defect which must be submitted to. If 
either house should elect by themselves and send 
to the other for concurrence, the right of nomina 
tion would be such an advantage as neither would 
be willing to concede to the other. In the early 
days of the charter, it had been made a question, 
whether in any acts of government the council had 
a negative voice, and were not rather to vote in 
conjunction with the house of representatives ? 
and Constantine Phips gave bis opinion that they 
had no negative. He seems not to have considered 
that the charter and the commissions to gover 
nors of other colonies evidently intended a legis 
lature after the pattern of the legislature of Eng 
land, as far as the state and circumstances of the 
colonies wou d admit. 

The government under the old charter and the 



new, had been very prudent in the distribution of 
the territory. Lands were granted for the sake of 
settling them. Grants for any other purpose had 
been very rare, and, ordinarily, a new settlement 
was contiguous to an old one. The settlers them 
selves, as well as the government, were inclined 
to this for the sake of a social neighbourhood, as 
well as mutual defence against an enemy. The 
first settlers on Connecticut river, indeed, left a 
great tract of wilderness between them and the rest 
of the colony, but they went off in a body, and a 
new colony, Connecticut, was settling near them 
at the same time. Rivers were also an induce 
ment to settle, but very few had ventured above 
Dunstable upon the tine river Merrimack, and ilia 
rivers in the province of Maine had no towns at 
any distance from the sea into which they empty. 
But, all on a sudden plans wen; laid for grants of 
vast tracts of unimproved land, and the last ses 
sion of Mr. Dnmmer s administration, a vote pass 
ed the two houses, appointing a committee to lay 
out three lines of towns, each town of the contents 
of six miles square, one line to extend from Con 
necticut river above Northfield to Merrimack 
river above Dunstable, another line on each side 
Merrimack as far as Penicook, and another from 
Nichewanock river to Falmouth in Casco bay. 

Pretences were encouraged, and even sought 
after, to entitle persons to be grantees. The pos 
terity of all the officers and soldiers who served 
in the famous Naraganset expedition in 1675, 
were the first pitched upon, those who were in the 
unfortunate attempt upon Canada in 1690, were 
to come next. The government of New Hamp 
shire supposed these grants were made in order to 
secure the possession of a tract of country chal 
lenged by them as within their bounds. This 
might have weight with some leading men who 
were acquainted with the controversy, but there 
was a fondness for granting land in any part of 
the province. A condition of settling a certain, 
number of families in a few years, ordinarily, 
was annexed to the grants, but the court, by mul 
tiplying their grants, rendered the performance of 
the condition impracticable, there not being people 
enough within the province willing to leave the 
old settled towns, and the grantees not being able 
to procure settlers from abroad. 

The settlement of the province was retarded by 
it ; a trade of land-jobbing made many idle per 
sons, imaginary wealth was created, which was 
attended with some of the mischievous effects of 
the paper currency, viz. idleness and bad econo 
my, a real expencc was occasioned to many per 
sons, besides the purchase of the grantees title,] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



41 



[for every township by law was made a proprietary, 
and their frequent meetings, schemes for settle 
ment, and other preparatory business, occasioned 
many charges. In some few towns houses were 
built and some part of the lands cleared. In a 
short time, a new line being determined for the 
n. boundary of the Massachusetts colony, many 
of these townships were found to be without it. 
The government of New Hampshire, for the 
crown, laid claim to some of them; and certain 
persons, calling themselves proprietors under Ma 
son, to others, and the Massachusetts people, 
after a further expence in contesting their tide, 
either wholly lost the lands or made such compo 
sition as the new claimers thought fit to agree to. 

(Anno 1728.) Mr. Burnet was received with 
unusual pomp. Besides a committee of the gene 
ral court, many private gentlemen went as far as 
Bristol to wait upon him ; and, besides the conti 
nual addition that was .making in the journey, 
there went out of Boston to meet him at a small 
distance, such a multitude of horses and carriages 
that he entered the town with a greater cavalcade 
than had ever been seen before or since. Like one 
of the predecessors, Lord Bellamont, he urged 
this grand appearance, in his first speech to the 
assembly, as a proof of their ability very honour 
ably to support his Majesty s government, and at 
the same time acquainted them with the king s 
instruction to him to insist upon an established sa 
lary, and his intention firmly to adhere to it. lie 
had asked the opinion of a New England gentle 
man, who was then the minister of the presbyte- 
rian church at New York, whether the assembly 
would comply with his instruction, and received a 
discouraging answer, which caused him to reply, 
that he would not engage in a quarrel, or to that 
effect ; but he either received different advice upon 
his arrival, or for some other reason altered his 
mind. The assembly seemed from the beginning 
determined to withstand him. To do it with better 
grace and a more reasonable prospect of success, 
the quantum of the salary, it was agreed, was 
not worth disputing. It bore no proportion to the 
privilege and right of granting it for such time as 
they thought proper. The same persons, there 
fore, who six or seven years before refused to 
make Governor Shute, and. perhaps, the govern 
ment easy, by granting not n&amp;gt;ore than 500 /. ster 
ling a year, now readily voted for 1000 /. or a sum 
"which was intended to be equal to it. As soon as 
addresses from the council and house, the usual 
compliments upon the first arrival of a governor, 
had passed, the house made a grant of 1700 /. 
towards his support and to defray the charge of 

VOL. III. 



his journey. In a day or two the governor let 
them know he was utterly unable to give his con 
sent to it, being inconsistent with his instruction. 
After a week s deliberation, a grant was made of 
300 /. for the charge of his journey, which he ac 
cepted, and another of 14007. towards his sup 
port, which was accompanied with a joint message 
from the council and house, prepared by a com 
mittee, wherein they assert their undoubted right 
as Englishmen, and their privilege by the charter, 
to raise and apply moneys for the support of go 
vernment, and their readiness to give the governor 
an ample and honourable support, but they ap 
prehended it would be most for his Majesty s ser 
vice, &amp;c. to do it without establishing a fixed sa 
lary. The governor was always very quick in his 
replies, and once, when a committee came to him 
with a message, having privately obtained a copy 
of it, gave the same committee an answer, in writ 
ing, to carry back. The same day this message 
was delivered he observed to them, in answer, 
" that the right of Englishmen could never en 
title them to do wrong, that their privilege of 
raising money by charter was expressed to be by 
wholesome and reasonable laws and directions, 
consequently not such as were hurtful to the con 
stitution and the ends of government ; that their 
way of giving a support to the governor could not 
be honourable, for it deprived him of the right 
of an Englishman, viz. to act according to his 
judgment, or obliged him to remain without sup 
port, and he appealed to their own consciences, 
whether they had not formerly kept back their 
governor s allowance until other bills were passed, 
and whether they had not sometimes made the sa 
lary depend upon the consent to such bills ; (hat 
if they really intended, from time to time, to grant 
an honourable support, they could have no jnst 
objection to making their purposes effectual by 
fixing his salary, for he would never accept a grant 
of the kind they had then made." We shall be 
convinced that Air. Burnet was not a person who 
could be easily moved from a resolution he had 
once taken up. 

Upon the receipt of this message and the per 
emptory declaration of the governor, the house 
found this was like to be a serious affair, and that 
they should not so easily get rid of it as they had 
done of the like dernnnds made by Dudley and 
Shute, and again appointed a committee to join 
with a committee of council to consider of this 
message. The exclusive right of the house in 
originating grants, they have often so far given up 
as to join with the council, by committees, to con 
sider and report the expediency of them, the re-] 
G 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[ports generally being sent to the house, there to be 
first acted upon. The report of this committee 
was accepted in council and sent to the house, but 
there rejected, and not being able to unite in an an 
swer, the house tried the council with a resolve, and 
sent to them for concurrence, the purport of which 
was, that fixing a salary on the governor or com 
mander in chief for the time being would be dan 
gerous to the inhabitants, and contrary to the de 
sign of the charter in giving power to make whole 
some and reasonable orders and laws for the wel 
fare of the province. This vote, in so general 
terms, the council did not think proper to concur, 
and declared that, although they were of opinion 
it might prove of ill consequence to settle a salary 
upon the governor for the time being, yet they ap 
prehended a salary might be granted, for a certain 
time, to the present governor, without danger to 
the province, or being contrary to the design of 
the charter, &amp;c. 

This occasioned a conference, without effect, 
both houses adhering to their own votes, and from 
this time the house were left to manage the con 
troversy themselves. They sent a message to the 
governor to desire the court might rise. He told 
them, that if he should comply with their desire 
he should put it out of their power to pay an im 
mediate regard to the king s instruction, and he 
would not grant them a recess until they had 
finished the business for which the court was then 
sitting. They then, in a message to him, declared 
that, in faithfulness to the people of the province, 
they could not come into an act for establishing a 
salary on the governor or commander in chief for 
the time being, and therefore they renewed their 
request that the court might rise. 

Both the governor and the house seem to have had 
some reserve in their declarations. Perhaps a sa 
lary during his administration would have satisfied 
him, although he demanded it for the commander 
in chief for the time being; and the house were 
scrupulous of saying that they would not settle a 
salary for a limited time. Each desired that the 
other would make some concessions. Both de 
clined, and both by long altercation were irritated, 
and at length, which is often the case, instead of 
closing, as seemed probable at first, widened the 
broach until they fixed at the opposite extremes. 
The major part of the council, and about a sixth part 
of the house, were willing to settle a salary upon 
Mr.Burnet for a term not exceeding three years ; 
possibly even some who were finally the most zealous 
in t lie opposition would have submitted to this if they 
could have been sure of its being accepted, and had 
been at liberty to act according to their judgment. 



Mr. Cooke had experienced the ill success of the 
controversy with Governor Shute, and seemed de 
sirous of being upon terms with his successor, who, 
upon his first arrival and until the province house 
could be repaired, lodged at Mr. Cooke s house, 
but a friendship could not long continue between 
two persons of so different opinions upon civil go 
vernment. The language of the governor s mes 
sages was thought too dictatorial by the people, 
and particularly by the inhabitants of Boston, and 
he had been somewhat free in his jokes upon some 
of the shopkeepers and principal tradesmen, who 
were then the directors of the councils of the town, 
and very much influenced those of the house An 
intimation in the governor s next message, that if 
they did not comply with the instruction, the le 
gislature of Great Britain would take into con 
sideration the support of the government, and, 
perhaps, something besides, meaning the charter, 
increased the prejudices against him. The house 
now thought themselves obliged to be more par 
ticular than they had yet been, fully to assert their 
rights. This was what the governor desired, and 
without any delay he sent them an answer. As 
these two messages seemed to be much in earnest, 
the argument on each side of the question afforded 
a serious topic of conversation. Not long after, the 
house, instead of any advances towards a compli 
ance, which the governor wished to obtain, came 
to resolutions upon two questions, which shewed 
still more fully their sense of the point in contro 
versy. The first question was, Whether the house 
will take under consideration the settling a tempo 
rary salary upon the governor or commander in 
chief for the time being? -This passed in the nega 
tive. Then this question was put, Whether the 
house can with safety to the people come into any 
other method for supporting the governor or com 
mander in chief for the time being, than what has 
been heretofore practised? This also passed in the 
negative, and was the first instance of the house s 
declaring they would make no advances ; for in 
their message last preceding, they only say they 
do not think it advisable to pass an act for fix 
ing a salary as prescribed. These votes caused the 
governor to put them in mind of a letter from their 
agent in the year 1722, wherein he mentions that 
Lord Carteret, in conversation, desired him to 
write to the assembly not to provoke the govern 
ment in England to bring their charter before the 
parliament ; for if they did, it was his opinion, it 
would be dissolved without opposition, and the go 
vernor advised them to take care their proceedings 
did not bring their charter into danger at that 
time. This caution did not prevent the house] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[from preparing a state of the controversy between 
the governor and them, concerning his salary, to 
transmit to their several towns, in the conclusion 
of which they say, that they dare neither come into 
a fixed salary on the governor for ever nor for a 
limited time, for the following reasons : 

" 1st, Because it is an untrodden path, which 
neither they nor their predecessors have gone in, 
and they cannot certainly foresee the many dan 
gers that may be in it, nor can they depart from 
that, way which has been found safe and com 
fortable. 

" 2dly, Because it is the undoubted right of all 
Englishmen, by Mngna Charta, to raise and dis 
pose of money for the public service, of their own 
free accord, without compulsion. 

" Sdly, Because it must necessarily lessen the 
dignity and freedom of the house of representatives 
in making acts and raising and applying taxes, &amp;c. 
and, consequently, cannot be thought a proper 
method to preserve that balance in the three bran 
ches of the legislature which seems necessary to 
form, maintain, and uphold the constitution. 

" 4thly, Because the charter fully empowers 
the general assembly to make such laws and orders 
as they shall judge for the good arid welfare of the 
inhabitants, and if they or any part of them judge 
this not to be for their good, they neither ought 
nor could come into it ; for, as to act beyond or 
without the powers granted in the charter might 
justly incur the king s displeasure, so not to act 
up and agreeable to those powers might justly be 
deemed a betraying the rights and privileges 
therein granted, and if they should give up this 
right, they would open a door to many other in 
conveniences." 

This representation was prepared to be carried 
home by the several members, upon (he rising of 
the court, in order to their towns giving their in 
structions, hut the house being kept sitting, it was 
printed and sent through the province. "The go 
vernor sent a message to the house, a few days 
after, in which he takes their representation to 
pieces, and, in the close of his message, appeals to 
them whether he had not answered all their ob 
jections, " except the unknown inconveniences to 
which a door would be opened," which could 
not be answered until they could tell what they 
were ; and charges them with calling for help from 
what they had not mentioned, from a sense of the 
imperfection of what they had, and with sending 
to their several towns for advice, and declaring at 
the same time they did not dare follow it. 

It would be tedious to recite at length the seve 



ral messages which passed, during the remainder 
of the controversy, from the chair to the house, 
and from (he house to the chair, which followed 
quick one upon the back of another. The sum of 
the argument, upon the part of the governor, was 
as follows : That it was highly reasonable he should 
enjoy the free exercise of his judgment in the ad 
ministration of government, but the grants, made 
for a short time only by the house, were thus li 
mited for no other reason than to keep the governor 
in a state of dependence, and with design to with 
hold from him the necessary means of subsistence, 
unless he would comply with their acts and re 
solves, however unreasonable they mi^ht appear to 
him ; that, in fact, they had treated Governor Shute 
in this manner, and no longer since than the last 
year the house had refused to make the usual grants 
and allowances, not only to the lieutenant-governor 
but to other officers, until they had compelled him 
to give his consent to a loan of 60,000/. in bills of 
credit ; that a constitution which, in name and ap 
pearance, consisted of three branches, was in fact 
reduced to one ; that it was a professed principle, 
in the constitution of Great Britain, to preserve a 
freedom in each of the three branches of the legis 
lature, and it was a great favour shewn the pro 
vince, when King William and Queen Mary esta 
blished, by the royal charter, a form of govern 
ment so analogous to the government of Great Bri 
tain ; a principle of gratitude and loyalty, there 
fore, ought to induce them to establish a salary for 
the governor of this province, in order to his sup 
porting his dignity and freedom, in like manner as 
the parliament always granted to the king what 
was called the civil list, not once in six months or 
from year to year, but for life ; that this was no 
more than other provinces which had no charters 
had done for their governors ; that there was no 
thing in the province charter to exempt them from 
the same obligation which other his Majesty s colo 
nies were under to support the government ; to be 
sure, they had no pretence to greater privileges by 
charter than the people of England enjoyed from 
Magna Charta, and yet no clause of that was ever 
urged as an objection against granting to the king 
a revenue for life ; and a power by charter to grant 
moneys could not be a reason against granting them 
either for a limited or unlimited time. 

On the part of the house, the substance of their 
defence against the governor s demand and his rea 
sons in support of it was, that an obligation upon 
an assembly in the plantations could not be infer 
red from the practice of the house of commons in 
Great Britain; the king was the common father ofj 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[all his subjects, and their interests were inseparably 
united, whereas a plantation governor was affected 
neither by the adversity nor prosperity of a colony 
when lie had once left it ; no wonder then a colony 
could not place the same confidence in the gover 
nor which the nation placed in the king ; however, 
the grants to the governor always looked forward 
and were made not for service done, but to be 
done. It must be admitted the governor is in 
some measure dependent upon the assembly for 
his salary, but he is dependent in this instance 
only, whereas he has a check and controul upon 
every grant to any person in the government and 
upon all laws and acts of government whatsoever ; 
nor can an exact parallel be drawn between the 
constitution of Britain and that of the province, 
for the council are dependent upon the governor 
for their very being, once every year, whereas the 
house of lords cannot be displaced unless they 
have criminally forfeited the rights of peers. The 
house were not to be governed by the practice of 
assemblies in some of the other colonies, nor were 
they to be dictated to and required to raise a cer 
tain sum for a certain time and certain purposes ; 
this would destroy the freedom which the house 
apprehended they had a right to in all their acts 
and resolves, and would deprive them of the 
powers given to them by charter, to raise money 
and apply it when and how they thought proper. 
Different judgments will undoubtedly be formed 
upon the weight of these reasons on the one side 
and the other. 

The messages of the house at first were short, 
supposed to have been drawn by Mr. Cooke, who 
never used many words in his speeches in the 
house, which generally discovered something 
manly and open, though sometimes severe and 
bitter, and often inaccurate. In the latter part of 
the controversy they were generally drawn by Mr. 
Welles, another member from Boston, the second 
year of his coming to the house. These were 
generally more prolix, and necessarily so from the 
length of the messages to which they were an 
answer. The house had justice done them by 
their committees who managed this controversy, 
and they were then willing to allow that the go 
vernor maintained a bad cause with as plausible 
reasons as could be. 

The contending parties, for a little while, en 
deavoured to be moderate and to preserve de 
corum, but it was impossible to continue this 
temper. 

On the 4th of September the house repeated to 
the governor the request they had formerly made 



to rise, but he refused to grant it, and told them 
that unless his Majesty s pleasure had its due 
weight with them, their desires should have very 
little weight with him. 

The council, who had been for some time out of 
the question, now interposed, and passed a vote, 
" that it is expedient for the court to ascertain a 
sum as a salary for his excellency s support, as also 
the term of time for its continuance." This was 
sent to the house for concurrence. The council 
seem to have gone a little out of their line, but the 
house took no other notice of the vote than to non 
concur it. The house being kept sitting against 
their will, employed part of their time in draw 
ing up the state of the controversy, which we have 
mentioned. 

This was not occasioned by any doubt they had 
themselves, but to convince the governor that the 
people throughout the province were generally of 
the same mind with the house, and for this pur 
pose they thought it necessary to obtain from their 
towns an express approbation of their conduct. 
It was well known that not a town in the province 
would then have instructed their representatives, 
to fix a salary upon the governor for the time 
being. 

One of the king s governments (Barbadoes) was 
at this time warmly contending with its governor 
against fixing a salary. The assembly of that 
island, some years before, had settled a very large 
salary upon a governor, against whom they after 
wards made heavy complaints, charging him with 
rapaciousness and grievous oppressions, and his 
successor having demanded the like settlement 
upon him, they resolved to withstand the demand^ 
and the spirit seemed to be as high there as in 
Massachusetts bay. 

This had no small tendency to strengthen and 
confirm the resolution of the people here, who sup 
posed their charter rather an additional privilege and 
security against this demand. There was a minor 
part, however, very desirous of an accommoda 
tion. The ill success of the controversy with Go 
vernor Shute was fresh in their minds. Many 
amiable qualities in Mr. Burnet caused them to 
wish he might continue their governor, and employ 
those powers and that attention which were now 
wholly engaged in this single point, in promoting 
the general welfare and prosperity of the pro 
vince. 

About a third part of the house of representa 
tives and a major part of the council would have 
been content to have granted a salary for two, or 
perhaps three years. If we are to judge by his} 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



45 



[declarations, lliis would not have satisfied him, 
and it was far short of his instructions, but his 
friends were of opinion, that such a partial com 
pliance would have produced a relaxation of the 
instruction and issued in lasting agreement and 
harmony. 

The house made what they would have the go 
vernor think a small advance towards it. Instead 
of a grant for the salary, supposed, though not 
expressed, for half a year, they made a grant, 
September 20th, of 3000/. equal to 1000/. ster 
ling, in order to enable him to manage the affairs 
of the province, and although it was notexpressly 
mentioned, it was generally understood to be for a 
year. This was concurred in by the council, but he 
let it lie without signing his consent, which caused 
the house to make at least a seeming farther ad 
vance, for on the 24th of October they, by a mes 
sage, entreated him to accept the grant, and added, 
" we cannot doubt but that succeeding assemblies, 
according to the ability of the province, will be 
very ready to grant as ample a support, and if 
they should not, your excellency will then have 
the opportunity of shewing your resentment." 
Still they had no effect, the governor knew how 
natural it would be for a future assembly to refuse 
being governed by the opinion of a former; be 
sides, the reserve, "according to the ability of the 
province," left sufficient room for a further reason 
for reducing the sum whensoever a future assem 
bly should think it proper. 

A little before this message from the house, the 
governor had informed them that he was of opi 
nion the act, which passed the last year, issuing 
60,000/. in bills of credit by way of loan, would 
be disallowed, the lieutenant-governor having given 
his consent to it directly contrary to a royal in 
struction, and recommended to them, as the most 
likely way to obtain his Majesty s approbation, to 
apply the interest of the money arising from the 
loan towards the governor s salary. This was one 
of those acts which have their operation so far, 
before they are laid before his Majesty, that great 
confusion may arise from their disallowance. 
The house therefore had no great fears concerning 
it, but it would have been a sufficient reason to 
prevent their complying with the proposal, that it 
would be a fixing the salary so long as the loans 
continued, and for this reason they refused it. 

The country in general, as we have observed, 
was averse to a compliance with the king s instruc 
tion, but no part more so than the town of Boston. 
Generally in the colonies, where there is a trading 
capital town, the inhabitants of it are the most 
aealous part of the colony in asserting their liber 



ties when an opinion prevails that they are attacked . 
They follow the example of London, the capital 
of the nation. The governor had frequently said, 
that the members of the house could not act with 
freedom, being influenced by the inhabitants of 
the town. Besides, the tovvn, at a general meeting 
of the inhabitants for that purpose, had passed a 
vote, which was calU d the unanimous declaration 
of the inhabitants of the town of Boston, against 
fixing a salary upon the governor, and this vote 
they ordered to be printed. The governor was ia 
great wrath, and called it " an unnecessary for 
wardness, an attempt to give law to the country." 
This seems to have determined him to remove the 
court out of town, and 0:1 the 24&amp;lt;h of October, he 
caused it to be adjourned to the 31st, then, to 
meet at Salem in the county of Essex, " where 
prejudice had not taken root, and where of conse 
quence his Majesty s service would in all proba 
bility be better answered." Jocosely, he said, 
" there might be a charm in the names of places,, 
and that he was at a loss whether to carry them 
there or to Concord." 

The house thought their being kept so long sit 
ting at Boston a great grievance. In one of their 
messages they ask the governor, " Whether it has 
been customary that the knights, burgesses, and 
other freemen of the land, should be told that they 
are met to grant money in such a peculiar way and 
manner, and so they should be kept till they had 
done it, and this in order to gain their goodwill 
and assent?" In his reply hetells them he would con 
sider their question in all its parts, 1st, " Whether 
freemen, &amp;c. should be told they are met to grant 
money ?" " 1 answer, the crown always tells them 
so." 2d, " In such a particular way and man 
ner ?" "I answer, if you mean the way and 
means of raising money, the crown leaves that to 
the commons ; but if you mean the purpose for 
which it is to be granted, the crown always tells 
them what that is, whether it is for an honourable 
support, the defence of the kingdom, carrying on. 
a war, or the like." Sdly, " And so they should 
be kept till they had done it." The crown 
never tells the parliament so, that 1 know of, not 
have I fold you any thing like this as an expedient 
to get the thing done. I have given you a very 
different reason for not agreeing to a recess, alto 
gether for your own sakes, lest I should thereby 
make your immediate regard to his Majesty s 
pleasure impossible," &amp;c. 

The house could not easily be persuaded they 
were kept so long together merely for their own 
sakes, and thought this part of the governor s answer 
evasive of the true reason, and considered them-} 



46 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[selves as under duresse whilst at Boston, and their 
removal to Salem to be a further hardship, and an 
earnest of what was still further to come, a removal 
from place to place until they were harassed into 
a compliance. The members of the general court 
lamented the measures -which had driven away 
Governor Shute, who would have been easy with 
a salary of about 500/. sterling, granted from year 
to year. The same persons by whose influence 
his salary was reduced, were now pressing Mr. 
Burnet to accept WOOL in the same way, and 
con Id not prevail. 

The house met, according to the adjournment, 
but immediately complained of their removal from 
Boston as illegal or unconstitutional and a great 
grievance. The same and the only reason which 
was row given had been given before in the con 
troversy \vith Governor Shute. The form of the 
writ for calling an assembly, directed by the pro- 
vince law, mentions its being to be held at the 
town house in Boston, but this had been deter 
mined by the king in council to be, as no doubt it 
was, mere matter of form or example only, and 
that it did not limit the power which the crown 
before had of summoning and holding assemblies 
at any other place. They prayed the governor, 
however, to adjourn them back to Boston, but 
without success. 

They endeavoured to prevail upon the council 
to join with them, but the council declared they 
were of a different opinion, and urged the house to 
proceed upon business, which occasioned repeated 
messages upon the subject; but the whole stres 
of the argument on the part of the house lay upon 
the form of the writ for calling the assembly, 
which the board answered by saying, the house 
might as well insist that all precepts to the towns 
should go from the sheriff of Suffolk, because the 
form of the precept in the law has Suffolk ss, 

The alteration of place had no effect upon the 
members of the house. Votes and messages pass 
ed, but no new arguments, the subject had been 
exhausted, nothing remained but a determined 
resolution on both sides to abide by their principles, 
and the house met and adjourned, day after day, 
without doing any business. The governor was 
the principal suflercr, not being allowed by the 
king to receive any thing towards his support, 
except in a way in which the assembly would not 
give it. The members of the court, in general, 
were as well accommodated at Salem as Boston, 
and the members of Boston, who had not been 
used to the expence and other inconvenience of 
absence from home, received a compensation from 
their towoi over and above the ordinary wages of 



representatives. It was a time of peace without, 
and a cessation of public business for that reason 
was less felt. 

The house, from an apprehension that their 
cause was just, and therefore that they were entitled 
to relief, resolved to make their humble applica 
tion to his Majesty. Francis Wilks, a New Eng 
land merchant in London, who had been friendly 
to Mr. Cooke in his agency, and who was univer 
sally esteemed for his great probity as well as his 
humane obliging disposition, was pitched upon 
for their agent. 

Mr. Belcher, who had been several years of the 
council, always closely attached to Governor 
Shute, and in general, what was called a preroga 
tive man, by some accident or other became, on a 
sudden, the favourite of the house, and he was 
thought the properest person to join with Mr. 
Wilks. At the last Hection he had been left out 
of the council, by what was called the country 
party, but now declared against the governor s 
measures, arid became intimate with Mr. Cooke 
and other leading members of the house. Such 
instantaneous conversions are not uncommon. A 
grant was made by the house to defray the charges 
of the agency, but this was non-concurred by the 
council, because it was for the use of agents in 
whose appointment they had no voice. The want 
of money threatened a stop to the proceeding, but 
the public spirit of the town of Boston was displayed 
upon this occasion, and by a subscription of mer 
chants and other principal inhabitants, a sum was 
raised which was thought sufficient for the pur 
pose, the house voting them thanks, and promising 
their utmost endeavours that the sums advanced 
should be repaid in convenient time. The gover- . 
nor desired a copy of their address to the king, but 
they refused it. 

The only argument or reason in the king s in 
struction for fixing a salary is, " that former as 
semblies have, from time to time, made such 
allowances and in such proportion as they them 
selves thought the governor deserved, in order to 
make him more dependent upon them." The 
house, in the first part of their memorial or address, 
declare they cannot in faithfulness settle or fix a 
salary, because, after that is done, the governor s 
particular interest will be very little affected by 
serving or deserving the interest of the people. 
This was shewing that they apprehended the rea 
son given by his Majesty for settling a salary was 
insufficient, and that the governor ought to be 
paid, according to his services, in the judgment of 
those who paid him ; but in the close of the ad 
dress they say, " we doubt not succeed ing assem-] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



47 



[blies, according to the ability of the province, 
will come into as ample and honourable support, 
from time to time, and should they not, we ac 
knowledge, your Majesty will have just reason to 
shew your displeasure with them." It was re 
marked that, in order to make the last clause con 
sist with the first, the ample and honourable sup 
port must be understood in proportion to the 
services of the governor in the judgment of the 
house, but in this sense, it was saying nothing and 
trifling with Majesty ; for no case could happen, 
at any time, in which his Majesty would have 
just reason to shew his displeasure. It would al 
ways be enough to say that the house, in faithful 
ness to the people, had withheld part or the go 
vernor s support, because, in their judgment, he 
had neglected their interest and his duty. 

Whether this remark was just or not, the house 
had great encouragement given them by Mr. 
\Vilks, that their address would obtain for them 
the wished-for relief. He had been heard by 
counsel, Mr. Fazakerlcy and Dr. Sayes, before 
the board of trade, Mr. Belcher not being then ar 
rived; but soon after they received letters from 
their joint agents, inclo^ngthe report of the board 
of trade, highly disapproving the conduct of the 
house, and their agents let them know it was their 
opinion that, if the house should persist in their re 
fusal to comply with the king s instruction, the 
affair might be carried before the parliament ; but 
if this should be the case, they thought it better a 
salary should be fixed by the supreme legislature 
than by the legislature of the province, better the 
liberties of the people should be taken away from 
them than given up by their own act. The go 
vernor likewise communicated to the house his 
letters from the lords of trade approving his con 
duct. All hopes of success from the agents seemed 
to be over, and their business in England would 
have been very short if the governor had not given 
occasion for further application. His administra 
tion for many months, except in this affair of the 
salary, had been unexceptionable. Indeed the 
members of the house thought themselves aggrieved 
that he would not sign a warrant upon the treasury 
for their pay, and his reason for refusing it, viz. 
that one branch of the legislature might as well go 
without their wages as another, they thought in 
sufficient. Being drove to straits, and obliged 
to his friends to assist him in the support of his 
family, he thought he might be justified in esta 
blishing a fee and perquisite which had never been 
known in the province before. At New York, all 
vcsseis took from the governor a let pass, for which 
there was no law, but the owners of vessels sub 



mitted to it, arid it was said, rolenli nonfit injuria. 
Lord Coke perhaps would not have thought even 
this a justification. 

The governor required all masters to take the 
same passes here, against their will, and demanded 
6s. or 2s. sterling for every vessel bound a foreign 
voyage, and 4&amp;lt;?. for coasters. The stated fee, by 
law, for registers was 6-v. but the bills having de 
preciated more than one half in value since the 
law was made, he required 12*. This was a very 
different case from the other, and we do not know 
that it was exceptionable, but they were alike corn- 
plained of as grievous and oppressive, and the go 
vernor s enemies were not displeased with the ad 
vantage he had given them against him ; and upon 
a represent. ition made by the agents, notwithstand 
ing the hardship of being restrained from receiving 
a salary in any w;;y except such as the assembly 
would not give it in, yet such was the regard to 
law and justice, that his conduct, so far as related 
to the let passes, was immediately disapproved. 
There were other matters besides that of the salary 
to be settled before Mr. Burnet could be easy in 
his government, but this grand affair caused the 
lesser to be kept off as much as possible. One was 
the appointment of an attorney -general. By the 
charter the election of the civil officers, except 
such as belong to the council and courts of justice, 
is in the general assembly. Until after Governor 
Dudley s time it had generally been allowed that 
the attorney-general was an officer of the courts of 
justice and included in the exception, but Lieu 
tenant-governor Tailer, in the year 1 7 1C, con 
sented to an election made by the two houses, and 
the choice had been annually n:ade and approved 
ever since, not without notice from Mr. Shute of 
the irregularity of it, but he had so many other 
affairs upon his hands that he waved this. 

Mr. Burnet was determined not to part with the 
right of nomination, and the council were of 
the opinion he ought not, and refused to join with 
the house in the election. There was some alter 
cation between the two houses upon it, and both 
adhered to their principles. 

Another affair of more extensive influence 
would have been more strenuously insisted upon. 

In Governor Shute s administration, the house, 
after long disputes with the governor and with the 
council, carried the point as to the form of supply 
of the treasury, which differing, as we have already 
observed, from the former practice, and, as both 
governor and council insisted, from the rule 
prescribed by the charter, Mr. Burnet had deter 
mined to return to the first practice. The house 
passed a vote for supplying the treasury withj 



48 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[20,000/. which the council concurred, the prac 
tice having been the same for eight or nine years 
together, but the governor refused his consent, and 
assured them that he would agree to no supply of 
the treasury but such as was in practice before the 
year 1721. This declaration was made not long- 
before his death. The settlement of the point in 
controversy remained for his successor. 

(Anno 1729.) The court was allowed a recess 
from the 20th of December to the 2d of April, and 
then sat until the 8th, at Salem again, without any 
disposition to comply. 

The new assembly for the election of counsellors 
was held at the same place : There was a general 
expectation that a new set of counsellors would be 
chosen. The council of the last 1 year had been of 
very different opinion from the house in many 
points. They had no doubt of the governor s 
power to call, adjourn, or prorogue the assembly 
to any part of the province he thought proper, 
and although they were not for a fixed salary ac 
cording to the instruction, yet they would have 
willingly consented to settle it for longer term than 
a year, and some of them, during Mr. Burnetts 
administration, but the house were most offended 
with the non-concurrence of their grant of money 
to their agents. After all, only four new coun 
sellors were elected. Immediately after the coun 
cil was settled, the court was prorogued to the 
25th of June, and having sat unto the I Oth of 
July, he prorogued them again unto the 20th of 
August, having made no speech at either of the 
sessions, or taken any notice of any business he 
thought proper for them to do. The reason of 
this omission appeared at the session in August. 
He bad waited the final determination of his Ma 
jesty in council, upon the report of the lords com 
mittee. This he now communicated to the house, 
whereby they perceived that his conduct was ap 
proved, that of (he house condemned, and his 
Majesty advised to lay the case before the parlia 
ment. The house received a letter at the same 
time from their agents, who, it seems, had altered 
their opinions, and now intimated to the house, that 
notwithstanding the determination or advice of the 
privy council, it was not likely the affair would 
ever be brought before the parliament. This 
letter the house ordered to be printed. The go 
vernor, in one of his messages, calls it " an unde 
niable proof of their endeavours to keep the peo 
ple in ignorance of the true state of their affairs." 
It seems to be preferring a present temporary con 
venience, in keeping up the spirit of the people 
and diffusing a favourable opinion of their repre 
sentatives, to the future real advantage of the 



cause, for such a measure must weaken the hands 
of the agents in England, and tend to bring the 
matter before the parliament, when otherwise it 
might have been avoided. 

The governor having held several sessions at 
Salem without any success, he adjourned the 
court, to meet the 2lst of August at Cambridge. 
This widened the breach, and the house grew 
warmer in their votes and messages, and com 
plained that they were to be compelled to measures 
against their judgment, by being harassed and 
drove from one part of the province to another. 
The governor s friends observed the effect the con 
troversy had upon his spirits. In a few days he 
fell sick of a fever and died at Boston the 7th of 
September. Some attributed his illness to his tak 
ing cold, his carriage oversetting upon the cause 
way at Cambridge, the tide being high, and he 
falling into the water. The resentment which had 
been raised ceased with the people in general upon 
his death. Many amiable parts of his character 
revived in their minds. He had been steady and 
inflexible in his adherence to his instructions, but 
discovered nothing of a grasping avaricious mind, 
it was the mode more than the quantum of his sa 
lary upon which he insisted. The naval office 
had generally been a post for some relation or fa 
vourite of the governor, but Colonel Tailer hav 
ing been lieutenant-governor, and in circumstances 
far from affluent, he generously gave the post to 
him, without any reserve of the issues or profits. 
The only instance of his undue exacting money, 
by some was thought to be palliated by the esta 
blished custom of the government he had quitted. 
This did not justify it. In his disposal of public 
offices, he gave the preference to such as were 
disposed to favour his cause, and displaced some 
for not favouring it ; and, in some instances, he 
went further than good policy would allow. He 
did not know the temper of the people of New 
England. They have a strong sense of liberty, 
and are more easily drawn than driven. He dis 
obliged many of his friends by removing from his 
post Mr. Lynde, a gentleman of the house, 
esteemed by both sides for his integrity and other 
valuable qualities; and he acknowledged that he 
could assign no other reason except that the gen 
tleman had not voted for a compliance with the 
instruction. However, an immoral or unfair cha 
racter was a bar to office, and he gave his nega 
tive to an election of a counsellor, in one instance, 
upon that principle only. His superior talents 
and free and easy manner of communicating his 
sentiments made him the delight of men of sense 
and learning, His right of precedence in all com-] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



49 



[panics facilitated the exercise of his natural dis 
position to a great share in the conversation, and 
at the same time " caused it to appear more ex 
cusable." Bis own account of his genius was, 
that it was late before it budded, and that until he 
was near 20 years of age, his father despaired of 
his ever making any figure in life. This, per 
haps, might proceed from the exact severe disci 
pline of the bishop s family, not calculated for 
every temper alike, and might damp and discou 
rage his. To long and frequent religious services 
at Jiome, in his youth, he would sometimes plea 
santly attribute his indisposition to a very scrupu 
lous exact attendance upon public worship ; but 
this might really be owing to an abhorrence of 
ostentation and mere formality in religion, to avoid 
which, as most of the grave serious people of the 
province thought, he approached too near the 
other extreme. A little more caution and con 
formity to the different nges, manners, customs, 
and even prejudices of different companies, would 
have been more politic, but his open undisguised 
mind could not submit to it. Being asked to dine 
with an old charter senator who retained the cus 
tom of saying grace sitting, the grave gentleman 
desired to know which would be more agreeable to 
his excellency, that grace should be said standing 
or sitting, the governor replied, standing or sit 
ting, any way or no way, just as you please. He 
sometimes wore a cloth coat lined with velvet. It 
was said to be expressive of his character. He 
was a firm believer of the truth of revealed reli 
gion, but a bigot to no particular profession among 
Christians, and laid little stress upon modes and 
forms. By a clause in his last will, he ordered 
his body to be buried, if he died at New York, 
by his wife, if in any other part of the world, in 
the nearest church-yard or burying-ground, all 
places being alike to God s all-seeing eye. 

The assembly ordered a very honourable funeral 
at the public charge. A motion, at another time, 
was made in the house for a grant to a governor 
to bear the ex pence of his lady s funeral, a dry 
old representative objected to a grant for a gover 
nor s lady, had a motion been for a grant to bury 
the governor he should hive thought the money 
well laid out. 

Mr. Dummer reassumed the administration. He 
did not intend to enter into the controversy about 
the salary ; no advantage could arise from it, no 
new arguments could be used, the king s instruc 
tions were to be his rule, and he would not depart 
from them by accepting any grant as lieutenant- 
governor ; but the affair having been under consi 
deration before his Majesty in council, and fur- 

VOL. III. 



ther proceedings expected, he would wait for fur 
ther intelligence and directions. The house were 
not willing to admit that the instruction had any 
respect to the salary of a lieutenant-governor, but 
if it. had they had given sufficient reasons against 
it, and were determined to come into no act for 
fixing a salary. Having continued the session at 
Cambridge until the 26th of September, he or 
dered an adjournment to the 29th of November, 
at Boston, which was a further indication that he 
did not intend to press the instruction ; however, 
at their first coming together he recommended to 
them a compliance with it ; and upon their assur 
ing him, by a message, that although they could 
not settle a salary, yet they were ready to give him 
an ample and honourable support, he desired 
them to lose no time about it, for he would accept 
of no support unless it should be exactly conform 
able to his Majesty s instruction. The house, not 
withstanding, made a grant of 750/. to enable 
him to manage the affairs of government. The 
council concurred with an amendment, adding 
" for the half year current;" but this being fixing 
a salary for half a year the house refused it. 

Upon the news of Mr. Burnet s death Mr. 
Belcher applied with all his powers to obtain the 
commission for the government. Governor Shute 
might have returned, but he declined it, and ge 
nerously gave his interest to Mr. Belcher, who, 
14 years before, had given 500/. sterling, which 
was never repaid, to facilitate Colonel Shute s ap 
pointment. The controversy, which it was sup 
posed a governor must be engaged in, caused 
fewer competitors, and the ministry were the more 
concerned to find a proper person. Lord Towns- 
hend asked Mr. Wilks, who had much of his 
confidence, whether he thought Mr. Belcher would 
be able to influence the people to a compliance 
with the king s instructions, he replied that he 
thought no man more likely. Their choosing him 
agent was a mark of their confidence in him, but 
it seemed natural to expect that they would be 
under stronger prejudices against him than against 
a person who had never engaged in their favour. 
Mr. Belcher s appointment occasioned the removal 
of Mr. Dummer from the place of lieutenant-go 
vernor. A young gentleman, with whose family 
Mr. Wilks was connected, Mr. Thornton, Mr. 
Belcher had engaged to provide for, and he had 
no post in his gift worth accepting besides the naval 
office. To make a vacancy there, Colonel Tailer 
was appointed lieutenant-governor. The plea 
sure, if there was any, in superseding Mr. Dum 
mer, who had superseded him before, could be 
no equivalent for the difference between a post of] 
ii 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[naked honour and a post of profit which gave him 
a comfortable living. Mr. Dummcr s administra 
tion has been justly well spoken of. His general 
aim was to do public service. Me was compelled 
to some compliances which appeared to him the 
least of two evils. It lessened him in Mr. Bur- 
net s esteem, who thought he should have shewn 
more fortitude ; but he retired with honour, and, 
after some years, was elected into the council, 
where, from respect to his former commission, he 
took the place of president ; but being thought 
foo favourable to the prerogative, after two or 
three years he was left out. He seemed to lay this 
slight more to heart than the loss of his commis 
sion, and aimed at nothing more the rest of his 
life than otium cum dig nit ate , selecting for his 
friends and acquaintance men of sense, virtue, and 
religion, and enjoyed in life, for many years, that 
fame, which, for infinitely wise reasons, the great 
Creator has implanted in every generous breast a 
desire of, even after death. 

Colonel Tailer s commission was received and 
published before Mr. Belcher s arrival, and it 
gave him an opportunity of doing a generous 
thing for Mr. Dummer. A vote had passed the 
two houses granting him 900/. which, from a re 
gard to his instructions, he had not signed, nor 
had he expressly refused it, and the court having 
been adjourned only, not prorogued, the next 
meeting was considered as the same session, and 
Colonel Tailcr ventured to sign it, not being a 
grant to himself and not against the letter of his 
instructions, and it was really saving money to Mr. 
Dummer; the grant being intended for services to 
come as well as past, would not have been renewed, 
or in part only. 

CHAP. VII. 

From the arrival of Governor Belcher in 1730, 
to the reimbursement of the charge of the ex 
pedition against Cape Breton, and the abolition 
of paper money) in 1749. 

(Anno 1730.) Mr. Belcher arrived the begin 
ning of August, in the Blandford man of war, 
Captain Prothero. 

No governor had been received with a shew of 
greater joy. Both parties supposed they had an 
interest in him. For men to alter their principles 
and practice, according to their interest, was no 
new thing. A sketch of Mr. Belcher s life and 
character will in some measure account for his 
obtaining the government, for the principal events 
in his administration, and for the loss of his com 
mission. 
Being the only son of a wealthy father, he had 



high views from the beginning of life. After an aca 
demical education in his own country he travelled 
to Europe, was twice at Hanover, and was intro 
duced to the court there, at the time when the 
Princess Sophia was the presumptive heiress to the 
British crown. The novelty of a British Ameri 
can, added to the gracefulness of his person, 
caused distinguishing notice to be taken of him, 
which tended to increase that aspiring turn of 
mind which was very natural to him. Some years 
after he made another voyage to England, being 
then engaged in mercantile affairs, which, after 
his return home, proved, in the general course of 
them, rather unsuccessful, and seem to have sup 
pressed or abated the ruling passion ; but being 
chosen agent for the house of representatives, it 
revived and was gratified to the utmost, by his 
appointment to the government of Massachusetts 
bay and New Hampshire, and discovered itself in 
every part of his administration. Before lie was 
governor, except in one instance, he had always 
been a favourer of the prerogative, and after 
wards he did not fail of acting up to his principles. 
A man of high principles cannot be too jealous of 
himself, upon a sudden advancement to a place of 
power. The council never enjoyed less freedom 
than in his time. He proposed matters for the 
sake of their sanction rather than advice, rarely 
failing of a majority to approve of his senti 
ments. 

He lived elegantly in his family, was hospitable, 
made great shew in dress, equipage, &amp;c. and al 
though, by the depreciation of the currency, he 
was curtailed of his salary, yet he disdained any 
unwarrantable or mean ways of obtaining money 
to supply his expences. By great freedom in con 
versation, and an unreserved censure of persons 
whose principles or conduct he disapproved, he 
made himself many enemies. In a private person 
this may often pass with little notice, but from a 
governor it is very hardly forgot, and some never 
ceased pursuing revenge until they saw him dis- 



The general court met the 9th of September. 
The people waited with impatience the governor s 
first speech. Many flattered themselves that the 
instruction for a fixed salary was withdrawn ; 
others, that if it was continued, he would treat it 
rather as Dudley and Shute had done lhan as his 
immediate predecessor ; others, who did not ex 
pect a relaxation, were, from curiosity, wishing 
to know how he would acquit himself with the 
people, who sent him to England to oppose the 
instruction. After premising, that the honour of 
the crown and interest of Great Britain are very] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



51 



[compatible with the privileges and liberties of the 
plantations, he tells the two houses, that he had it 
in command from his royal master to communicate 
to them his 27th instruction, respecting the gover 
nor s support ; that whilst he was in England he 
did every tiling consistent with reason and justice 
for preserving and lengthening out the peace and 
welfare of the province ; that they were no strangers 
to the steps taken by his Majesty with respect to 
the unhappy dispute between the late governor and 
them, and he hoped, after such a struggle, they 
would think it for the true interest of the province 
to do what might be perfectly acceptable ; that 
nothing prevented this controversy, and several 
other matters of dangerous consequence, being 
laid before the parliament, but his Majesty s great 
lenity and goodness, which inclined him to give 
them one opportunity more of paying a due regard 
to what in his royal wisdom he thinks so just and 
reasonable. Had he stopped here, perhaps less 
could not have been expected from him ; but he 
unfortunately attempted to shew the similitude be 
tween the case of Cato shut up in Utica, and the 
Massachusetts bay under the restraint of the royal 
instruction, commended the wisdom of Cato in 
making so brave a stand for the liberties of his 
country, but condemned his putting an end to his 
life, when affairs became desperate, rather than 
submit to a power he could no longer resist ; which 
instance he brought as some illustration of the late 
controversy, though he would not allow it to run 
parallel, Cassar being a tyrant, and the king the 
protector of the liberties of his subjects. 

It was said, upon this occasion, that the gover 
nor must allow that the Massachusetts assembly 
had done wisely hitherto in defending their liber 
ties, for, otherwise, he had brought an instance of 
a case in no one respect similar to theirs; and if 
they had done so, it was because the instruction 
was a mere exertion of power, and then the pa 
rallel would run farther than he was willing to 
allow. 

The instruction was conceived in much stronger 
terms than that to Governor Burnet, and it is de 
clared that in case the assembly refuses to conform 
to it, " his Majesty will find himself under a ne 
cessity of laying the undutiful behaviour of the 
province before the legislature of Great Britain not 
only in this single instance but in many others of 
the same nature and tendency, whereby it mani 
festly appears that this assembly, for some years 
last past, have attempted by unwarrantable prac 
tices to weaken, if not cast off, the obedience they 
owe to the crown, and the dependence which all 
colonies ought to have on their mother country." 



And in the close of the instruction his Majesty ex 
pects, " that they do forthwith comply with this 
proposal as the last signification of our royal plea 
sure to them upon this subject, and if the said as 
sembly shall not think fit to comply therewith, it is 
our will and pleasure and you are required imme 
diately to come over to this kingdom of Great 
Britain, in order to give us an exact account of all 
that shall have passed upon this subject, that we 
may lay the same before our parliament." 

The house proceeded just as they had done with 
Governor Burnet. They made a grant to Mr. Bel 
cher of 1000/. currency for defraying the expence 
of his voyage to New England and as a gratuity 
for services while in England ; and some time after, 
they voted him a sum equal to 1000/. sterling, to 
enable him to manage the public affairs, &amp;c. but 
would fix no time. The council concurred it with 
an amendment, viz. " and that the same sum be 
annually allowed for the governor s support. " 
This, without a fund for the payment of it, was 
doing little more than the house had repeatedly 
done by their declarations, that they doubted not 
future assemblies would make the like honourable 
provision for the governor s support according to 
the ability of the province; the amendment, not 
withstanding, was not agreed to, and the house 
adhered to their own vote. This produced a se 
cond amendment, viz. * that the same sum should 
be annually paid during his excellency s continu 
ance in the government and residence here ;" but 
this also was non-concurred. The two houses then 
conferred upon the subject, the governor being 
present, and before they parted he made a long 
speech, expressing the great pleasure the council 
had given him in the part they had taken, and his 
concern arid surprise at the conduct of the house, 
in running the risk of the consequences of their 
refusal to comply with the instruction, reminded 
them of the vast expence which their former un 
successful disputes with their governors had oc 
casioned to the province, but used no arguments 
to convince them of the reasonableness of the de 
mand and its compatibility with their rights and 
privileges. 

The small-pox being in the town of Cambridge, 
where the court sat, the house desired to rise, but 
the governor let them know he would meet them 
in any other town, and the same day ordered an 
adjournment to Roxbury, where a bill passed both 
houses for the support of the governor, but, not 
coming up to the instruction, the governor could 
not consent to it. The country party in the house, 
as much a solecism as it is, were the most zealous 
for the prerogative, and except a few prerogative] 
H 2 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



men, who were always willing to fix the salary, 
none went so great a length, at this time, towards 
fixing it as those who opposed any one step to 
wards it under Mr. Burnet. 

The people, in general, were well pleased with 
the governor. It is not improbable that he would 
have obtained the settlement of a salary during his 
administration, if it had not been, in effect, a set 
tlement for his successors also, for such a precedent 
could not easily have been resisted. The two 
parties which had long subsisted in the govern 
ment were vying, each with the other, in measures 
for an expedient or accommodation. The prero 
gative men were Mr. Belcher s old friends, who 
were pretty well satisfied that his going over to 
the other side was not from any real affection to 
the cause, and that he must, soo ner or later, differ 
with those who adhered to it, and for this event 
they waited patiently. The other party, by whose 
interest he had been sent to England, adhered to 
him, expecting their reward. Accordingly, Mr. 
Cooke was soon appointed a justice of the common 
pleas for the county of Suffolk. To make way 
lor him and another favourite, Colonel Byfield, to 
whom Mr. Belcher was allied, two gentlemen, 
Colonel Ilutchinson and Colonel Dudley, were 
displaced. They were both in principle steady 
friends to government, and the first of them was a 
fast friend to the governor. Mr. Belcher would 
not have been able to advance so many of his 
friends as he did, if he had not persuaded the 
council, that upon the appointment of a new go 
vernor, it was necessary to renew all civil com 
missions. Having obtained this point, he took 
the most convenient time to settle the several coun 
ties. Before he settled the county of York, he re 
commended to the judges a person for clerk of the 
court. This officer the province law empowers 
the judges to appoint. Some of them sent their 
excuse, being well satisfied with the clerk they 
had, who was a faithful well-approved officer, but 
the governor let (he judges know, if he could not 
appoint a clerk lie could a judge, and accordingly 
removed those who were not for his purpose and 
appointed others in their stead. There was an in 
consistency, in delaying appointments, with the 
principles he advanced. If new commissions 
were necessary, they were necessary immediately, 
and they might as well be delayed seven years as 
one. 

(Anno 1731.) Two or. three sessions passed, 
when liitle more was done, on the governor s part, 
than repeating his demand for a fixed salary, and 
intimating that he should bo obliged to go to Eng 
land and render an account of their behaviour to 



the king. The major part of the house were very 
desirous of giving satisfaction to the governor arid 
to their constituents both, but that could not be. 
Mr.Cooke s friends in the town of Boston began to 
be jealous of him. A bill was prepared, which sets 
forth in the preamble, that settling a salary would 
deprive the people of their rights as Englishmen. 
In the purview, after granting 3400/. which was 
about equal to 1000/. sterling, it is further enacted, 
that as his Majesty had been graciously pleased to 
appoint J. B. Esq. to be the governor, who was a 
native of the country, whose fortune was here, 
who, when a member of the council, as well as 
when in a private station, has always consulted the 
true interest of his country as well as the honour 
and dignity of the crown, therefore it is most so 
lemnly promised and engaged to his most excel 
lent Majesty that there shall be granted the like 
sum for the like purpose at the beginning of the 
sessions in May every year during the governor s 
continuance in the administration and residence 
within the province, provided this act shall not be 
pleaded as a precedent or binding on any future 
assembly for fixing a salary on any succeeding go 
vernor. The bill is in Mr. Cooke s hand-writing, 
and it is minuted at the bottom that the governor 
approved of it. The governor could not imagine 
so evasive a thing could be approved in England. 
He might hope to improve it as being a further ad 
vance than had been before made, and by using 
this argument, that it would be much more ra 
tional for the house to do what they now had fully 
in their power to do, than to make a solemn pro 
mise that another house should do the same thing, 
the performance of which promise they would not 
have in their own power. The scheme failed, the 
bill did not pass, and from that time Mr. Belcher, 
despairing of carrying his point, turned his 
thoughts to obtaining a relaxation of his instruc 
tion. Instead of applying himself, he advised to 
an address from the house, not for the withdraw 
of the instruction, but that the governor might have 
leave to receive the sum granted. This was al 
lowed, but it was to be understood, that he was to 
insist upon a compliance with his instruction as 
much as ever. Leave for consent to particular 
grants was obtained two or three years, and at 
length, a general order of leave to receive such 
sums as should be granted. This was the issue of 
the controversy about a fixed salaiy. Until Mr. 
Belcher s arrival, Mr. Cooke had differed from, 
most who, from time to time, have l&amp;gt;een recorded 
in history for popular men. Generally, to pre 
serve the favour of the people, they must change 
with the popular air, and when we survey a course] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[^faction it will not appear altogether consistent. 
He had the art of keeping the people steady in the 
applause of his measures. To be careful never to 
depart from the appearance of maintaining or en 
larging rights, liberties, and privileges, was all he 
found necessary. As soon as he was defective in 
this respect, and tried to secure his interest both 
with the governor and4own of Boston, he had like 
to have lost both. In the election of representatives 
for Boston, in 1733 or 1734, the governor s party 
appeared against him, he had lost many of the 
other party by what they called too great a coin- 
pliance, and he had a majority, after several trials, 
of one or two votes only in 6 or 700. 

The dispute about the manner of issuing money 
out of the treasury was settled unfavourably for 
the house. The charter provides, that all money 
shall be issued by warrant from the governor with 
advice and consent of the council. Until the year 
1720 the money was brought into the treasury, by 
a vote or act originating in the house, and destined 
to certain purposes, and drawn out for those pur 
poses by warrant from the governor, with advice 
&amp;c. but after that, the house not only destined the 
money when put into the treasury, but provided 
that none of it, except some trifling sums for ex 
presses and the like, should be issued without a 
vote of the whole court for payment. After such 
a vote they were willing the governor should give 
his warrant. This appeared to the king to render 
his governor contemptible, and entirely to defeat 
the provision in the charter, and there was no pro 
spect of any relaxation of the instruction to the 
governor. When the servants of the government 
had suffered a long time for want of their money, 
the house passed a bill which supplied the treasury 
in a way not materially differing from what had 
been in practice before 1720. 

Mr. Belcher had another instruction not to con 
sent to the issuing any bills of credit for a longer 
term than those were to remain current which had 
before been issued, none of which extended beyond 
the year 1741. It would have been but a small 
burden upon the inhabitants to have paid the 
charges of every year and the debt which lay upon 
such year besides, but, instead of that wise mea 
sure, they suffered one year after another to pass 
with light taxes, and laid heavy burdens upon dis 
tant years, and the last year, 1741, had more laid 
upon it than any four or five preceding years; and 
although even this was far short of what has been 
paid in some succeeding years, yet it was deemed 
an insupportable burden, and it was generally sup 
posed the promises made by the acts of government 
to draw in the bills in that year would by some 



means or other be evaded or openly violated. Mr. 
Belcher seemed determined to adhere to his in 
struction, and there was an expectation of some 
great convulsion, which was prevented by his being 
superseded before that period arrived. 

The project, of which AVC have already taken no- 
lice, for settling thee. country, Captain Coram pur 
sued until he procured an order or instruction to 
Colonel Phillips, the governor of Nova Scotia, in 
7130, to take possess ion of the land between St. Croix 
and Kennebeck, and 30 men with an officer were 
sent to the fortatPemaquid, built by the Massachu 
setts. Colonel Dunbar, a gentleman out of em 
ploy, came over about the same time, took the 
command of the fort, and assumed the government 
of that part of the province. Mr. Belcher was ap 
plied to by the proprietors of the lands there, and 
the house of representatives asserted the right of 
the province. The governor, with adviceof coun 
cil, issued a proclamation requiring the inhabitants 
to remain in their obedience and due subjection to 
the laws and government of the province. This 
seems to have been all that in prudence he could 
do. Some were for taking further measures to 
remove Dunbar, which, as he had a royal commis 
sion, however liable to exceptions, Mr. Belcher 
thought by no means warrantable. The minds of 
the people were inflamed, and when Dunbar came 
up to Boston he persisted in his claim to the coun 
try, which, with reports of some not very decent 
expressions of the governor, raised the resentment 
of many. Persons of ill design perhaps might 
have been able to have caused a tumult. The 
lands indeed were claimed by a few particular 
persons, but it was spread abroad that when this 
country should be detached from the rest of the 
province the supplies of fuel to the sea-port towns 
would cease, or be burdened with heavy duties, 
and the poor oppressed. 

{Anno 1732.) It happened that Mr. Samuel 
Waldo, a gentleman of good capacity and who 
would not easily relinquish his right, undertook for 
the proprietors of the principal tract of the country 
claimed, and upon representation to his Majesty in 
council, the order to Phillips and the authority to 
Dunbar were revoked in 173^, and the govern 
ment of the province afterwards thought it proper 
to place a garrison in their own pay at tort Fre 
derick, the name given by Dunbar to the fort at 
Pemaquid. 

Weshalltakenotice of twoor three only and those 
the most remarkable events during the rest of Mr. 
Belcher s administration. 

{Anno 1733.) In 1733, there was a general com 
plaint throughout the four governments of NewJ 



54 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[England of the unusual scarcity of money. There 
was as large a sum current in bills of credit as ever, 
but the bills having depreciated they answered the 
purposes of money so much less in proportion. 
The Massachusetts and New Hampshire were 
clogged with royal instructions. It was owing to 
them that those governments had not issued bills to 
as great an amount as Rhode Island. Connecti 
cut, although under no restraint, yet consisting of 
more husbandmen and fewer traders than the rest, 
did not so much feel the want of money. The 
Massachusetts people were dissatisfied that Rhode 
Island should send their bills among them, and take 
away their substance and employ it in trade, and 
many people wished to see the bills of each go 
vernment current within the limits, of such govern 
ment only. In the midst of this discontent, Rhode 
Island passed an act for issuing 100,000/. upon loan, 
for 20 years, to their own inhabitants, who would 
immediately have it in their power to add 100,000/. 
to their trading stock from the horses, sheep, lum 
ber, fish, &amp;c. of the Massachusetts inhabitants. 
The merchants of Boston therefore confederated, 
and mutually promised and engaged not to receive 
any bills of this new emission, but to provide a 
currency. A large number formed themselves into a 
company, entered into covenants, chose directors, 
&amp;c. and issued 110,000/. redeemable in 10 years, 
in silver at 19*. per ounce, the then current rate, 
or gold in proportion, a tenth part annually. 
About the same time the Massachusetts treasury, 
which had been long shut, was opened, and the 
debts of two or three years were all paid at one time 
in bills of credit ; to this was added the ordinary 
emissions of bills from New Hampshire and Con 
necticut, and some of the Boston merchants, 
tempted by an opportunity of selling their English 
goods, having broke through their engagements 
and received the Rhode Island bills, all the rest 
soon followed the example. All these emissions 
made a flood of money, silver rose from 19s. to 27s. 
the ounce, and exchange with all other countries 
consequently rose alsoj and every creditor was de 
frauded of about one third of his just dues. As 
soon as silver rose to 27.?. the notes issued by the 
merchants payable at 195. were hoarded up and 
no longer answered the purposes of money. Al 
though the currency was lessened by taking away 
the notes, yet what remained never increased in 
value, silver continuing several years about the 
same rate, until it took another large jump. Thus 
very great injustice was caused by this wretched 
paper currency and no relief of any sort obtained ; 
tor, by this sinking in value, though the nominal 
sum was higher than it had ever been before, yet 



the currency would produce no more sterling money 
than it would have done before the late emissions 
were made. 

(Anno 1737.) In 1737, a controversy which 
had long subsisted between the two governments 
of Massachusetts bay and New Hampshire was 
heard by commissioners for that purpose appoint 
ed by the crown. Various attempts had been 
made to settle this dispute, and it had been often 
recommended by the crown to the assemblies of 
the tsvo provinces to agree upon arbitrators from 
neighbouring governments, and to pass acts which 
should bind each province to be subject to their 
determinations. Several such acts passed, but they 
were not exactly conformable one to the other, or 
the operation of them was by some means or other 
obstructed. The Massachusetts refused terms 
which afterwards they would gladly have accept 
ed. They have done the like in other contro 
versies. Long possession caused them to be loth 
to concede any part of the territory. New Hamp 
shire took its name from the grants made by the 
council of Plymouth to Captain John Mason. 
Of these there had been four or five, all containing 
more or less of the same lands. Exceptions were 
taken to all of them, and that which was the least 
imperfect was dated after the grant of Massa 
chusetts bay, so that the whole controversy turned 
upon the construction of the Massachusetts charters. 
The first charter made the n. boundary to be three 
miles to the n. of Merrimack river, or to the 
w. of any and every part thereof. After running 
w. about 30 miles from the sea the river alters its 
course and tends to the n. ; or, to speak with more 
propriety, having run from its crotch or the meet 
ing of Pemigewasset river and Winnepissiauke 
pond to the s. about 50 miles, it then tends to the 
e. about 30 miles, until it empties into the sea. 
It was urged by the advocates for Massachusetts 
colony that their boundary Avas to be three miles 
to the n. of the northernmost part of the river, and 
to extend e. and w. from the Atlantic to the S. sea. 
This swallowed all New Hampshire and the greatest 
part of the province of Maine. At a hearing 
before the king in council, in 1677, the agents for 
Massachusetts, by advice, disclaimed all right of 
jurisdiction beyond the three miles n. of the river 
according to the course, and it was determined 
they had a right as far as the river extended, but 
how far the river did extend was not then expressly 
mentioned. It seems, however, not to have been 
doubted, for although at the time of the grant of 
the first charter it does not appear that the course 
was known any great distance from the sea, yet, 
soon after the government was transferred froml. 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[Old England to New, it was as well known by the 
name of Merrimack as far as Penicook as it is 
at this day, and the tribe of Indians which dwelt 
there had a correspondence with the English, and 
in 1639 persons were employed by the government 
of Massachusetts to explore that part of the coun 
try, and there are still preserved the testimonies of 
divers persons, declaring that they before that time 
always understood the river to be called by the 
same name from the crotch to the mouth. If the 
first charter of the Massachusetts had continued, 
it is not probable any different construction would 
ever have been started ; but in the new charter 
the boundary is thus expressed, u extending from 
the great river commonly called Monomack alias 
Merrimack on the n. part, and from three miles n. of 
the said river to the Atlantic or \V. sea or ocean on 
the s. part, &amp;c." The whole, however, of the old 
colony being included in the new province, many 
years passed without any thought of a different 
construction of bounds in the two charters, and the 
disputes between New Hampshire and the Massa 
chusetts have been, principally, concerning the 
towns of Salisbury and Haverhill, which, when 
first granted by the Massachusetts, were made to 
extend more than three miles from the river, and 
the part beyond the three miles remained under 
the jurisdiction by which they had been granted, 
which New Hampshire complained of. A new 
line to begin three miles n. of the mouth of Merri 
mack and so run zo. to the S. sea, is a modern 
construction. Some hints had been given of such 
a line before or about the year 1726, and it was 
supposed by New Hampshire that the Massa 
chusetts were induced thereby to make grants of 
townships between Merrimack and Connecticut 
river, in order to strengthen their title by possession. 
Still there was a prospect of accommodation, and 
in the year 1731, the committees from the assem 
blies of the two provinces differed only upon the 
point of equivalents, the Massachusetts desiring to 
retain under their jurisdiction the whole of those 
towns which lay upon the river, and to give other 
lands as an equivalent for the property ; but 
about the same time the gentlemen of New Hamp 
shire, who had for many years before been at the 
lielm, thinking, and perhaps justly, that they were 
not well treated by Mr. Belcher, determined to 
exert themselves to obtain a governor for that 
province, and to remain no longer under the same 
governor with the Massachusetts. They had 
but little chance for this unless they could enlarge 
their bounds. The very proposal of a distinct 
government, as it increased the n umber of officers 
of the crown, they thought would be a favourable 



circumstance in settling the controversy witli 
Massachusetts. 

The house of representatives of New Hamp 
shire, October 7, 1731, by a vote appointed John 
Rindge, Esq. a merchant there who was bound to 
England, their agent, to solicit the settlement of the 
boundaries. But their main dependence was upon 
Mr. Thpinliospn, a gentleman who had been in 
New Hampshire, and was then a merchant of note 
in London, and perhaps was as capable of conduct 
ing their cause as any person they could have 
pitched upon. He had the friendship of Colonel 
Bladen, who at that day had great weight in the 
board of trade, and had conceived very unfa 
vourable sentiments of the Massachusetts in general, 
and did not like Mr. Belcher the governor. He 
employed a solicitor, Ferdinando Paris, one of the 
first rate, and who had a peculiar talent at slurring 
the characters of his antagonists. Many of bitf 
briefs have been known to abound in this way. 
The first step in consequence of Mr. Rindge s 
petition was a question sent by the lords of trade to 
the attorney and solicitor general for their opinion, 
" From what part of Merrimack river the three 
miles from whence the dividing line between the 
province of New Hampshire and the province of 
the Massachusetts bay is to begin, ought to be 
taken, according to the intent of the charter of 
William and Mary ?" This was a plain intimation 
that if the point where to begin could be settled, 
nothing more was necessary, the w. line claimed 
by New Hampshire was to follow of course. The 
Massachusetts agent (Mr. Wilks), by his counsel, 
would say nothing upon the question, because it 
would not determine the matters in dispute. 
Report was made, however, that it ought to begin 
three miles n. of the mouth of Merrimack river. 
It was then proposed that commissioners should be 
appointed to settle this controversy. This the 
Massachusetts were averse to, unless they knew 
who they were to be. They were at the same 
time afraid of its being determined in England 
ex parte, if they should refuse to consent. A 
committee of the general court reported, that the 
agent should be instructed that the province would 
agree to commissioners to be appointed to settle 
the controversy here. This report was accepted, 
the house intending the commissioners should be 
agreed upon by the two governments, some of the 
committee intending the agent should understand 
his instructions, to consent to the appointment of 
commissioners provided they sat here or in one of 
the two governments. A comma after the word 
appointed and after the word controversy would 
give the sense of the house, the last comma left] 



56 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[out, it mightbe taken in the sense of the committee ; 
but ns it is most probable the letter had no regular 
pointing, their meaning was to be guessed at. 

This was treating Ihe agent ill, and he was 
censured by the house for not observing his 
instructions. This account of the affair was col 
lected from some of the committee, who excused 
themselves for this equivocal report as being 
necessary for the public service, the house not 
being willing to consent to an explicit submission. 
It was made a condition of the submission that 
private property should not be affected. The 
ministry in later instances have not waited for 
an express submission, but have appointed com 
missioners upon application from one party only. 

The commissioners were all such as the New 
Hampshire agent proposed, five counsellors from 
each ofthe governments of New York, Rhode Island, 
and Nova Scotia. With the two former govern 
ments the Massachusetts were then in controversy 
about lines. The latter, it was said, was disaffected 
to charier government. Connecticut, proposed by 
Massachusetts, was rejected because of a bias from 
their trade, religion, &amp;c. which New Hampshire 
was afraid of. The place for the meeting of com- 
missisoners was Hampton in New Hampsire, the 
first of August. 

The commissioners from Nova Scotia, with some 
of Rhode Island, met at the time appointed, and 
were afterwards joined by Mr. Livingstone from 
New York, who presided. After many weeks 
spent in hearing the parties and examining their 
evidence, the only doubt in the commissioners 
minds was, whether the Massachusetts new charter 
comprehended the whole of the old colony. 
Not being able to satisfy themselves, and perhaps 
not being unwilling to avoid the determination, 
they agreed to make a special judgment or decree, 
the substance of which was, that, if the charter of 
William and Mary grants to the Massachusetts 
bay all the lands granted by the charter of Charles 
I. they then adjudge a curve line to begin three 
miles n. ofthe mouth of the river, and to keep the 
same distance from the river as far as the crotch 
or parting at Pemigewasset and Winnepissiauke, 
and then to run w. towards the S. sea until it meets 
with his Majesty s other governments ; but if the 
charter of William and Mary did not contain, 
&amp;c. then they adjudge a w. line to begin at the 
same place three miles n. of the mouth and to run 
to the S. sea. This point in doubt they submitted 
to his Majesty s royal pleasure. 

The Massachusetts were sure of their cause. It 
was impossible, they thought, consistent with com 
mon sense, that the point in doubt shaould be deter 



mined against them. They thought it safest, 
however, to send to England a special agent, 
Edmund Quincy, Esq. one of the council, who 
had been one of the court s agents before the com 
missioners. He was joined with Mr. AVilks, and 
Mr. Belcher by his interest prevailed upon the 
assembly to add a third, his wife s brother, Richard 
Partridge. Exceptions, called an appeal, were 
offered to the judgment of the commissioners, Mr. 
Quincy died of (he small pox by inoculation, soon 
after his arrival in London, the other two knew 
little or nothing of the controversy. The com 
missioners, however, had rendered it as difficult 
to determine a line against the Massachusetts as if 
they had given a general judgment in their favour. 
The New Hampshire agent and solicitor thought 
of no expedient. In their brief they pray the 
lords committee to report, * that all the lands lying 
to the n. of Merrimack river, which were granted 
by the charter of King Charles I. to the late colony 
of the Massachusetts bay, are not granted to (he 
present province of the Massachusetts bay by the 
charter of King William and Queen Mary." 
This never could have been done. At the hear 
ing, it was thought proper to lay aside all re 
gard to the judgment of the commissioners, and 
to proceed upon an entirely new plan. No doubt 
was made, that the old colony was all included in 
the new province. The question was, what were 
the n. bounds of the colony of Massachusetts bay, 
which the council of Plymouth when they sold the 
territory to the patentees, and the king when he 
granted the jurisdiction, had in contemplation ? 
This, it was said, must be a line three miles n. of 
a river not fully explored, but whose general 
course was supposed to be e. and w. So far 
therefore as it afterwards appeared that the river 
kept this course, so far it was equitable the line 
should continue ; but, as on the one hand, if the 
river had altered its course and turned to the s. 
it would have been inequitable- to have reduced the 
grant to a very small tract, so on the other hand, 
when it appeared to turn to the n. it was inequi 
table to extend the grant and make a very large 
territory, and therefore defeat other grants made 
about the same time. It was therefore determined 
that the n. boundaries of Massachusetts bay should 
be a line three miles from the river as far as 
Pantucket falls, then run w. 10 n. until it meets 
New York line. 

The Massachusetts thought themselves aggriev 
ed. They submitted the controversy to com 
missioners to be appointed by the crown, and had 
been fully heard. The whole proceedings of the 
commissioners were set aside, and, without any.] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



57 



{"notice to tlie government, (he controversy was 
determined by a committee of council upon a new 
point, on which their agent had never been instruct 
ed. And however there might be the appearance 
of equity in the principle upon which their lord 
ships proceeded, yet the Massachusetts supposed, 
if their possession for 100 years, together with the 
determination of the king in council in 1677, and 
the acquiescence of all parties in this determination 
for about 50 years, had been urged and duly 
weighed, the balance, upon the sole principle of 
equity, would have been in their favour. It increas 
ed their mortification to find that they had lost by 
this new line several hundred thousand acres more 
than the utmost claim ever made by New Hamp 
shire ; for Merrimack river, from the mouth to 
Pantucket falls tending tothc s. it made a difference 
of four or five miles in breadth, the whole length 
of the line, between a line to run a*, from Pantucket 
falls and a line w. from the black rocks. 

The dispute about the bounds of the province 
of Maine, which lies on the other side New Hamp 
shire, was upon the construction of the word 
northwestward. The Massachusetts urged that 
it was the evident design of the grantors of the pro 
vince of Maine to describe a territory about 120 
miles square. At that day this was probably the 
reputed distance from Newichawannock or Pisca- 
taqua river to Kennebeck, along the sea-coast, the 
general course of which was n. e. and s. w. ; after 
goinff upthe two rivers to (lie heads, the lines were 
to run north-westward until 120 miles were finished, 
and then a line back parallel to the line upon the sea. 
The agents for New Hampshire, at the court of 
commissioners, insisted that every body understood 
north-westward to be n. a little, perhaps less than a 
quarter of a point w. It not being possible to think 
of any reason for aline to run upon this course, the 
Massachusetts could scarce suppose the New Hamp 
shire agents to be serious, and imagined the com 
missioners would need no other reply than that 
every body understood a line running w. to be a 
line from c. to za. and by the same rule of construc 
tion they supposed north-westward to be from s. e. 
to n. w. ; that north-eastward being explained in 
the same grant to be as the coast lay, proved in fact 
to be from s. wAo n. e. They were, however, sur 
prised with the determination of the commissioners, 
that north-westward intended w.2 D a&amp;gt;. Why not 1 
or 3 as well as 2. From this part of the judgment 
the Massachusetts appealed. The agents in Eng 
land obtained the celebrated Doctor 1 1 alley s opi 
nion, in writing under his hand, that in tlie lan 
guage and understanding of mathematicians a line 
to run north-westward is a line to run n. w. but this 

VOL. III. 



opinion did not prevail, and the judgment of the 
commissioners upon this point was confirmed by 
his Majesty in council. 

It behoved Mr. Belcher, the governor of both 
provinces, (o carry an even hand. It happened, 
that the general court of the Massachusetts, whilst 
it sat at Salisbury on the occasion of this con 
troversy, made him a grant of SOO/. currency, in 
consideration of the deficiency of their former 
grants, for his salary and his extraordinary expence 
and trouble in attending the court at a distance from 
his house and family. Soon after this grant, he 
adjourned the general courts of both provinces, 
in order to their determining whether to abide 
by the result of the commissioners or to appeal 
from it, but the court of New Hampshire was 
adjourned to a day or two after the Massachusetts 
court, and it was said they were prevented entering 
tlie appeal within the time limited. He did not 
care that cither assembly should do any business 
when he was absent, and therefore intended first to 
finish the Massachusetts business, and immediately 
after proceed to New Hampshire. 

This afforded matter of complaint from that 
province, which Mr. Belcher was called upon to 
answer, and it was determined the complaint was 
well founded ; and it being urged that the 800/. 
was intended as a bribe to influence him to this 
measure, the Massachusetts thought their own 
honour concerned, and joined with him in his 
defence, which perhaps increased the suspicion of 
guilt and hastened his removal. That we may finish 
what relates to the controversy between the two 
provinces, we must take notice of the conduct 
of the Massachusetts upon the receiving his Ma 
jesty s order in council. The lines, by the order, 
were to be run by two surveyors, one on the part of 
each province ; but if either province refused, the 
other was to proceed ex parte. New Hampshire, 
whose highest expectations were exceeded, propos 
ed to join, but were refused by the Massachusetts, 
and thereupon appointed surveyors to run the lines 
of the Massachusetts and province of Maine c:t 
parte. Both lines were complained of as being run 
favourably for New Hampshire : that of the pro 
vince of Maine became a subject of new controversy, 
it having been suggested that the surveyor mistook 
the main branch of the river Newichewannock, 
which if he had pursued would have made five or 
six miles in breadth to the advantage of Massa 
chusetts. This refusal to join proceeded from the 
feeble irresolute state of the minds of the house of 
representatives. Unwilling by any act of their 
own to express their submission to what they call 
ed an unequal t\&amp;gt; cree, they ran the risk of its] 
i 



58 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[being carried into execution still more unequally, 
and yet succeeding houses, by a subsequent long 
continued passive submission, as effectually subject 
ed the province, as if the same had been explicitly 
acknowledged at first. 

(Anno 1738.) After the controversy about the 
governor s salary and the supply of the treasury 
was finished, there seemed to be a general dis 
position to rest, and we hear little of a party in 
opposition to the governor for several years together. 
Whilst the controversy with New Hampshire was 
depending, all of every party engaged in defence 
of the right of the province. Besides, Mr. Cooke, 
who had been many years at the head of the 
popular party, was worn out with service, and 
having been some time in a declining state, died in 
the fall of 1737 ; and the town of Boston were so 
far from an apprehension of danger to their liberties 
that they chose in his stead Mr. Wheelwright, the 
cornmissiary general, who depended upon the 
governor every year for his approbation after 
being elected by the council and house, and in 
1738 three of the representatives of the town had 
the character of friends to government ; but towards 
the end of the year a great clamour arose against 
the governor for adhering to his instruction about 
paper money, and again.st the three representatives 
for their pernicious principles upon ihe subject of 
paper money ; and at the town election for 1739 
three others were chosen in their stead, two of 
them professedly disaffected to the governor and 
promoters of popular measures, the third, although 
of great integrity, and for that reason desirous of 
a fixed currency, yet in his judgment against 
reducing the paper money, and a favourer of 
schemes for preventing its depreciation. 

(Anno 1739.) Many country towns followed 
the example of Boston, and it appeared that a 
majority of the house were of the same principles 
with the town members. After Mr. Belcher s 
arrival, the house, as we have observed, had passed 
a vote for depositing 500/. sterling in the bank of 
England, to be used as they or their successors 
should think proper. This was concurred in 
council, and consented to by the governor. This 
money it was said could not be better applied than 
in soliciting a relaxation of the governor s instruc 
tion concerning paper money, and Mr. Kilby, one 
of the Boston representatives, was chosen agent for 
the house, and a petition was by him presented 
from the house to his Majesty in council, but it had 
no effect. 

A general dread of drawing in all the paper 
money without a substitution of any other instru 
ment of trade in the place of it, disposed a great 



part of the province to favour what was called the 
land bank or manufactory scheme, which was 
begun or rather revived in this year 1739, and 
produced such great and lasting mischiels that a 
particular relation of the rise, progress, and over 
throw of it, may be of use to discourage and 
prevent any attempts of the like nature in future 
ages. By a strange conduct in the general court 
they had been issuing bills of credit for 8 or 10 
years annually for charges of government, and 
being willing to ease each present year, they had 
put off the redemption of the bills as far as they 
could, but the governor being restrained by his 
instruction from going beyond the year 174 1, that 
year was unreasonably loaded with 30 or 40,000/. 
sterling taxes, which, according to the general 
opinion of the people, it was impossible to levy, 
not only on account of the large sum, but because 
all the bills in the province were but just sufficient 
to pay it, and there was very little silver or gold, 
which by an act of government was allowed to be 
paid for taxes as equivalent to the bills. A scheme 
was laid before the general court by a person of 
eminence, and then one of the representatives of 
Boston, in which it was proposed to borrow in 
England upon interest, and to import into the 
province, a sum in silver equal to all the bills 
then extant, and therewith to redeem them from the 
possessors and furnish a currency for the inhabi 
tants, and to repay the silver at distant periods, 
which would render the burden of taxes tolerable 
by an equal division on a number of future years, 
and would prevent the distress of trade by the loss 
of the only instrument, the bills of credit, without 
another provided in its place. But this proposal 
was rejected. One great frailty of human nature, 
an inability or indisposition to compare a distant, 
though certain inconvenience or distress with a 
present convenience or delight, was said by some 
strangers, who came hither from Europe, to be 
prevalent in Americans, so as to make it one of 
their distinguishing characteristics. Be that as 
it may, it is certain that at this time a great num 
ber of private persons, alleging (hat the preceding 
general court having .suffered the province to be 
brought into distress, from Avhich it was not in the 
power of their successors to afford relief, the royal 
instruction being a bar to any future emissions of 
bills until all that were then extant should be 
redeemed, resolved to interpose. Royal instruc 
tions were no bar to the proceedings of private 
persons. The project of a bank in the year J714 
was revived. 

(Anno 1740.) The projector of that bank now 
put himself at the head of 7 or 800 persons,] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



59 



[some few of rank and good estate, but generally of 
low condition among the plebeians and of small 
estate, and many of them perhaps insolvent. This 
notable company were to give credit to 150,000/. 
lawful money, to be issued in bills, each person 
being to mortgage a real estate in proportion to the 
sums he subscribed and took out, or to give bond 
with two sureties, but personal security was not to 
be taken for more than 100/. from any one person. 
Ten directors and a treasurer were to be chosen by 
the company. Every subscriber or partner was 
to pay three per cent, interest for the sum taken 
out, and five per cent, of the principal, and he 
that did not pay bills might pay the produce and 
manufacture of the province at such rates as the 
directors from time to time should set, and they 
should commonly pass in lawful money. The 
pretence was, that by thus furnishing a medium 
and instrument of trade, not only the inhabitants 
in general would be better able to procure the pro 
vince bills of credit for their taxes, but trade, fo 
reign and inland, would revive and flourish. The 
fate of the project was thought to depend upon the 
opinion which the general court should form of it. 
It was necessary therefore to have a house of re 
presentatives well disposed. Besides the 800 per 
sons subscribers, the needy part of the province 
in general favoured the scheme. One of their 
votes will go as far in popular elections as one of 
the most opulent. The former are most numerous, 
and it appeared that by far the majority of the re 
presentatives for 1740 were subscribers to or fa 
vourers of the scheme, and they have ever since 
been distinguished by the name of the Land Bank 
House. 

Men of estates, and the principal merchants in 
the province, abhorred the project and refused to 
receive the bills, but great numbers of shopkeepers 
who had lived for a long time before upon the 
fraud of a depreciating currency, and many small 
traders, gave credit to the bills. The directors, it 
was said, by a vote of the company, became 
traders, and issued just what bills they thought 
proper, without any fund or security for their ever 
being redeemed. They purchased every sort of 
commodity, ever so much a drug, for the sake of 
pushing off their bills, and by one means or other 
a large sum, perhaps 50 or 60,000/. was abroad. 
To lessen the temptation to receive the bills, a 
company of merchants agreed to issue their notes 
or bills, redeemable by silver and gold at distant 
periods, much like the scheme in 1733, and at 
tended with no better effect. The governor ex 
erted himself to blast this fraudulent undertaking, 



the land bank. Not only such civil and military 
officers as were directors or partners, but all who 
received or paid any of the bills, were displaced. 
The governor negatived the person chosen speaker 
of the house, being a director of the bank, and 
afterwards negatived 13 of the new-elected coun 
sellors who were directors or partners in or re 
puted favourers of the scheme. But all was in 
sufficient to suppress it. Perhaps the major part, 
in number, of the inhabitants of the province, 
openly or secretly, were well-wishers to it. One of 
the directors afterwards was said to acknowledge, 
that although he entered in the company with a 
view to the public interest, yet when he found 
what power and influence they had in all public 
concerns, he was convinced it was more than be 
longed to them, more than they could make a good 
use of, and therefore unwarrantable. Many of the 
most sensible discreet persons in the province saw 
a general confusion at hand. The authority of 
parliament to controul all public and private per 
sons and proceedings in the colonies was, in that 
day, questioned by nobody. Application was 
therefore made to parliament for an act to sup 
press the company, which, notwithstanding the 
opposition made by their agent, was very easily 
obtained; and therein it was declared, that the act 
of the sixth of King George I. chap. 18, did, 
does, and shall extend to the colonies and planta 
tions in America. It was said the act of George I. 
when it passed, had no relation to America, but 
another act 20 years after gave it a force even from 
the passing it, which it never could have had 
without. This was said to be an instance of the 
transcendent power of parliament. Although the 
company was dissolved, yet the act of parliament 
gave the possessors of the bills a right of action 
against every partner or director for the sums ex 
pressed, with interest. The company were in 
amaze. At a general meeting some, it was said, 
were for running all hazards, although the act sub 
jected them to a praemunire; but the directors had 
more prudence, and advised them to declare that 
they considered themselves dissolved, and met only 
to consult upon some method of redeeming their 
bills from the possessors, which every man engaged 
to endeavour in proportion to his interest, and to 
pay into the directors, or some of them, to burn or 
destroy. Had the company issued their bills at 
the value expressed in the face of them, they would 
have had no reason to complain of being obliged 
to redeem them at the same rate, but as (his was 
not the case in general, and many of the possessors 
of the bills had acquired them for half their value,] 



60 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[as expressed, equity could not be done ; and so far 
as respected the company perhaps the parliament 
was not very anxious, the loss they sustained being 
but a just penalty for their unwarrantable under 
taking-, if it had been properly applied. Had not 
the parliament interposed, the province would 
have been in the utmost confusion, and the au 
thority of government entirely iu the land bank 
company. 

Whilst Mr. Belcher, by his vigorous opposition 
to the land bank, was rendering himself obnoxi 
ous to one half the people of the province, mea 
sures were pursuing in England for his removal 
from the government. Besides the attempts which 
we have mentioned from New Hampshire, which 
had never been laid aside, there had always been 
u disaffected party in Massachusetts, who had been 
using what interest they had in England against 
him. Lord Wilmington, president of the coun 
cil, the speaker of the house of commons, and Sir 
Charles Wager, first lord of the admiralty, all had 
a favourable opinion of Mr. Belcher, so had Mr. 
Holden, who was at the head of the dissenters in 
England, and all, upon one occasion or another, 
had appeared for him. 

The most unfair and indirect measures were used 
with each of these persons to render Mr. Belcher 
obnoxious and odious to them. The first instance 
was several years before this time. A letter was 
sent to Sir Charles Wager in the name of five per 
sons, whose hands were counterfeited, with an in 
sinuation that Mr. Belcher encouraged the de 
struction of the pine-trees reserved for masts for 
the navy, and suffered them to be cut into logs 
for boards. Forgeries of this sort strike us with 
more horror than false insinuations in conversation, 
and perhaps are equally mischievous in their ef 
fects. The latter may appear the less criminal, be 
cause abundantly more common. 

An anonymous letter was sent to Mr. Holden, 
but the contents of it declared, that it was the let 
ter of many of the principal ministers of New 
England, who were afraid to publish their names 
lest Mr. Belcher should ruin them. The charge 
against him was, a secret undermining the Congre 
gational interest, in concert with commissary Price 
and Dr. Cutler, whilst at the same time he pretended 
to Mr. Holden and the other dissenters in England 
to have it much at heart. To remove suspicion of 
fraud, the letter was superscribed in writing either 
in imitation of Dr. Colman s hand, a correspon 
dent of Mr. Holden, or, which is more probable, a 
cover of one of his genuine letters had been taken 
off by a person of not an unblemished character, 



to whose care it was committed, and made use of 
to inclose the spurious one. Truth and right are 
more frequently, in a high degree, violated in po 
litical contests and animosities than upon any other 
occasion. It was well known that nothing would 
more readily induce a person of so great virtue as 
the speaker to give up Mr. Belcher than an in 
stance of corruption and bribery. The New 
Hampshire agents therefore furnished him with the 
votes of the Massachusetts assembly, containing 
the grant of 800/. and evidence of the adjourn 
ment of New Hampshire assembly, alleged to be 
done in consequence; nor was he undeceived until 
it was too late. 

Mr. Wilks, the Massachusetts agent, who was 
in great esteem with Lord Wilmington, and was 
really a person of a fair upright mind, had pre 
vented any impressions to Mr. Belcher s prejudice, 
but it unluckily happened that the land bank 
company employed Richard Partridge, brother by 
marriage to Mr. Belcher, as their agent. He had 
been many years agent for his brother, w r l&amp;gt;ic4i fact 
was well known to his lordship, but, from an ex 
pectation of obtaining the sole agency of the pro 
vince by the interest of the prevailing party there, 
engaged zealously in opposing the petitions to the 
house of commons, and gave out bills at the door 
of the house. It was said that all Mr. Belcher s 
opposition to the scheme, in the province, was 
mere pretence ; had he been in earnest, .his agent 
in England would never venture to appear in. sup 
port of it, and this was improved with Lord Wil 
mington to induce him to give up Mr. Belcher, 
and it succeeded. Still the removal was delayed 
one week after another, two gentlemen from the 
Massachusetts continually soliciting. At length, 
it being known that Lord Euston s election for 
Coventry was dubious, one of these gentlemen 
undertook to the Duke of Grafton to secure the 
election, provided Mr. Belcher might immediately 
be removed, and, to accomplish his design, he re 
presented to Mr. Maltby, a large dealer in Coven 
try st nfts and a zealous dissenter, that Mr. Belcher 
was, with the Episcopal clergy, conspiring the ruin 
of the Congregational interest in New England, and 
unless he was immediately removed it would be ir 
recoverably lost ; that the Duke of Grafton had 
promised, if Lord Euston s election could be se 
cured, it should be done ; that letters to his friends 
in Coventry would infallibly secure it ; that he 
could not better employ his interest than in the 
cause of God and of religion. Maltby swallowed 
the bait, used all his interest for Lord Euston, the 
two gentlemen spent three weeks at Coventry, and j. 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



61 



[having succeeded agreeable to the Duke s promise, 
Mr. Belcher was removed a day or two after their 
return. This account was received from Mr. 
Maltby himself, who lamented that he had suf 
fered himself to be so easily imposed on. 

A few weeks longer delay would have baffled all 
the schemes. The news arrived of his negativing 
13 counsellors, and displacing a great number of 
officers concerned in the land bank, and his zeal 
and fortitude were highly applauded when it was 
too late. An American who was in London at this 
time, has given us some very full information con 
cerning these facts. Certainly, in public employ 
ments no man ought to be condemned from the re 
ports and accusations of a party, without sufficient 
opportunity given himtoexculpatehimself; a plan 
tation governor especially, who, be he without guile, 
or a consummate politician, will infallibly have a 
greater or lesser number disaffected to him. 

Mr. Shirley, successor to Mr. Belcher, was a 
gentleman of Sussex, bred in the law, and had 
been in office in the city, but having prospect of a 
numerous offspring, was advised to remove to Bos 
ton in the Massachusetts, where he had resided six 
or eight years and acquired a general esteem ; and 
if there must be a change, it was said to be as ac 
ceptable to have it in his favour as any person 
whosoever. His lady was then in London and 
had obtained the promise of the collector s place 
for the port of Boston,, and would have preferred it 
to the government, but a strong interest being made 
for Mr. Frankland, since Sir Henry Frankland, 
there was no way of providing for both, except by 
giving the government to Mr. Shirley. 

The news came to Boston the first week in July. 
Mr. Shirley was at Providence in Rhode island 
government, counsel for the Massachusetts before 
a court of commissioners appointed to settle the 
line between the two governments. As most of the 
public documents and records of that time are 
burnt, we cannot give so particular an account of 
the proceedings of those commissioners as other 
wise we should have done. It is certain that for 
divers years past the only part in controversy be 
tween the two governments was a small gore of 
land between Attleborough in the Massachusetts 
and the old township of Providence. A great part 
of the Massachusetts assembly wished it might be 
ceded to Rhode Island, but a few tenacious men, 
who do not always regard consequences, influenced 
a majority against it. Besides a settlement made 
by commissioners in 1664 or 1665, another settle 
ment had been made or the old one confirmed in 
1708, but Rhode Island, encouraged by the ill 
success of the Massachusetts in the controversy 



with New Hampshire, applied to his Majesty to 
appoint commissioners to settle the line between 
the two governments. The consent or submission 
of the Massachusetts to such appointment was not 
thought necessary, and, if they would not appear, 
the commissioners were to proceed ex parte. The 
Massachusetts assembly thought proper to appear 
by their committee, having no apprehensions the 
controversy would turn, in the judgment of the 
commissioners, upon a point never before relied 
upon, viz. that the colony of New Plymouth hav 
ing no charter from the crown, Rhode Island 
charter must be the sole rule of determining the 
boundary, although the patent from the council of 
Plymouth to Bradford and associates was prior to it. 

(Anno 174:1.) The colony of New Plymouth 
was a government dc facto, and considered by 
King Charles as such in his letters and orders to 
them before and after the grant of Rhode Island 
charter, and when the incorporation was made of 
New Plymouth with Massachusetts, &amp;c. the natu 
ral and legal construction of the province charter 
seems to be, that it should have relation to the time 
when the several governments incorporated respec 
tively, in fact, became governments. A gentle 
man of the council of New York had great influ 
ence at the board of commissioners. The argu 
ment which had been made use of in former con 
troversies, that Massachusetts was too extensive, 
and the other governments they were contending 
with, of which New York was one, were too con 
tracted, was now revived. To the surprise of Mas 
sachusetts, a line was determined, which not only 
took from them the gore formerly in dispute, but 
the towns of Bristol, Tiverton, and Little Comp- 
ton, and great part of Swansey and Barrington. 
An appeal was claimed, and allowed to his Ma 
jesty in council, where, after lying four or five 
years, the decree of the court of commissioners 
was confirmed. In the prosecution and defence 
of this title it has been said, that some material evi 
dence was never produced which would have sup 
ported the Massachusetts claim. 

Mr. Shirley found the affairs of the province in 
a perplexed state. The treasury was shut, and 
could not be opened without some deviation from 
the royal instructions, the bills of credit were re 
duced, and nothing substituted as a currency in 
their stead, the land bank party carried eVery 
point in the house, there seemed to be a necessity 
of securing them, the great art was to bring fhcru 
over to his measures, and yet not give in to their- 
measures so as to lose his interest with the rest of 
the province and with the ministry in England. 
Some of the principal of them, who knew their own} 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[importance, were willing to have some assurance 
of favour from him, at the same time they en 
gaged to do every thing to serve him. The first 
step, on their part, was the advancement of the 
governor s salary to the full value of WOOL ster 
ling per annum. This had been most unjustifiably 
evaded all the latter part of Mr. Belcher s admi 
nistration, by granting a sum in bills of credit 
without a due regard to their depreciation. Mr. 
Kilby, who had been very active for Mr. Shirley s 
interest and against Mr. Belcher, in England, was 
chosen agent for the province in England, and 
Mr. Wilks, who had been agent the whole of the 
last administration, was laid aside. Mr. Auch- 
muty, who had been one of the land bank di 
rectors, was joined with Mr. Kilby in the affair of 
the Rhode Island line. A grant of about 2001. 
sterling was made to John Sharpe, Esq. for 
his account of charge in defending Mr. Belcher 
against New Hampshire s complaint to the king 
in council. This had been repeatedly refused in 
Mr. Belcher s time, which gave great offence to 
Mr. Sharpe. It was thought extraordinary that 
Mr. Shirley should make it a point with the land 
bankers that this debt for his predecessor should 
be paid ; but to take Mr. Sharpe off from Mr. 
Belcher and engage him for Mr. Shirley, the 
friends and solicitors for the latter in England had 
engaged that if he was appointed governor Mr. 
Sliarpe s account should be paid. 

But the grand affair to settle was that of the 
bills of credit. The instruction was express, not 
to consent to any act which should continue the 
bills beyond the time fixed for their being brought 
in. If this was complied with, a tax must have 
been made for the whole sum extant in that year, 
1741. This it was said would be a burden that 
the people would never bear. Mr. Shirley was 
sensible that the intent of his instruction was the 
prevention of a depreciating currency. No mat 
ter how large a sum in bills was current, if their 
value could be secured. If the spirit of the in 
struction could be preserved, an exact conformity 
to the letter would not be required. Every 
scheme for fixing the value of the bills had failed. 
A new project was reported by a committee of the 
house and accepted, and afterwards concurred by 
the council and consented to by the governor. 
This was a scheme to establish an ideal measure in 
all trade and dealings, let the instrument be what 
it would. The act which passed the court de 
clared, that all contracts should be understood pay 
able in silver at 65. 8d. the ounce, or gold in pro 
portion. Bills of a new form were issued, 20s. of 
which expressed in the face of the bill three ounces 



of silver, and they were to be received accordingly 
in all public and private payments, with this sav 
ing, that if they should depreciate in their value, 
an addition should be made to all debts, as much 
as the depreciation from the time of contract to the 
time of payment. How to ascertain the deprecia 
tion from time to time was the great difficulty in. 
framing the act. To leave it to a common jury 
would never do. There was some doubt whether 
a house of representatives would be wholly un 
biassed. At length it was agreed that the eldest 
council in each county should meet once a year 
and ascertain the depreciation. This is said to 
have been the scheme of Colonel Stoddard of 
Northampton, a gentleman of good sense and 
great virtue, who probably saw the defects, but 
hoped to substitute a lesser evil in the place of a 
greater. 

This at best must have been a very partial cure. 
It did not prevent the loss from the depreciation of 
the bills in those persons hands through which 
they were continually passing. All debts which 
were contracted and paid between the periods when 
the value of the bills were fixed annually, could 
not be affected by such fixing, and unless in debts 
of long standing, which the debtor could not pay 
without an action at law, demand was not ordi 
narily made for depreciation, and what rendered 
it of little effect in all other cases, the counsellors 
appointed to estimate the depreciation never had 
firmness enough in any instance to make the full 
allowance, but when silver and exchange had rose 
20 per cent, or more, an addition was made of 
four or five only. The popular cry was against 
it, and one year, when Nathaniel Hubbard, Esq. 
the eldest counsellor for the county of Bristol, a 
gentleman of amiable character and who filled 
the several posts he sustained with applause, en 
deavoured to approach nearer to a just allowance 
than had been made in former years, he felt the 
resentment of the house, who left him out of the 
council the next election. In short, the act neither 
prevented the depreciation of the bills nor afforded 
relief in case of it, and was of no other service than 
to serve as a warning, when an act passed for the 
establishing a fixed currency a few years after, to 
leave nothing to be done by any person or bodies 
of men, or even future legislatures, to give the act 
its designed effect, but in the act itself to make full 
provision for its execution in every part. 

Even this act which, with its fair appearance, 
justified Mr. Shirley in departing from his instruc 
tion, and afforded a supply of the treasury for the 
payment of debts and future support of govern 
ment, could not have been obtained if he had] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[not prevailed with the land bank party, con 
trary to the inclinations of many of them, to join 
in promoting it. 

He made the.m return, by consenting to any new 
elections that were made of any of them into the 
council, by restoring now and then one and another 
to the posts they had been deprived of, which, 
though it was done by degrees, caused many who 
condemned the land bank and all who were con 
cerned in it, to be very free in their censures 
upon it. 

But the great favour they expected was re 
lief from the severity of the act of parliament. 
This was to be touched with great tenderness and 
delicacy. Every person concerned was liable to 
the demands of the possessors of the bills. 1 f large 
demands should be made upon any particular per 
sons, it seemed but just that the rest should con 
tribute their proportion ; but no demand was given 
by the act to one partner against another in such 
case. A bill was therefore prepared with a pro 
fessed design to carry the act of parliament equi 
tably into execution. Three commissioners were 
appointed by the bill, with power to tax all who 
had been concerned in the scheme in proportion 
to their interest in it, and with the moneys thus 
raised to redeem the company s bills from the pos 
sessors, and after the redemption of the bills to 
make an equitable adjustment between the mem 
bers and the company. Great care was taken to 
avoid all opposition to the act of parliament ; Mr. 
Shirley however did not think proper to sign the 
bill until he had sent a copy of it to England, and 
received directions concerning it. After it had 
passed both houses, to oblige the principal land 
bankers, he continued the session of the court by 
long repeated adjournments many months, and be 
fore the expiration of the year gave his consent to 
the bill. Having thus secured a considerable 
party in the government without losing those who 
had been in opposition to them, he rendered his 
administration easy, and generally obtained from 
the assembly such matters as he recommended to 
them. 

From the Spanish war in 1740, a French war 
was expected every year to follow. Castle Wil 
liam, the key of the province, was not only effec 
tually repaired, but a new battery of 20 forty-two 
pounders, which takes the name of Shirley bat 
tery, was added to the works, with a larger maga 
zine than any before, and a large supply of 
powder, all at the expence of the province. The 
cannon, mortars, shot, and other stores, were the 
bounty of the crown. The forts upon the fron 
tiers were also put into good order, and upon a re 



presentation from Mr. Mascarene, commandrr-in- 
chief at Annapolis in Nova Scotia, of the defence 
less state of that province and the d;mger they were 
in from the enemy, Mr. Shirley, in 1744, pre 
vailed upon the Massachusetts assembly to vote, 
pay, &amp;c. for 200 men which were sent there, and 
who were the probable means of saving that coun 
try from falling into the enemy s hands. 

(Anno 1744.) But the great event in this ad 
ministration was the siege and reduction of Louis- 
burgh. Canso had been surprised and taken by 
900 men under Duvivier from Louisburgh, before 
the war with France was known at Boston. With 
another party, Duvivier made an attempt the same 
summer upon Annapolis, but was disappointed. 
Many good vessels had been taken by the French 
men of war and privateers, and carried into Louis- 
burgh. The fishermen had no intention to go 
upon their voyages the next summer, and every 
branch of trade, it was supposed, must be carried 
on by vessels under convoy. It was the general 
voice, in the fall of the year, that Louisburgh 
must be taken, but nobody supposed that the 
united force of the colonies could take it ; applica 
tion must be made to his Majesty for sea and land 
forces sufficient for the purpose. As winter ap 
proached, it began to be suggested that it was not 
improbable the place might be surprised or taken 
by a coup de main, the inhabitants and garrison 
being shut up within the walls. Some of the gar 
rison at Canso, who had been prisoners and who 
professed to be well acquainted with the fortifica 
tions and garrison at Louisburgh, favoured this 
opinion, and declared that in whiter the snow often 
lay in drifts or banks against a particular part of 
the wall, where there were no embrasures nor any 
cannon mounted ; that the crust would bear a 
man s weight, and in that part at least, the walls 
might be scaled, and perhaps by the help of lad 
ders it would not be difficult in other parts ; that 
the grand battery, intended for defence in case of 
an attack by sea, would not be capable of long 
resisting if attacked by land. Mr. Vaughan, "who 
had been a trader at Louisburgh, was very sanguine 
also that the place might be taken by surprise, 
and it was generally agreed that if they should be 
mistaken, yet it would not be possible for the 
enemy, who were scant of provisions, to stand a 
siege until the time the supplies usually arrive to 
them from France ; and to prevent any chance 
vessels from entering, a sufficient naval force might 
be provided to cruise before the harbour. 

Whilst this was the conversation abroad, Mr. 
Shirley was diligently inquiring of those persons 
who had been traders, and of others who had] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[been prisoners (here, into the condition of the 
place, the usual time ibr the arrival of supplies 
from Europe, the practicability of cruising oft 
the harbour, &amp;c. He had before wrote to the 
ministry and represented the necessity of a naval 
force early in the spring for the preservation of 
Annapolis. If this should arrive, he might be 
able to prevail with the commander to cover our 
forces with it. Commodore Warren was with 
several ships at the Leeward islands. It was pos 
sible, when he was acquainted with the expedition, 
he would come with or send part of his force to 
strengthen it. These were the only chances for a 
naval strength sufficient to cope with a single ca 
pital French ship that might be bound to Louis- 
burgh in the spring. The ministry indeed would, 
by express, be immediately acquainted with the 
expedition, if engaged in, but Europe was at too 
great distance to expect timely aid from thence. 
The plan of the expedition was, a land force of 
4000 men in small transports to proceed to Canso, 
and the first favourable opportunity to land at 
Chapeaurouge bay, with cannon, mortars, ammu 
nition, and warlike stores, and all other necessaries 
for carrying on a siege ; and to prevent a supply of 
provision and stores to the enemy, several vessels 
were to cruise off the harbour of Louisburgh, as 
soon as the season of the year would permit. An 
estimate was made of all the naval force which 
could be procured in this and the neighbouring 
colonies, the largest vessel not exceeding 20 guns. 
With this land and sea force, it was said there was 
good chance for success, and if "the men of war 
should arrive, which there was good reason to 
hope for, there was all imaginable grounds to de 
pend upon the reduction of the place. 

(^w01745.) The general court being sittingthe 
beginning of January, the governor sent a message 
to the two houses to let them know he had something 
to communicate to them of very great importance, 
but of such a nature that the publishing it, before 
they should come to any resolution upon it, might 
wholly defeat the design ; he therefore desired they 
would lay themselves under an oath of secrecy for 
such time as each house should think proper. 
This they did, although it was the first instance in 
the house of representatives, without any scruple, 
and then he communicated to them his proposed 
plan of the expedition. Many of the members, 
who had heard little or nothing of the conversation 
upon the subject, were struck with amazement at 
the proposal. The undertaking was thought to 
be vastly too great, if there \vas a rational prospect 
of success. However, in deference to the recom 
mendation of the governor, a committee of the two 

J 



houses was appointed to consider the proposal. 
Here the proposal was for several days deliberated 
and weighed. Louisburgh, if left in the hands of 
the French, would infallibly prove the Dunkirk of 
New England : their trade had always been incon 
siderable, their fishery was upon the decline, and 
for several years past they had bought fish of the 
English at Canso cheaper than they could catch 
and cure it themselves, both trade and fishery they 
might well lay aside, and by privateering enrich 
themselves with the spoils of New England ; and 
to all these dangers was added that of losing Nova 
Scotia, which would cnuse an increase of 6 or 
8000 enemies in an instant. The garrison of 
Louisburgh was disaffected, provisions were scant, 
the works mouldering and decayed, the governor 
an old man unskilled in the art of war ; this there 
fore was the only time for success, another year the 
place would be impregnable. There was nothing 
to fear from the forces at Louisburgh, before addi 
tional strength could arrive from France they 
would be forced to surrender. There were, it must 
be owned, no ships of strength sufficient to match 
the French men of war, unless perhaps a single 
ship should fall in by herself, and in that case five 
or six of the state might be a match for her; but 
there was no probability of men of war so early, 
and it was very probable English men of war from 
Europe or the W. Indies would arrive before them. 
There was always uncertainty in war, a risk must 
be run, if the state failed it might be able to grap 
ple with the disappointment, although it should 
bear the whole expence ; but if it succeeded, not 
only (he coasti of New England would be free from 
molestation, but so glorious an acquisition would 
be of the greatest importance to Great Britain, and 
might give peace to Europe, and it might depend 
upon a reimbursement of the A\hole charge it had 
been at. 

On the other hand it was replied, that the state 
had better suffer in its trade, than by so expensive 
a measure deprive itself of all means of carrying 
on any future trade ; that it was capable of an 
noying them in their fishery, as much as they 
could annoy it in its own, and in a short time, both 
sides would be willing to leave the fishery un 
molested ; that the accounts given of the works and 
the garrison at Louisburgh could not be depended 
upon, and it was not credible that any part of the 
walls should be unguarded and exposed to sur 
prise; that instances of disaffection rising to mutiny 
were rare, and but few instances were to be met 
with in history where such expectation has not 
failed. The garrison at Lonisburgh consisted of 
regular experienced troops, who, though unequal] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[in number, would be more than a mutch in open 
field for all the raw unexperienced militia which 
could be sent from New England ; that 20 cruizers 
at that season of the year would not prevent sup 
plies going into the harbour, it being impossible 
to keep any station for any length of time, and the 
weather being frequent lj so thick, that a vessel 
was not to be discovered at a quarter of a mile s 
distance ; that there was no room to expect any 
men of war for the cover of the troops ; that if only 
one 60-gun ship should arrive from France, or the 
French islands, she would be more than a match 
for all the armed vessels that could be provided, the 
transports at Chapeaurouge bay would be every 
one destroyed, and the army upon Cape Breton 
obliged to submit to the mercy of the French ; that 
the state would be condemned in England for en 
gaging in such an affair without their direction or 
approbation, and that it would be nowhere pitied, 
its misfortunes proceeding from its own rash and 
wild measures. To these arguments were added the 
uncertainty of raising a sufficient number of men, 
or of being able to procure provisions, warlike 
stores, and transports, discouragement from the 
season of the year, when frequently, for many days 
together, no business could be clone out of doors. 
Money indeed could be furnished, or bills of credit 
in lieu of it, but the infallible consequence would 
be the sinking the value of the &amp;gt;vhole currency, to 
\vhat degree no man could determine, but probably 
in proportion to the sum issued ; and finally, if the 
plan should succeed, a general national benefit would 
be the consequence, in which the state would be but 
small sharers, and far short of the vast expence of 
treasure and perhaps of lives in obtaining it, and if 
it failed, such a shock would be given to the pro 
vince that half a century would not recover it to 
its former state. After mature deliberation, a 
majority of the committee disapproved the pro 
posal, and their report was accepted, and for a few 
days all thoughts of the expedition with the mem 
bers of the court were laid aside. In the mean 
time, the governor, who wished his proposal had 
been agreed to, but did not think it proper to press 
it any further by message or by privately urging 
the members, either directed or encouraged the 
carrying about a petition which was signed by 
many of the merchants in the town of Boston, but 
principally by those of Salem and Marblehead, 
directed to the house of representatives, or to the 
two houses, praying for reasons set forth, among 
others the saving the fishery from ruin, they would 
re- consider their vote and agree to the governor s 
proposal of an expedition against Louisburgh. A 
second committee, appointed upon this petition, re- 

TOL. III. 



ported in favour of it, and the 26th of January, 
their report came before the house, who spent the 
day in debating it, and at night a vote was carried 
in favour of it by a majority of one voice only. 
Never was any affair deliberated upon with greater 
calmness and moderation, the governor indeed 
laid the affair before thp court, but left the mem 
bers free to use their judgment without any solici 
tation, and there appeared no other division than 
what was caused by a real difference in opinion 
consulting the true interest of the province. 

The point once settled, there was immediately a 
union of both parties in the necessary measures for 
carrying the design into execution, those who had 
opposed it before being employed upon committees, 
and exciting themselves with zeal equal to that of 
the principal promoters. An embargo was laid 
upon every harbour in the province, and messen 
gers were immediately dispatched to the several 
governments, as far as Pennsylvania, to entreat an 
embargo on their ports, and that they would join in 
the expedition. All excused themselves from any 
share in the adventure, except Connecticut, who 
agreed to raise 500 men, New Hampshire 300, and 
Rhode Island SOO. Connecticut and Rhode 
Island also consented their colony sloops should 
be employed as cruisers. A small privateer ship, 
about 200 tons, and a snow of less burden, belong 
ing to Newport, were hired there by the Massa 
chusetts; a new snow, Captain Rouse, aship, Cap 
tain Snelling, were taken into the service at Boston, 
which, with a snow, Captain Smethurst, and a brig, 
Captain Fletcher, three sloops, Captains Sanders, 
Donahcw, and Bosch, and a ship of 20 guns, pur 
chased on the stocks, Captain Tyng the commo 
dore, made the whole naval force. 

From the day the vote passed until the place was 
reduced, a series of favourable incidents contri 
buted to the g-eneral success. They will be obvious 
enough in the course of the narrative, and will not 
require being specially remarked. The time for 
preparing was short. The winter proved so fa 
vourable that all sorts of out-door business was 
carried on as well and with as great dispatch as at 
any other season of the year. In the appointment 
of a general officer one qualification was considered 
as essential, that he should be acceptable to the 
body of the people, the enlistment depended upon 
this circumstance. It was not easy to find a per 
son, thus qualified, willing to accept the trust. 
Colonel Pepperell, having the offer from the go 
vernor, was rather pressed into the service than vo 
luntarily engaged. Besides a very great landed 
interest, he was largely concerned in mercantile af 
fairs, which must necessarily suffer by his absence;] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[and this being generally known had no small in 
fluence, from the example, with inferior officers 
and even private soldiers, to quit their lesser af 
fairs for a season, for the service of their country. 
Many of the private soldiers were freeholders, and 
many more sons of wealthy farmers, who could 
have no other views in consenting 1 to the enlistment 
of their children than the public interest. 

Mr. Shirley had set his heart so much upon the 
expedition, that many points were conceded by him 
which he would not have given up at any other 
time, and the people of the province submitted to 
compulsory measures from the government, which 
at another time would have been grievous and not 
very patiently borne. Such officers were nomi 
nated by the governor as the people proposed or 
called for, because they were most likely to enlist 
men. Instead of a commissary-general, an officer 
appointed by the governor, a committee of war was 
chosen by the two houses out of their own mem 
bers. Nothing further was heard of the royal in 
struction against bills of credit. Such sums as the 
service called for, and to be redeemed at such pe 
riods as the house thought proper, were consented 
to by the governor. It soon appeared that these 
sums would vastly exceed what had been com 
puted, and many declared that had aright estimate 
been made they should never have voted for the 
expedition, but it was now too late to go back. It 
was found also, that transports and vessels of war 
could not be engaged unless the government would 
become insurers, which, although it occasioned no 
additional ex pence at first, yet, in case of ill success, 
.would greatly increase the public debt and dis 
tress. The committee of war were likewise con 
vinced that a sufficiency of provisions, clothing, 
and warlike stores, could not be procured within 
the province. Whosoever was possessed of any 
of these articles, by an act or order of government, 
his property was subjected to the committee, who 
set such price as they judged equitable, and upon 
refusal to deliver, entered warehouses, cellars, &amp;c. 
by a warrant for that purpose to the sheriff, and 
took possession. In the course of the preparation, 
many vessels unexpectedly arrived with more or 
less of each of these articles, and after all, the army 
was poorly enough provided. Ten cannon, 18 
pounders, were obtained upon loan, not without 
difficulty, from New York, otherwise Mr. Shirley 
himself seemed to doubt if the plan could proceed. 
Some dependence was placed upon cannon from 
the grand battery v but this was too manifest a dis 
posal of the skin before the bear was caught. By 
force of a general exertion in all orders of men, the 
.armament was ready, and the general, on board the 



Shirley snow, Captain Rouse, with the transports 
under her convoy, sailed from Nantasket the 24th 
of March, and arrived at Canso the 4th of April. 
The Massachusetts land forces consisted of 3250 
men, exclusive of commission officers. The New 
Hampshire forces, 304, including officers, arrived 
four days before. Those of Connecticut, being 
516, inclusive, did not arrive until the 25th. The 
deputy governor of the colony, Roger Walcot, 
Esq. had the command, and was the second officer in 
the army. Rhode Island waited until a better judg 
ment could be made of the event, their 300 not 
arriving until after the place had surrendered. 
The 23d of March, an express boat, sent to Com 
modore Warren, in the W. Indies, returned to 
Boston. 

As this was a provincial expedition, without 
orders from England, and as his small squadron, 
had been weakened by the loss of the Weymouth, 
Mr. Warren excused himself from any concern in 
the affair. This answer must necessarily strike a 
damp into the governor as well as the general and 
Brigadier Waldo, then next in command, who 
were the only persons in the army made privy to 
it before the fleet sailed. Several of the cruising 
vessels had sailed the middle of March, but they 
could be no protection to the army against two ca 
pital ships ; if they intercepted small vessels, it was 
the most that was expected. A blockhouse, with 
eight cannon, was built at Canso. Whether some 
good reason would not have been given for pro 
ceeding no further than Canso, if there had been 
a disappointment in the expected junction of men 
of war from the several quarters to which notice of 
the expedition had been sent, may well enough be 
made a question. Mr. Shirley hoped, if the re 
duction of Louisburgh was not effected, at least 
Canso would be regained, Nova Scotia preserved, 
the French fishery broke up, and the New Eng 
land and Newfoundland fisheries restored. But 
on the 23d of April, to the great joy of the army, 
arrived at Canso, the Eltham, of 40 guns, from 
New England, by order from Mr. Warren ; and 
on the 23d the commodore himself, in the Superb, 
of 60 guns, with the Launceston and Mermaid of 
40 each, arrived also. This gave great spirits to 
all who had the success of the expedition at heart, 
for although this was not a naval force to enter the 
harbour or annoy the forts, yet it was a cover to 
the army, and equal to any expected force from 
France. It seems that in two or three days after 
the express sailed from the W. Indies for Boston, 
the Hind sloop brought orders to Mr. Warren to 
repair to Boston with what ships could be spared, 
and to concert measures with Mr. Shirley for his"] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



67 



*s general service in N. America. Upon 
the passage to Boston the commodore received in 
telligence that the fleet had sailed for Canso, arid 
meeting with a schooner at sea he sent her to Bos 
ton to acquaint Mr. Shirley that he would proceed 
to Canso, and at the same time sent orders to any 
fillips which might be in thes^ seas to join him. 
The Eltham "was actually under sail with the mast 
fleet when an express sent from Boston with the 
commodore s ortlers arrived at Portsmouth m 
New Hampshire, but being followed and over 
taken by a boat, the captain ordered his convoy 
into port again, and sailed for Canso. After a short 
consultation with the general the men of war sailed 
to cruise before Louisburgh. The cruizers, before 
this, had intercepted several small ve-sels bound in 
there, with W. India goods and provisions, and had 
engaged the Ueuommee, a French ship of 36 guns, 
sent from France with dispatches, and who kept a 
long running fight with the Massachusetts vessels, 
being able with ease to outsail them, and, after two 
or three attempts to enter the harbour, went back 
to France to give an account of what she had met 
with. She fell in with the Connecticut troops, 
under convoy of their own and the Rhode Island 
colony sloops, both which she had strength enough 
to have carried, but, after some damage to the 
llhode Island sloop, she went her way. The forces 
landed at Chapeaurouge bay the 30th of April. 
The transports were discovered early in the morn 
ing from the town, which was the first knowledge 
of any design against them. The cruisers had 
been seen every fair day before the harbour, but 
these were supposed to be privateers in search after 
their trading and fishing vessels. The night before, 
it is said, there was a grand ball at the fort, and 
the company had scarce fallen asleep when they 
were called up by an alarm. Bouladrie, a French 
officer, was sent with 150 men to oppose the 
landing, but the general making a feint of lauding 
at one place, drew the detachment there, and 
this opportunity was taken for lauding 100 men at 
another place without opposition, although they 
were soon after attacked by the detachment, six of 
\vhich were killed on the spot, and about as many 
more, with Bouladrie their leader, were taken pri 
soners : the rest fled to the town, or they would 
soon have fallen into the hands of the Massachusetts, 
who were landing fast one upon the back of another. 
The next morning after they landed, 400 men 
marched round to Uie n. e. harbour, behind the 
Lills, setting fire to all the bouses and store-houses, 
until they came within a mile of the grand battery. 
Some of the store-houses having in them pitch, tar, 
and other combustible stuff, caused such a thick 



smoke, that the garrison were unable to discover 
an enemy, though but a few rods distant, and, 
expecting the body of the army upon them, they 
deserted the fort, having thrown their powder into 
a well, but leaving the cannon and shot for the ser 
vice of the English. A small party of less than 20 
English first came up to the battery, and discover 
ing nosignsof men, suspected a plot, and were afraid 
to enter; at length, it is said, a Cape Cod Indian 
went in alone and discovered the state of it to the 
rest of the party, just as some of the French were 
relanding in order to regain the possession of it. 

The army found they had near two miles to 
transport their cannon, mortars, shot, &amp;c. through 
a morass. This must be done by mere dint of 
labour. Such of the men as had been used to 
drawing pine-trees for masts, and those who had 
the hardiest and strongest bodies, were employed 
in this service. Horses and oxen would have been 
buried in mud and were of no use. Brigadier 
Waldo had the command of the grand battery. 
The French kept firing upon the battery from the- 
town as well as from the island battery, but to little 
purpose, the town being near 2000 yards distant, 
and the island about 1600. A constant fire was 
kept from the grand battery upon the town with 
the 42 pounders. This greatly damaged the 
houses, but caused so great an expence of powder 
that it was thought advisable to stop and reserve 
it for the fascine batteries. Five of these were 
erected, the last the 20th of May, called Tid- 
comb s battery, with five 42 pounders, which did 
as great execution as any. The Massachusetts knew 
nothing of regular approaches, they took the advan 
tage of the night, and when they heard Mr. Bastide s 
proposals for zigzags and epaulements, they made 
merry with the terms, and went on, void of art, in 
their own natural way. Captain Pierce, a brave 
officer, standing at one of these batteries, had his 
bowels shot away by a cannon ball, and lived just 
long enough to say, " it is hard to die." 

Whilst the people of Massachusetts were thus 
busy ashore, the men of war and other vessels were 
cruising off the harbour whenever the weather 
would permit, and the 18th of May the Vigilant, 
a French man of war of 64 guns, having 560 
men on board, and stores of all sorts for the gar 
rison, was met with by the Mermaid, whom she 
attacked, but Captain Douglass, the commander, 
being of unequal force, suffered himself to be 
chased by her until he drew her under the com 
mand of the commodore and the other ships cruis 
ing with him, to whom, or, as some say, to the 
Mermaid, she struck, because she had first met 
with her. This capture gave great joy to the] 
K 2 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[army, not so much for the addition made to the 
naval force, as for the disappointment to the enemy. 
A proposal had been made a few days before, that 
the men of war should anchor in Chapeaurouge 
bay, and that the marines, and as many sailors as 
could be spared, should land and join the army. 
The Vigilant would then have got in, and the siege 
would then have been given over. Affairs were 
now in such a state that the anxiety at Boston was 
much lessened. It was hoped the army might re 
treat with safety whenever it should be determined 
to give over the siege, for Bouladrie, who belonged 
to the town of Louisburgh, and the Marquis de la 
Maison Forte, commander of the Vigilant, who 
was well acquainted with the state of the place, when 
they came to Boston, were sanguine that it would 
hold out longer than the Massachusetts ; and soon 
after we find the news of a fruitless, and perhaps a 
rash attempt upon the island battery by 400 men, 
60 of whom were killed, and 116 taken prisoners. 
The Caesar, Snelling, one of the ships in the pro 
vincial service, arrived at Boston with letters from 
the general, and an application for more men and a 
further supply of powder. The Massachusetts 
agreed, and actually did raise 400 men, and sent 
all the powder that could be purchased, and Con 
necticut raised 200 men, but there were neither 
men nor powder arrived when the siege was 
finished. 

The Princess Mary, of 60, and the Hector, of 
40 guns, unexpectedly had arrived at Boston from 
England, and were immediately sent to join the 
commodore, pursuant to his general orders, and 
arrived before Louisburgh the22d of May. This 
increase of naval force occasioned conjectures, 
some being of opinion, that rather than the siege 
should be raised the ships would attempt lo go in, 
but it was generally supposed the hazard would be 
too great. It was commonly reported that Colonel 
More, of the New Hampshire regiment, offered 
to go on board the Vigilant with iris whole regi 
ment and to lead the van, if, in case of success, 
he might be confirmed in the command of the 
ship. He had been an experienced sea captain, 
and had a very good character. It is certain, an 
attempt with the ships was not then thought ad 
visable. A new battery, about this time, was 
erected upon the light-house point, which being 
well attended by Lieutenant-colonel Gridley, of 
the artillery, did great execution upon the island 
battery, silenced many of the guns, and it was 
expected it would not be long tenable. Soon after, 
viz. June 10th, arrived before Louisburgh the 
Chester, a 50-gun ship, in consequence of the 
dispatches from Mr. Shirley with an account of 



the expedition. The Canterbury and Sunderland, 
two 60-gun ships, sailed with her, and arrived the 
12th. Here was now a fleet of 11 ships, and it 
is said to have been determined the ships should 
make an attack by sea the 18th, while the army 
did the same by land. It is not certain that when 
the day should come some sufficient reason would 
not have been found for a further delay. Those 
who give the most favourable accounts of the 
siege say, " the w. gate was entirely beat down, 
the wall adjoining very much battered, and a 
breach made ten feet from the bottom, the circu 
lar battery of 16 cannon, and the principal one 
against ships almost ruined, the n. e. battery of 
17 cannon damaged, and the men drove from the 
guns, and the w. flank of the king s bastion almost 
demolished." Others say, " the w. gate was de 
faced, and the adjoining curtain, with the flank of 
the king s bastion, were much hurt, but no practi 
cable breach." Whether a general storm was 
really intended upon the 18th or not, it seems the 
French expected it from the preparations on board 
the men of war, and did not incline to stand it ; 
and on the 15th sent a flag of truce to the general, 
desiring a cessation that they might consider of 
articles to be proposed for a capitulation. Time 
was allowed for this purpose until the next morn 
ing, when such articles were offered as were re 
jected by the general and commodore, and others 
offered to the enemy in their stead, which they 
accepted of, and hostages were exchanged, aud 
the next day, the 17th, the city was delivered up. 
Many of the Massachusetts had taken colds and 
many fallen into dysenteries, so that 1500 were taken 
off from their duty at one time, but the weather prov 
ing remarkably fine during the 49 days siege they 
generally recovered. The day after the surrender 
the rains began, and continued ten days incessantly, 
which must have been fatal to many, they having 
nothing better than the wet ground to lodge on; 
and their tents, in general, being insufficient to se 
cure them against a single shower, but in the city 
they found barracks to shelter them. Captain 
Bennet, in a schooner, was sent immediately to 
Boston, and arrived with the great news the 3d of 
July, about one in the morning. The bells of the 
town were ringing by break of day, and the day 
and night following were spent in rejoicing. The 
news flew through the continent. The colonies 
which declined any share in the expence and ha 
zard were sensible they were greatly interested in 
the success. It was allowed every where, that if 
there had been no signal proof of bravery and cou 
rage in time of action, there having been only one 
sally from the town and a few skirmishes with the] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[French and Indians from the woods, in all which 
the men tehaved well ; yet here was the strongest 
evidence of a generous noble public spirit, which 
first induced to the undertaking, and of steadiness 
and firmness of mind in the prosecution of it, the 
labour, fatigue, and other hardships of the siege 
being without parallel in all preceding American 
affairs. A shade was thrown over the imprudence 
at first charged upon the New Englanders. Con 
siderate persons among themselves could not, how 
ever, avoid gratefully admiring the favour of Di 
vine Providence in so great a number of remark 
able incidents which contributed to this success. 
The best use to be made by posterity seems to be, 
not to depend upon special interpositions of Pro 
vidence, because their ancestors have experienced 
them, but to avoid the like imminent dangers, and 
to weigh the probability and improbability of suc 
ceeding in the ordinary course of events. 

The commodore was willing to carry away a full 
share of the glory of this action. It was made a 
question whether the keys of the town should be 
delivered to him or to the general, and whether 
the sea or land forces should first enter. The of 
ficers of the army say they prevailed. The ma 
rines took possession of one or more of the batte 
ries, and sometimes the commodore took the keys 
of the city gates. The command, however, until 
orders should arrive from England, was to be joint, 
and a dispute about precedence to be avoided as 
much as could be. The commodore dispatched 
Mr. Montague, in the Mermaid, to England, with 
intelligence, and the general, the day after, sent 
the Shirley galley, Captain Rouse. The Mer 
maid arrived first. 

It was very happy that disputes arose to no 
height between the sea and land forces during the 
siege. This has often proved fatal. This expe 
dition, having been begun and carried on under a 
commission from a provincial g-overnor, seems to 
be distinguished from ordinary cases, and to leave 
less room for dispute. Whether the land or sea 
force had the greatest share in the acquisition may 
be judged from the relation of facts. Neither 
would have succeeded alone. The army, with 
infinite labour and fatigue to themselves, harass 
ed and distressed the enemy, and, with perseve 
rance a few weeks or days longer, must have com 
pelled a surrender. It is very doubtful whether 
the ships could have lain long enough before the 
walls to have carried the place by storm, or whe 
ther, notwithstanding tiie appearance of a design 
to do it, they would have thought it advisable to 
attempt it ; it is certain they prevented the arrival 



of the Vigilant, thus taking away all hopes of further 
supply and succour, and it is very probable the 
fears of a storm might accelerate the capitulation. 
The loss by the enemy and sickness did not exceed 
101 men. The loss of the snow, Prince of Orange, 
belonging to the province, and supposed to be 
overset, was a heavy blow upon the town of 
Marblehead, the captain and most of the crew be 
longing to that town ; and it is a rare thing for a 
Marblehead man to die without leaving a widovr 
and a number of children surviving. 

As it was a time of year to expect French vessels 
from all parts to Louisburgh, the French flag was 
kept flying to decoy them in. TwoE. India and one 
S. sea ship, supposed to be all together of the value 
of GOOjOOO/. sterling, were taken by the squadron 
at the mouth of the harbour, into which they would 
undoubtedly have entered. The army, at first, 
supposed they had acquired a right to the island of 
Cape Breton and its dependencies, and, until they 
were undeceived by Mr. Shirley, were for dividing 
the territory among the officers and men. With 
greater colour they might have claimed a share 
with the men of war in these rich prizes. Some 
of the officers expected a claim would have been 
laid in, but means were found to divert it, nor was 
any part decreed to the vessels of Avar in the pro 
vince service, except a small sum to the brig Bos 
ton Packet, Captain Fletcher, who being chased by 
the S. sea ship, led her directly under the command 
of the guns of one of the men of war. It seemed 
to be conceded, that as this acquisition was made 
under the commission of the governor of Massa 
chusetts bay, the exercise of government there 
appertained to him until his Majesty s pleasure 
should be known. We know of no precedent in the 
colonies except that of the conquest of Nova 
Scotia, in 1690. It was necessary then to admit 
this principle : the acquisition could not otherwise 
have been retained. Mr. Shirley made a voyage to 
Louisburgh, took the government upon him, pre 
vailed upon a great part of the army to consent 
to remain in garrison over the winter, or until 
regiments which were expected arrived, engaged 
that their pay should be increased and clothing 
provided, and settled other matters to general sa 
tisfaction. 

Duvivicr had been sent to France the winter of 
1741, to solicit a force, not to defend Cape Breton, 
but to conquer Nova Scotia, and accordingly 
sailed the beginning of July with seven ships of 
\var for that purpose, who were to stop at Louis 
burgh. This fleet took a prize bound from Bos 
ton to Loridon, on board which was Lieutenant-"] 



70 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[governor Clark, of New York, and by this means 
they were Informed of the conquest of Louisburgh, 
nnd the strong squadron there ; otherwise some or 
all of them would also have probably fallen into 
the hands of the English. Upon this intelligence 
they went back to France. Thus Nova Scotia no 
doubt was saved by the Massachusetts expedition. 
There would not have been men of war in these 
seas sufficient to match this squadron. 

(Anno 1746.) The reduction of Louisburgh 
by a British colony must have been a surprise to 
Great Britain and to France. It caused very 
grand plans .of American measures for the next 
year with both powers. Great Britain had in 
view the reduction of Canada, and the extirpa 
tion of the French from the n. continent. France 
intended the recovery of Louisburgh, the conquest 
of Nova Scotia, and the destruction of the Eng 
lish sea-coast from Nova Scotia to Georgia. Upon 
the English plan, eight battalions of regular troops, 
with the provincial forces to be raised in the four 
New England governments, were to rendezvous 
at Louisburgh, and, with a squadron under Ad 
miral Warren, were to go up the river Saint Law 
rence to Quebec ; other provincials from Virginia 
and the colonies n. including New York, were to 
rendezvous at Albany, and go across the country 
to Montreal ; the land forces to be under General 
St. Clair. No province had a certain number as 
signed, but it was expected there should be at least 
5000 in the whole. The Massachusetts forces 
were ready to embark by the middle of July, 
about six weeks after the first notice. The prepa 
rations making at Brest for America were well 
known in England, and a squadron was ordered 
to block up that harbour. Notwithstanding all 
the caution used, the Brest squadron slipped out, 
and sailed to the w. and it is certain no English 
squadron followed. Whilst all were impatiently 
waiting for news of the arrival of the fleet at Louis 
burgh, a fisherman comes in some time in August, 
with an account of his being brought to by four 
French capital ships not far from Chibucto ; that 
he was required to pilot them there ; that as he 
lay under the stern of one of them he read the 
word Le Terrible, but a fog suddenly rising he 
made his escape. After that some days had pass 
ed without any further account, the fisherman s 
news was generally discredited. It appeared some 
months after that these were four ships under M. 
Conflans, who had escaped an English squadron 
from Jamaica, and were bound to Chibucto in 
order to join the Brest fleet; but after cruising 
some time, and meeting with storms and fogs upon 



a coast they were unacquainted with, they returned 
to France. 

The beginning of September, vessels arrived at 
Boston from Hull and Liverpool, with advice that 
the Brest fleet had sailed, and it was supposed tor 
N. America, and from the middle to the latter end 
of the month frequent accounts were brought of a 
great fleet seen to the w. of Newfoundland, which 
was supposed might be English as likely as 
French ; but on the 28th, an express arrived from 
Louisburgh with certain advice that these ships 
were the French fleet, which it was affirmed con 
sisted of 70 sail, 14 of which were capital ships, 
and that there were 20 smaller men of war, and 
the rest fire-ships, bombs, tenders, and transports 
for 8000 troops. The same day a vessel from 
Jamaica arrived, with advice that the four men of 
war who had engaged with Commodore Mitchell 
were intended to join the fleet, and it was now no 
longer doubted that these were the ships seen by 
the fishermen, and it was supposed soon after got 
into Chibucto. England was not more alarmed 
with the Spanish armada in 1.588, than Boston and 
the other N. American sea-ports were with the 
arrival of this fleet in their neighbourhood. The 
firmest mind will bend upon the first advice of im 
minent danger to its country. Even the great De 
Witt swooned when he first opened a letter giving 
intelligence of England s confederating with 
France to enslave the Dutch, though the next 
moment he recovered his natural courage and 

^ 

vivacity. 

Every practicable measure for defence was im 
mediately pursued by the authority of the Massa 
chusetts province, but the main dependence wiis 
upon a squadron from England sufficient, in con 
junction with the ships then at Louisburgh, to 
overcome the French. It was impossible the mi 
nistry should be ignorant of the sailingof this fleet, 
and unless they were willing the colonies should 
be exposed to the ravages of the enemy, it was 
impossible an English squadron should not be 
soon after them. This was the general voice. 
But this dependence failed. However, as the 
probability of the arrival of the squadron was 
from day to day lessened, the apprehensions of 
danger from the enemy lessened in some propor 
tion. At length was received such authentic ac 
count of the distresses of the French, that it was ge 
nerally agreed that Admiral Townsend s ships at 
Louisburgh were more than a match for them, and 
it was every day expected to be heard they had sailed 
for Chibucto ; but if that should prove otherwise, 
the utmost they would be able to effect by their] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



71 



fjrrand plan would be the conquest of Annapolis, 
and the whole province of Nova Scotia. If the 
winter did not prevent a farther progress, it was 
agreed their strength was not sufficient for an at 
tempt upon Boston. 

The misfortunes of this grand armament are 
really very remarkable. The loss of Cape Breton 
filled the French with a spirit of revenge against 
the British colonies. The Duke D Anville, a 
French nobleman, in whose courage and conduct 
great confidence was placed, was appointed to the 
command of the expedition. As early as the be 
ginning of May the fleet was ready to sail, but was 
detained by contrary winds until the22d of June, 
when it left Rochelle, and then consisted of 1 1 ships 
of the line, 30 smaller vessels from 10 to 30 guns, 
and transport ships with 3130 larid forces, com 
manded by Monsieur Pommerit, a brigadier-gene 
ral. The French of Nova Scotia, it was expected, 
would join them, and Ramsay, a French officer, 
with 1700 Canadians and Indians, were actually in 
arms there ready for their arrival. To this force 
Conflans, with four ships from the W. Indies, 
was to be added. It was the 3d of August be 
fore the fleet had passed the W. islands. The 24th, 
they were 300 leagues distant from Nova Scotia, 
and one of their ships complained so much that 
they burnt her. The 1st of September, in a vio 
lent storm, the Mars, a 64-gun ship, was so da 
maged in her masts and so leaky that she bore 
away for the W. Indies, and the Alcide, of 64 
guns, which had also lost her topmast, was sent 
to accompany her. The 15th, the Argent, of 64 

funs, most of her crew being sick, put back for 
rest. 

The Duke D Anville, in the Northumberland, 
arrived at Chibucto the 12th of September, with 
only one ship of the line, the Renommee, and 
three or four of the transports. There he found 
only one of the fleet, which had been in three 
days, and after waiting three days and rinding 
that only three more, and those transports, had ar 
rived, the 16th in the morning he died, the French 
said of an apoplexy, the English that he poisoned 
himself. In the afternoon the vice-admiral, D Es- 
tournelle, with three or four more of the line, came 
in. Monsieur de la Jonquierc, governor of Ca 
nada, was aboard the Northumberland, and had 
been declared a r/ief d escadre after the fleet left 
France, and by this means was next in command 
to the vice-admiral. In a council of war, the 18th, 
the vice-admiral proposed returning to France. 
Four of the capital ships, the Ardent, Caribou, 
Mars, and Alcide, and the Argonaute fire-ship, they 



were deprived of; there was no news of Conflans 
and his ships, so that only seven ships of impor 
tance remained, more or less of the land forces 
were on board each of the missing ships, and what 
remained were in a very sickly condition. This 
motion was opposed for seven or eight hours by 
Jonquiere and others of the council, who sup 
posed that at least they were in a condition to re 
cover Annapolis and Nova Scotia, after which 
they might either winter securely at Casco bay, 
or at worst then return to France : The sick men, 
by the constant supply of fresh provisions from the 
Acadians, were daily recovering, and would be 
soon fit for service. The motion not prevailing, 
the vice-admiral s spirits were ngitated to such u 
degree as to throw him into a fever attended with a 
delirium, in which he imagined himself among the 
English, and ran himself through the body. Jon 
quiere succeeded, who was a man experienced in 
war, and, although above60, still more active than 
either of his predecessors, and the expectations of 
the fleet and army were much raised. From this 
time Annapolis seems to have been their chief 
object. An account, supposed to be authentic, 
having been received at Boston of the sailing of 
Admiral Lestock, Mr. Shirley sent an express 
to Louisburgh to carry the intelligence. The 
packet-boat was taken and carried info Chibucto, 
which accelerated the sailing of the fleet. Most 
of the sick had died at Chibucto, and but about one 
half their number remained alive. They sailed 
the 13th of October, and the 15th, being near cape 
Sables, they met with a violent cold storm, which, 
after some intermission, increased the 16th and 
17th and separated the fleet, two of which only, 
a 50 and a 36 gun ship, were discovered from the 
fort at Annapolis, where the Chester man of war, 
Captain Spry, then lay with the Shirley frigate and 
a small vessel in the service of the board of ordnance, 
who being discovered by the French to be under 
sail they made off, and this was the last of the ex 
pedition. The news of the beginning of the mis 
fortunes of the French having reached France by 
some of the returned vessels, two men of war were 
sent immediately, with orders, at all events, to take 
Annapolis, but the fleet had sailed three or four 
days before they arrived. 

Pious men saw the immediate hand of Divine 
Providence in the protection or rather rescue of 
the British colonies this year, as they had done in 
the miraculous success of the Cape Breton expedi 
tion the former year. 

When the summer had so far passed as to ren 
der it too late to prosecute the expedition against] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[Canada, if the fleet had arrived, Mr. Shirley s 
enterprising genius led him to project an attempt 
upon the French fort at Crown point, with part of 
the Massachusetts forces in conjunction with those 
of the other colonies, but the alarm of the French 
fleet prevented until it was judged, by some con 
cerned, to be too late. Fifteen hundred of the 
Massachusetts men were intended for Nova Scotia, 
upon the news of Ramsay s appearing there, and 
400 actually went there, convoyed by the Chester, 
and, late in the fall, an additional number were sent 
thither. Those posted at Minas were surprised, 
the 1st day of January, by a body of French and 
Indians commanded by Le Come, a French officer, 
and after having 160 of their number killed, 
wounded, and taken prisoners, the rest capitulated, 
engaging not to bear arms agaitist the French in 
Nova Scotia for the term of one year. De Ram 
say with his troops soon after returned to Canada. 
The troops raised for the Canada expedition 
continued in pny until September the next year, 
1747. Some of them served for defence of the 
frontiers, the rest were inactive. The inactive 
prosecution of the war in Europe on both sides in 
dicated peace to be near, which the next year was 
effected. 

War had been declared in 1744 against the 
Cape Sable and St. John s Indians, and in 1745 
against the Penobsc ots and Norridgewocks. The 
frontiers did not escape molestation. They suf 
fered less than in any former wars. The Indians 
were lessened in number, and having withdrawn 
to the French frontiers were sometimes detained 
for their defence upon an apprehended invasion, 
and at other times engaged to be in readiness to 
join in the great designs against the English. 

(Anno 1747.) In 1747 (November l7th) hap 
pened a tumult in the town of Boston, equal to any 
which had preceded it, although far short of some 
that have happened since. Mr.Knowles was com 
modore of a number of men of war then in the har 
bour of Nantasket. Some of the sailors had desert 
ed. These deserters generally fled to some of the 
neighbouring ports, where they were out of danger 
of discovery. The commodore thought it reason 
able that Boston should supply him with as many 
men as he had lost, and sent his boats up to town 
early in the morning, and surprised not only as 
many seamen as couM be found on board any of 
the ships, outward bound as well as others, but 
swept the wharfs also, taking some ship-carpen 
ters apprentices and labouring land-men. How 
ever tolerable such a surprise might have been in 
London, it could not be borue here. The people 
2 



had not been used to it, and men of all orders re 
sented it, but the lower class were beyond measure 
enraged, and soon assembled with sticks, clubs, 
pitch-mops, &amp;c. They first seized an innocent 
lieutenant who happened to be ashore upon other 
business. They had then formed no scheme, arid 
the speaker of the house passing by and assuring 
them that he knew that the lieutenant had no hand 
in the press, they suffered him to be led off to a 
place of safety. The mob increasing, and having 
received intelligence that several of the com 
manders were at the governor s house, it was 
agreed to go and demand satisfaction. The house 
was soon surrounded, and the court or yard before 
the house rilled, but many persons of discretion 
intruded themselves and prevailed so far as to pre 
vent the mob from entering. Several of the officer* 
had planted themselves ait the head of the stair-way 
with loaded carbines, and seemed determined to 
preserve their liberty or lose their lives. A deputy 
sheriff attempting to exercise his authority, was 
seized by the mob and carried away in triumph, 
and set in the stocks, which afforded them diver 
sion and tended to abate their rage, and disposed 
them to separate and go to dinner. 

As soon as it was dusk, several thousand people 
assembled in King-street, below the town-house, 
where the general court was sitting. Stones and 
brickbats were thrown through the glass into the 
council chamber. The governor, however, with 
several gentlemen of the council and house, ventur? 
ed into the balcony, and after silence was obtained, 
the governor, in a well-judged speech, expressed 
his great disapprobation of the impress, and pro 
mised his utmost endeavours to obtain the dis 
charge of every one of the inhabitants, and at the 
same time gently reproved the irregular proceed 
ings both of the forenoon and evening. Other 
gentlemen also attempted to persuade the people to 
disperse, and wait to see what steps the general 
court would take. All was to no purpose. The 
seizure and restntint of the commanders and other 
officers who were in town was insisted upon as the 
only effectual method to procure the release of the 
inhabitants aboard the ships. 

It was thought advisable for the governor to 
withdraw to his house, many of the officers of the 
militia and other gentlemen attending him. A re 
port was raised that a barge from one of the ships 
was come to a wharf in the town. The mob flew 
to seize it, but by mistake took a boat belonging 
to a Scotch ship, and dragged it with as much 
seeming ease through the streets as if it had been 
in the water, to the governor s house, and prepared] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[to burn it before the house, but from a considera 
tion of the danger of setting the town on fire, were 
diverted, and the boat was burnt in a place of less 
hazard. The nex day the governor ordered that 
the military officers of Boston should cause their 
companies to be mustered and to appear in arms, 
and that a military watch should be kept the suc 
ceeding night, but the drummers were interrupted 
and the militia refused to appear. The governor 
did not think it for his honour to remain in town 
another night, and privately withdrew to the 
castle. A number of gentlemen who had some irf- 
timation of his design, sent a message to him by 
Colonel Hutchinson, assuring him they would 
stand by him in maintaining the authority of go 
vernment and restoring peace and order^ but he 
did not think this sufficient. 

The governor wrote to Mr. Knowles represent 
ing the confusions occasioned by this extravagant 
act of his officers, but he refused all terms of ac 
commodation until the commanders and other 
officers on shore were suffered to go on board their 
ships, and he threatened to bring up his ships and 
bombard the town, and some of them being seen to 
weigh, caused different conjectures of his real inten 
tion. Captain Erskine of the Canterbury had 
been seized at the house of Colonel Brinley, in 
Roxbury, and given his parole not to go abroad, 
and divers inferior officers had been secured. 

The 17th, 18th, and part of the 19th, the coun 
cil and house of representatives, sitting in the 
town, went on with their ordinary business, not 
willing to interpose, lest they should encourage 
other commanders of the navy to future acts of the 
like nature, but towards noon of the 19th, some of 
the principal members of the house began to think 
more seriously of the dangerous consequence of 
leaving the governor without support when there 
was not the least ground of exception to his con 
duct. Some high spirits in the town began to 
question whether his retiring should be deemed a 
desertion or abdication. It was moved to appoint 
a committee of the two houses to consider what was 
proper to be done. This would take time and 
was excepted to, and the speaker was desired to 
draw up such resolves as it was thought necessary 
the house should immediately agree to, and they 
were passed by a considerable majority and made 
public. 

" In the house of representatives, November 
19th, 1747. 

" Resolved, that there has been and still con 
tinues a tumultuous riotous assembling of armed 
seamen, servants, Negroes, and others, in the 

VOL. III. 



town of Boston, tending to the destruction of all 
government and order. 

" Resolved, that it is incumbent on the civil 
and military officers in the province to exert them 
selves to the utmost, to discourage and suppress 
all such tumultuous riotous proceedings whenso 
ever (hey may happen. 

&amp;lt;{ Resolved, that this house will stand by and 
support, with their lives and estates, his excel 
lency the governor, and the executive part of the 
government, in all endeavours for this purpose. 

" Resolved, that this house will exert them 
selves by all ways and means possible in redress 
ing such grievances as his Majesty s subjects are 
arid have been under, which may have been the 
cause of the aforesaid tumultuous disorderly as 
sembling together. 

" T. HUTCHINSON, Speaker." 

The council passed a vote ordering that Captain 
Erskine and all other officers belonging to his Ma 
jesty s ships should be forthwith set at liberty and 
protected by the government, which was concur 
red in by the house. As soon as these votes were 
known, the tumultuous spirit began to subside. 
The inhabitants of the town of Boston assembled 
in town meeting in the afternoon, having been 
notified to consider, in general, what was proper 
for them to do upon this occasion, and notwith 
standing it was urged by many, that all measures 
to suppress the present spirit in the people would 
tend to encourage the like oppressive acts for the 
future, yet the contrary party prevailed, and the 
town, although they expressed their sense of the 
great insult and injury by the impress, condemned 
the tumultuous riotous acts of such as had insulted 
the governor and the other parts of the legislature, 
and committed many other heinous offences. 

The governor, not expecting so favourable a 
turn, had wrote to the secretary to prepare orders 
for the colonels of the regiments of Cambridge, 
Roxbury, and Milton, and the regiment of horse, 
to have their officers and men ready to march at an 
hour s warning, to such place of rendezvous as he 
should direct, but the next day there was an un 
common appearance of the militia of the town of 
Boston, many persons taking their muskets who 
never carried one upon any other occasion, and 
the governor was conducted to his house with 
as great parade as when he first assumed the go 
vernment. 

The commodore dismissed most, if not all, of 
the inhabitants who had been impressed, and the 
squadron sailed to the joy of the rest of the town. 

By the expedition to Louisburgh, the prepara-] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[tions for the reduction of Canada, and the several 
supplies of men for Nova Scotia, the province had 
issued an immense sum in bills of credit, between 
two and three millions, according to their deno 
mination in the currency. The greatest part of 
this sum had been issued when between 500/. and 
600/. was equal to 100/. sterling, and perhaps the 
real consideration the government received from 
the inhabitants who gave credit to them, was near 
400,000/. sterling, but by thus multiplying the 
bills they had so much depreciated, that at the 
end of the war, JOOO/. or 1 200/. was not equal to 
more than 100/. sterling, and the whole debt of 
the province did not much exceed 200,000/. ster 
ling. Thus the people had paid 200,000/. sterling 
in two or three years, besides a large sum raised by 
taxes each year, as much as it was supposed they 
were able to pay ; but the effect was almost insen 
sible, for however great and unequal might be the 
depreciation of the bills, yet as they were shifting 
hands every day, a possessor of a large sum for a 
few days could not perceive the difference in their 
value between the time when he received them, 
and the time when he parted with them. The ap 
prehension of their depreciation tended to increase 
it, and occasioned a quick circulation, and for 
some time, even for English goods, which ordi 
narily sell for the longest credit, nobody pretended 
to ask credit. They were constantly, however, dy 
ing in somebody s hand, though nobody kept 
them long by them. Business was brisk, men in 
trade increased their figures, but were sinking the 
real value of their stock ; and what is worse, by 
endeavours to shift the loss attending such a per 
nicious currency from one to another, fraudulent 
dispositions and habits are acquired, and the 
morals of the people depreciate with the currency. 

The government was soliciting for the reimburse 
ment of the charge in taking and securing Cape 
Breton, and by the address, assiduity, and fidelity 
of William Bollan, Esq. who was one of the 
agents of the province for that purpose, there 
was a hopeful prospect that the full sum, about 
180,QOO/. sterling, would be obtained. 

Some of the ministry thought it sufficient to 
grant such sum as would redeem the bills issued 
for the expedition, &amp;c. at their depreciated value, 
and Mr. Kilby, the other agent, seemed to despair 
of obtaining more, but Mr. Bollan, who had an 
intimate knowledge of the public affairs, set the 
injustice of this proposal in a clear light, and made 
it evident that the depreciation of the bills was as 
effectually a charge borne by the people as if the 
same proportion of bills had been drawn in by 



taxes, and refused all proposals of accommodation, 
insisting upon the full value of the bills when 
issued. He certainly has great merit for this and 
other services. 

Mr. Hutchinson, who was then speaker of the 
house of representatives, imagined this to be a 
most favourable opportunity for abolishing bills of 
credit, the source of so much iniquity, and for 
establishing a stable currency of silver and gold 
for the future. About 2,200,000/. would be 
outstanding in bills in the year 1749. One 
hundred and eighty thousand pounds sterling at 
elevenfor one, which was the lowest rate of exchange 
with London for a year or two before, and perhaps 
the difference was really twelve for one, would 
redeem 1 ,980,000/. which would leave but 220,000/. 
outstanding: it was therefore proposed that the 
sum granted by parliament should be shipped to 
the province in Spanish milled dollars, and applied 
for the redemption of the bills as far it would 
serve for that purpose, and that the remainder of 
the bills should be drawn in by a tax on the year 
1749. This would finish the bills. It was also 
proposed, silver of sterling alloy at 6s. 8d. the ounce, 
if payment should be made in bullion, or otherwise 
milled dollars at 6s. each, should be the lawful 
money of the province, and no person should 
receive or pay within the province, bills of credit 
of any of the other governments of New England. 
This proposal being made to the governor he 
approved of it, as founded in justice and tending 
to promote the real interest of the province, but he 
knew the attachment of the people to paper money 
and supposed it impracticable. The speaker, 
however, laid the proposal before the house, 
where it was received with a smile and generally 
thought to be an Utopian project, and, rather out 
of deference to the speaker, than from an appre 
hension of any effect, the house appointed a com 
mittee to consider of it. The committee treated it 
in the same manner, but reported that the speaker 
should be desired to bring in a bill for the 
consideration of the house. When this came 
to be known abroad, exceptions were taken and a 
clamour was raised from every quarter. The 
major part of the people, in number, were no 
sufferers by a depreciating currency, the number 
of debtors is always more than the number of 
creditors, and although debts on specialties had 
allowance made in judgments of court for depre 
ciation of the bills, yet on simple contracts, of 
which there were ten to one specialty, no allowance 
was made. Those who were for a fixed currency 
were divided. Some supposed the bills might be] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



75 



[reduced to so small a quantity as to be fixed and 
stable, and therefore were for redeeming as many 
by bills of exchange as should be thought super 
fluous; others were for putting an end to the bills, 
but in a gradual way, otherwise it was said a 
fatal shock would be given to trade. This last 
was the objection of many men of good sense. 
Douglass, who had wrote well upon paper cur 
rency and had been the oracle of the anti-paper 
party, was among them, and, as his manner was 
with all who differed from him, discovered as 
much rancour against the author and promoters of 
this new project as he had done against the frau 
dulent contrivers of paper money emissions. 

The bills it was said had sunk gradually in their 
value from 6s. lO^d. to 60s. the ounce ; by this 
means creditors had been defrauded, and it was but 
reasonable they should rise gradually that justice 
might be done. But the creditors and debtors 
would not be the same in one instance in a thousand, 
and where this was not the case the injury was the 
same, to oblige any one to pay more as to receive 
less than was justly due. Others were for exchang 
ing the bills at a lower rate than the then current 
price of silver. The inhabitants had given credit 
to the government when silver was at 30.?. the 
ounce, and ought to be paid accordingly. Two 
of the representatives of Boston urged their being 
exchanged at 30s. which would have given a most 
unreasonable profit to the present possessors, who 
had taken them at 55s. or 60s. To draw over some 
of this party, concessions were made and the 
bills were exchanged at 50s. the ounce instead of 
55s. as was at first poposed. 

Some of the directors and principal promoters 
of the land bank scheme, being at this time 
members of the general court, unexpectedly joined 
with the party who were for finishing paper mone} , 
but the opposition was so great, that after many 
weeks spent in debating and settling the several 
parts of the bill, and a whole day s debate at last in a 
committee of the whole house upon the expediency 
of passing the bill, as thus settled, it was rejected 
and the report of the committee accepted. 

The house, although upon some occasions 
exceptions are taken to motions and proceedings 
which come before them as not being in parlia 
mentary form, yet are not strict in conforming to 
some of the most useful rules of parliament. A 
bill or motion is not only referred from one session 
to another, but a bill, after rejecting upon a second 
or third reading, is sometimes taken up and passed 
suddenly the same session. They have an order of 
the house, that when any affair has been consider 
ed, it shall not be brought before the house again 



the same session unless there be as full a house as 
when it was passed upon. This, if observed, 
would still be liable to inconvenience, as any 
designing person might take an opportunity upon 
a change of faces, the number being as great as 
before, suddenly to carry any point, but even this 
rule, like many other of what are called standing 
orders, is too frequently by votes, on particular 
occasions, dispensed with, which lessens the dignity 
of the house. 

(Anno 1749.) It may be perhaps of no conse 
quence to the prerogative whether the currency of a 
colony be silver or paper, but the royal instructions 
from time to time for preventing a depreciating 
currency, caused merely by a gracious regard to 
the interest of the people, had generally engaged 
what was called the country part in opposition to 
them and in favour of paper. It was the case at 
this time. However, the next morning, two of 
the members of the house, zealous adherers to this 
party and who had been strong opposers of the 
bill, came early to the house to wait the coming 
of the speaker, and in the lobby let him know, 
that although they were not satisfied with several 
parts of the bill, yet they were alarmed with the 
danger to the province from the schemes of those 
persons who were for a gradual reduction of the 
bills, and by that means for raising the value of 
the currency without any provision for the relief 
of debtors ; and therefore they had changed their 
minds, and if the bill could be brought forward 
again, they would give their voice for it, and others 
who had opposed it would do the same. The 
speaker, who had looked upon any further attempt 
to be to no purpose, acquainted them that he did 
not think it proper to desire any of the favourers 
of the bill to move for a reconsideration of it, 
inasmuch as it had been understood and agreed in 
the house the day before, that if upon a full debate 
had, the bill should be rejected, no further motion 
should be made about it. As soon as the house 
met, upon a motion by one of these members, 
seconded by the other, the bill was again brought 
under consideration and passed the house, as it 
afterwards did the council, and had the governor s 
consent. 

The provision made by this act for the exchange 
of the bills and for establishing a silver currency 
was altogether conditional, and depended upon a 
grant of parliament for reimbursement of the 
charge of the Cape Breton expedition. This 
being at a distance and not absolutely certain, the 
act had no sudden effect upon the minds of the 
people ; but when the news of the grant arrived, 
the discontent appeared more visible, and upon] 
L 2 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[th arrival of the money there were some begin 
nings of tumults, and the authors and promoters of 
the measure were threatened. The government 
passed an act with a severe penalty against riots, 
and appeared determined to carry the other act 
for exchanging the bills into execution. The 
apprehension of a shock to trade proved groundless ; 
the bills being dispersed through every part of the 
province, the silver took place instead of them, a 
good currency was insensibly substituted in the 
room of a bad one, and every branch of business 
was carried on to greater advantage than before. 
The other governments, especially Connecticut 
and Rhode Island, who refused, upon being invited, 
to conform their currency to the Massachusetts, 
felt a shock in their trade which they did not for a 
long while recover. The latter had been the impor 
ters, for the Massachusetts, of W. India goods for 
many years, which ceased at once. New Hamp 
shire, after some years, revived its business and 
increased their trade in English goods, which 
formerly they had been supplied with from the 
Massachusetts ; and in this channel their successes 
have been considerable. 

We shall finish this part of our history Avith a 
few remarks upon the trade of the province at this 
day, (1760), compared with its trade in 1692. 

The other governments of New England, 60 
or 70 years before this period, imported no Eng 
lish goods, or next to none, directly from England, 
they were supplied by the Massachusetts trader. 
Now, although the trade with Great Britain, upon 
the whole, Avas supposed to cause no addition to 
the wealth of Massachusetts, yet, at least so far as 
it Avas the channel for conveying supplies of goods 
to the other colonies for their consumption, a benefit 
undoubtedly accrued. New Hampshire, by their 
convenient situation, were induced to become their 
own importers in a great measure some years before 
the alteration of the currency. They made their 
returns by shipping lumber, &amp;c. easier than Massa 
chusetts. At this time they probably imported Eng 
lish goods equal to their consumption. Connecticut, 
until the state abolished its bills of credit and theirs 
with them, continued their trade Avith it for Eng 
lish goods, but soon after turned great part of their 
trade to New York, and some persons became 
importers from England. They soon discovered 
their error. The produce of New York Avas so 
much the same with that of Connecticut that the 
Massachusetts market Avas always the best. The 
importer found it more difficult to make his returns 
to England from Connecticut than from the Massa 
chusetts. Connecticut trade therefore soon return 
ed to the state it had formerly been in. 



llhode Island, in part, became their own impor 
ters also, Avhich they still continue. 

As to the other colonies on the continent : bet ween 
S. Carolina and the Massachusetts, there never has 
been any considerate trade. The chief benefit 
from that colony has been the affording freights 
for the Massachusetts ships in the European trade. 

N. Carolina, Virginia, Maryland, the Jerseys, 
and Pennsylvania, until Avithin 20 or 30 years, used 
to furnish Massachusetts Avith provisions, for Avhich 
it paid them in W. India and sometimes English 
goods, and with its OAVU produce and manufactures. 
Philadelphia has since become the mart for the 
grain of great part of Maryland, which they 
manufacture into flour and supply the Massa 
chusetts, Rhode Island, and New Hampshire, and 
take little or no pay in return but money and bills 
of exchange, lit seems agreed that the s. colonies 
as far as Virginia are designed by nature for grain, 
countries. 

The trade Avith the W. India islands was much 
more profitable to Massachusetts, from the begin 
ning of King William s to the end of Queen Anne s 
war Avith France, than at any time to this period. 
Long since the peace of Utrecht it was continually 
growing Averse. Barbadocs required thep more 
n. produce than it does now. The other 
islands, except Jamaica, had very little increased 
their demand. From the growth of the n. 
colonies and the new methods of living, the pro 
duce of the islands was more than double the price 
it used to be. Perhaps te ( &amp;gt; and coffee, alone, 
caused as great consumption of sugar as all other 
uses to Avhich it was applied did formerly. The 
produce of the n. colonies Avas as low in the islands 
as ever it Avas. Formerly their demand for n. 
produce not only afforded this state in return, rum, 
sugar, and molasses sufficient for the consumption 
of the state, but left a surplus Avhich, in war 
time especially, every year gave freight to ships 
from Boston to England, and paid its debts there, 
or procured a supply of goods from thence, 
whereas, at this day, the whole supply of n. 
produce to the British islands Avould not pay for 
one half of the W. India goods consumed or used 
in the n. colonies. The trade to the Dutch colo 
nies, it is true, had since increased, and Massa 
chusetts goods from time to time have found their 
Avay into the French islands, sometimes through the 
Dutch, at other times, when French necessity called 
for them, by permission or other contrivances, and 
by this means Avas the state able to procure the W. 
India goods it wanted for its consumption over and 
above what it could obtain in pay for its produce 
from the British islands.] 



MAS 

[As to what relates to the subsequent history of 
Massachusetts, we refer our readers to the article 
UNITED STATES ; wherein a full and circumstan 
tial detail of the revolution, and other interesting 
matter, relative alike to this as to the other states, 
will be found inserted.] 

[MASSACHUSETTS Fort stands on the n. w. 
corner of the state of its name, in lat. 42 4 1 30" n. 
19 miles n. e. by n. of Pittsfield, and 22 due e. of 
Lansinburgh city, in New York state.] 

[MASSACHUSETTS Sound, on the n.w. coast of 
N. America, is situated on the s. side of the Qua 
dras isles, and leads from the w. into Nootka 
sound along the n. side of Kenrick s island, and 
whose e. side forms, with point Breakfast, the 
mouth of Nootka sound.] 

[MASSACRE River passes out of the straits of 
Magellan s. w. into the supposed channel of St. 
Barbara, which cuts through the island ofTierra 
del Fuego, through which, we are informed, 
Captain Mareanille of Marseilles passed in 1713 
into the S. Pacific ocean.] 

[MASSACRE River, on the n, side of the island of 
St. Domingo, falls into the Bay of MANCENILLA ; 
which see.] 

[MASSACRE, a small island on the coast of W. 
Florida, two miles to the e. of Horn island, 10 
miles from the mainland : all the way across there 
is from two to three fathoms, except the shoal 
called La Grand Bature, which stretches a league 
from the mainland, with two or three feet water 
on it, and in some places not so much. Behind it 
is a large bay called L Ance de la Grand Bature, 
eight miles e. of Pascagoula bluff. See DAUPHIN 
Island.] 

[MASSAFUERO, an island in the S. Pacific 
ocean, called by the Spaniards the Lesser Juan 
Fernandes, 22 leagues w. by s. of the Greater Juan 
Fernandes. It has always been represented by the 
Spaniards as a barren rock, without wood, water, 
or provisions ; but Lord Anson found this to be 
a political falsity, asserted to prevent hostile ves 
sels from touching there. There is anchorage on 
the n. side in deep water, where a single ship may 
be sheltered close under the shore, but is exposed 
to all winds except the s. According to Captain 
Magee, of the ship Jefferson, it is 78 miles to the 
w. of Juan Fernandes, and in about lat. 33 47 
30" *. and long. 80 41 w. from Greenwich.] 

[MASSANIJTEN S River, a w. branch of the 
Shenandoah.] 

[MASSEDAN Bay, in the N. Pacific ocean, 
and w. coast of Mexico, is situated between Aca- 
pulco and Aquacara, a port near the cape of Cali- 



M A T 



77 



fornia, where Sir Thomas Caveudish lay after he 
had passed the straits of Magellan.] 

[MASSE Y S Town, in the N.W. Territory, 
stands on the n. bank of Ohio river, between the 
rivers Little Miami and Sciota.] 

[MASSY S Ciioss ROADS, in Kent county, 
Maryland, is n. e. of Newmarket, ,v. e. of George 
town, and s. by to. of Sassafras town, a little more 
than five miles from each.] 

[MAST Bay, on the n. side of the island of Ja 
maica, in the n. w. part. It is e. of Montego bay, 
and near the shelf of rocks that lies from the shore, 
called Catlin s cliffs.] 

MASTELES, a barbarous and ancient nation 
of Indians of the province of Popayan, towards 
the w. They were warlike, cruel, and cannibals, 
and lived in continual warfare with their neighbours 
the Abades ; by whom they were at last extirpated. 

MASTERKOUT, a small city of the county 
of Prince George, in the w. division of the pro 
vince of Maryland. 

MASTES, a barbarous and warlike nation of 
Indians, of the province and government of Santa 
Marta, to the s. s.w. and confederates of the Tai- 
ronas. 

[MASTIC Gut, on the s. w. side of the island 
of St. Christopher s in the W. Indies, is between 
Moline s gut on the n. w. and Godwin s gut on 
the s. e.~\ 

[MASTIGON, a river which runs a&amp;gt;. into lake 
Michigan, about 11 miles n. of La Grande Ri 
viere. It is 150 yards wide at its mouth.] 

MASTON, a settlement of the island of Barba- 
does ; situate in the s. part. 

MATA, a large settlement of the province and 
captainship of Pernambuco in Brazil. It is well 
peopled through its commerce in Brazil-wood, 
which is cut in the neighbourhood in abundance. 
It has two convents of monks, and a very good 
parish; upon which is dependent another small 
settlement annexed to it. It is 11 leagues s. of its 
capital. 

MATA, CIENEGA DE, a settlement of the head 
settlement and alcaldia mayor of Sierra de Pinos in 
Nueva Espaila. Five leagues to the s. of Ojo 
Caliente. 

[MATA, Point, on the the n. side of the island 
of Cuba, and nine leagues n.w. of cape Maisy.J 

MATACH1QUI, a settlement of the missions 
that were held by the regulars of the company, in 
the province of Taraumara, and kingdom of Nucva 
Vizcaya. It is 31 leagues from the town and real 
of the mines of San Felipe de Chiguagua. 

MATA-FUEGOj some isles of the N. sea, near 



78 MAT 

the coast of the province and captainship of Rey 
in Brazil ; situate n. of the island of Santa Cata- 
lina. 

MATAGALPA, a province and alcaldia mat/or 
of the kingdom of Guatemala in N. America. 

MATAGEROS, some small islands of the N. 
sea, near the coast of the province and govern 
ment of Honduras; opposite the entrance or mouth 
of the river Comecueros. They arc many and 
desert. 

MATAGORDA, or PESCADERO, a port of the 
coast of the province and corregimiento of Quil- 
lota in the kingdom of Chile, between the que- 
brada of Choapa and the river Quilimari. 

MATAGUAYOS, or MATAGUAYES, a nation 
of barbarous Indians of the province of Chaco in 
Pern, who dwell in the llanos of Manso near the 
river Pilcomayo. The Fathers Ignacio dc Medina 
and Andres de Lujan of the abolished order of Je 
suits, endeavoured to reduce them to the Catholic 
faith in 1653, and entered their country, being 
conducted by the Cacique Nao, their chief, -whom 
they had gained over by bribes and persuasions; 
but just as they had collected together a certain 
number of the Mataguayos, and Mere beginning to 
establish a settlement, these infidels rose of a sud 
den and retired to the mountains, determining to 
put to death the fathers ; who, however, escaped 
their fury by the precaution of an Indian, their 
friend. In the following year they sent deputies 
to manifest their contrition for what had passed, 
and requesting that missionaries would again come 
amongst them to instruct them in the faith, and 
although their wishes were acceded to by the go 
vernor of Tucuman, and the provincial, a body of 
troops being also sent to secure the peace, yet did, 
at the same moment, one of the most terrible in 
surrections happen, which soon spread itself 
throughout the whole province, thereby putting 
aside all hope of reducing this nation to the bosom 
of the church. 

MATAHUASI, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Xauja in Peru. 

MATAJES, a large river of the province and 
government of Esmeraldas in the kingdom of 
Quito. It runs from s. e. to n. w. in the country 
and territory of the Malaguas Indians, and enters 
the Pacific, in the bay of Sardinas, in latitude 
1 22 . 

MATALIRON, a small island of the N. sea ; 
one of the Lesser or \VindwardAntilles. It is 
desert. 

MATAMEREQUE, a river of the province 
and corregimicnto of Caxamarquilla in Peru. 



MAT 

MATAMUSKET, a settlement of Indians of 
N. Carolina and district of Hyde ; situate on the 
coast. 

[MATANCA,or MANANCES, a short and broad 
river of E. Florida, which falls into the ocean s. of 
St. Augustine.] 

MATANCHEL, a town and port of the S. sea, 
on the coast of Nueva Espana, belonging to the 
jurisdiction and district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Tepic. It is on the w. part, and lying e. w. with 
the Marias isles. It is tolerably convenient and 
secure, and iw 1745, a China ship anchored in it, 
having suffered much by a storm ; also in 1746, 
a Dutch vessel which had been navigating those 
seas put in here. It is 65 miles from the capital, 
in lat. 20 45 n. and long. 105 24 w. 

MATANCHEL, a settlement of the head settle 
ment and alcaldia mayor of Compostela in Nueva 
Espana ; situate on the coast of the S. sea, near 
the former port. 

MA TAN E, a river of New France or Canada, 
the mouth of which is capable of receiving vessels 
of 200 tons. The whole of the sides of the river 
St. Lawrence, especially of that part of which we 
treat, abounds for more than 20 leagues in cod 
fish ; and is capable of employing 500 fishing 
smacks at the same time. This fish is of an excel 
lent quality, and much esteemed in Espana and in 
the e. parts. Here have also been seen many 
whales, which may be killed by the harpoon, and 
would bring ample profit. 

MATANILLAS, a settlement of the island of 
Cuba ; situate on the n. coast, between the settle 
ment of Guanaja and Alivitas. 

MATANZA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Buenos Ayres in Peru. 

MATANZA, a river of the same province and 
government, which runs n. n. e. and enters the Pa 
rana, between the Ramallos and that of Dos Her- 
manos. 

MATANZAS, a city of the island of Cuba ; 
situate on the n. coast, on the shore of a bay or 
port of the same name, and which is one of the 
most convenient, safest, and largest of any in Ame 
rica, having a good castle for its defence. The 
city is small, of poor commerce, and thinly inha 
bited. Formerly its commerce was great, since 
all the vessels that were going to Europe used to 
enter it. The Dutch admiral Pedro Hein routed 
and burnt in this bay the fleet of Nueva Espaiia 
in 1628; and in J638, the admiral of the galleons, 
Don Carlos de Ibarra, had two smart combats with 
the Dutch privateer Pie de Palo. It is 30 leagues 
from the Cabeza de los Martires on the coast of 



MAT 

Florida, and 20 from the Havana, in lat. 23 3 n. 
and long. 81 30 w. 

MATANZAS, PAN DE, a very lofty mountain in 
the shape of a sugar-loaf; situate at the back of 
the former port, and serving as a land-mark or di 
rection for entering the mouth of the canal of Ba 
hama, putting the prow to the n. and leaving the 
mountain a-stern, in order to bear right a-head of 
the said entrance or mouth, 

MATANZAS, PAN DE, an island of the N. sea, near 
the coast of Florida, beyond the canal of Bahama. 

MATAOUACHIE, a river of the province and 
country of the Iroquees Indians in New France or 
Canada. It runs n. e. and enters the Otaivas. 

MATAPE, a settlement of the province and 
government of Ostimuri in N. America. 

MAT API, a river of the province and govern 
ment of La Guayana, in the part which was pos 
sessed by the Portuguese, according to the de 
scription and chart of the engineer Bellin ; but not 
being able to find it in other charts, we may infer 
that he has mistaken the name for Matari. 

MATAPONI, a river of the province and co 
lony of Virginia in N. America. It runs 5. e. and 
enters the river York. 

MATAQU1NO, or MA-TAQUITO, as others will 
have it, a large river of the province and district 
of Chanco in the kingdom of Chile. It runs many 
leagues to the w. and enters the sea between the 
rivers Maule and Boyeruca. On its shore by the 
n. side are two large estates, called Tilicura and 
Peralvillo. Near to this spot the Spaniards were 
engaged with the Araucanos Indians in a battle, 
called the battle of Mataquino, in which the brave 
Lautaro fell. On the s. side are two other estates, 
with the names of Huaquen and Naicuda. 

MATARA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Caxatambo in Peru, where there 
is a spring of dark-coloured water, which flows 
into a river called De la Barranca, arid which 
passing through the settlement acquires a deeper 
tint in proportion te its stagnation. This settle 
ment is annexed to the curacy of Chiquian. 

MATARA, another settlement, in the province 
and corregimiento of Aimaraez in Peru. 

MATAHA, another, in the province and corregi- 
miento of Gnarochiri in the same kingdom; an 
nexed to the curacy of the settlement of Olleros. 

MATARA, another, in the province and corregi- 
mienlo of Lucanas in the same kingdom ; annexed 
to the curacy of the settlement of Paico. 

MATARA, another, called also MOPA, in the 
province and government of Tucuman in the 
same kingdom, of the district and jurisdiction of 



MAT 



79 



the city of Santiago del Estero, to the curacy of 
which it belongs. 

MATARAS, or M ATARANES, a nation of Indians 
of the province of Chaco in Peru. It is one of those 
which was happy enough to have employed in its 
conversion to the faith San Francisco Solano; but 
reverting, however, to its idolatrous state, it had 
lost nearly every trait of religion at the time 
that its conversion was again attempted by the Fa 
thers Juan de Fonte, Juan Baptista Anasco, Fran 
cisco de Angulo, and Alonso de Barcena, of the 
abolished order of Jesuits. These succeeded in 
reducing the greater part of these Indians, who^ 
having for many years been without any regular 
curate, again revolted to their pristine idolatry, 
when, in 1611, the true faith was again preached 
to them by the Fathers Pedro Pastor and Gaspar 
Cerqueira ; and it was then that, becoming strict 
proselytes, they united together in a settlement of 
their name. 

In the time of their gentilism these Indians had 
the custom of celebrating the anniversary of their 
relations death. A dead ostrich was brought in 
honour of each of the defunct, together with some 
articles of furniture, a ceremony with which even 
the guests were obliged to comply ; and in the 
same manner all heirs, in refusing to keep up this 
practice, were considered as giving ample cause 
for open enmity. This festival used to last four 
days ; at the end of these they would lament over 
the dead for one hour, and after this would suc 
ceed dances, convivialities, and the most excessive 
symptoms of mirth, so that they had the appear 
ance of bacchanalians, in whom was a complica 
tion of all the disorderly habits, of which it was 
possible to conceive creatures, who had nothing 
but the form of rational beings, to be guilty. 

[MATAVIA Bay, or PORT ROYAL Bay, is 
situated within point Venus, near the n. part of 
the island of Otaheite, but open to the n.w. and i 
the S. Pacific ocean. The e. side of the bay has 
good anchorage in 14 and 16 fathoms. Lat. 17 
40 s. Long. 149 30 w. and the variation of the 
compass 3 34 e.] 

[MATCHADOCK Bay, in the easternmost part 
of lake Huron.] 

[MATHANON Port, in the s. e. part of the 
island of Cuba, is one of those ports on that coast 
which afford good anchorage for ships, but with 
out any use for want of them. It is between cape 
Cruz and cape Maizi, at the e. end of the island.] 

[MATHEO River, in E. Florida, or St.Jojis s ; 
which see.] 

[MATIIEWS Fort stands on the e. side of 



so 



MAT 



Oconec river, in the 5. w. part of Franklin county, 
Georgia.] 

[MATHEWS, a county of Virginia; bounded w. 
by Gloucester, from which it was taken since 1790; 
lying on the w. shore of the bay of Chesapeak. 
It is about 18 miles in length, and six in breadth. 

MATIARK, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of I\ 7 icaragua 3 and kingdom of Guatemala, 
in the time of the gentilisra of the Indians; but at 
present not existing. It was near the city of 
Leon. 

MATIAS, S; a settlement of the head settle 
ment of Tepalcaltepec, and alcaldia mayor of Ne- 
japu, in Nueva Esparia ; situate on a mountain, the 
ascent to it being more than a league. It is of a 
cold temperature, and inhabited by 72 families of 
Indians. 

MATIAS, S. a bay, also called SIN FONDO, on 
the coast which lies between the river La Plata and 
the straits of Magellan, to the s. between the bay 
Anegada and the port of Los Leones. 

MATIAS, S. an island, the most e. of the two 
that were discovered by William Dampierre on 
the coast of New Britain of N.America. It is 
nine or 10 leagues long, is mountainous and full of 
woods, although not without certain spots and val 
leys with the appearance of cultivation. 

[MATICALOC River, on the w. coast of New- 
Mexico, is seven leagues from Catalta strand, or 
the port of Sansonate. It is much exposed to n. 
winds, and is known by some small but high hills 
that are opposite to it. There is another large 
river to the w. of it about four leagues, which has 
two fathoms upon the bar ; and from thence to the 
bar of Estapa it is 15 leagues.] 

[MATILDA, a village of Virginia ; situated on 
the s. w. bank of Patowmac river, above Wash 
ington city, and near the great falls.] 

MAT1LLA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Arica in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Pica. 

MAT1NA, a district of the government and 
province of Costarica in the kingdom of Guate 
mala ; situate between the district of Las Tala- 
nrcuicas to the e. and the river San Juan to the w. 
pji the coast of the N. sea. It has by the other 
part of the aforesaid river the coast of the Mosqui- 
tos Indians, who continually infest the same with 
their canoes ; so that this spot is peopled only very 
thinly by Spaniards, who dwell m certain ranche- 
rias or temporary habitations, for the purpose of 
labourers, and who cultivate cacao, which both in 
and out of the kingdom is as highly esteemed as 
that of Soconusco : its crops are, however, much 



MAT 

fallen off, and the produce is scarcely sufficient for 
the inhabitants of Nicaragua, who are eager in its 
monopoly. There was in this district a castle, 
which was demolished by the English in the war 
of 1740. 

MATINA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Veragua in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, 
which serves as a limit, and divides this province 
from that of Costarica in Guatemala. It runs 
into the N. sea, and on its shores stood a castle, 
which was demolished by the English in 1744. 

fMATlNICUS Islands, on the coast of Maine. 
When you pass on the w. of these islands, the 
main passage from the sea to Penobscot bay lies 
about n. by w. They lie in lat. 43 50 . 
Long. 68 47 .] 

MAT1TUI, a settlement of the province and 
government of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. 

MATLACUCUEYE, a name which the In- 
dians, in their idiom, gave to the sierra of Tlax- 
cala, and which served as a place of safety for 
their wives and children when Hernan Cortes en 
tered that province with the Spaniards. 

MATLAHUACALLAN, the spot where the 
Tultccas Indians settled for three years, the same 
being the first who peopled the Mexican empire, 
according to Fr. Juan de Torquemada. 

MATLALCINCO, a large and rich province 
of the Mexican empire, in the time of the Indians, 
and conquered and united to it by the Emperor 
Axayacatl. It was in the valley of Tolucan, nine 
leagues from the city of this name. Its natives 
were of the most faithful of the allies of Hernan 
Cortes, and of the Spaniards ; and on this account 
did the Otomies declare war against them, ravag 
ing and destroying the whole of their territory. 
This oppressed people complaining to Cortes, had 
sent to their relief Gonzalo de Sondoval with 100 
infantry and 18 cavalry, who chastised and re 
duced the Otomies to obedience. Ingratitude for 
this succour, the natives, of whom we treat, assist 
ed the Spaniards in a great measure in the siege 
and conquest of Mexico. They were extremely 
barbarous, superstitious, and vicious ; but were 
greatly improved by Fr. Andres de Castro, of the 
order of San Francisco, who dedicated himself to 
their conversion and instruction for nearly 40 years, 
in which time he succeeded in reducing them to 
the Catholic faith, in which they have persisted, 
looking back upon his conduct as though he were 
an apostle of the most heroic virtues. 

MATLALLAN, a settlement of the province 
and akaldia mayor of TIaxcala in Nueva Es- 



MAT 

pana, in the time of the gentilism of the In 
dians. 

MAT LA PA, a settlement of the head settle- 
mcnt of Tamazunchale, and annexed to its curacy, 
in the alcaldia mayor of Valles and kingdom of 
Nueva Espana ; situate on the bank of a beautiful 
stream, by which it is provided whh water. It is 
of a hot and moist temperature, abounding in 
maize, French beans, seeds, and cotton. It con 
tains 30 families of Indians, and is five leagues to 
the n. of its head settlement. 

MATLATEPEC, a thinly peopled settlement 
of the head settlement of the district of Santa Ana, 
and alcaldia mayor of Zultepec, in Nueva Espana; 
united to the settlement of Hueztahualco, and be- 
ino- distant from it a short league. 

MATLAZINCO, a large river of Nueva Es- 
paiia. It rises near the settlement of Santiago, in 
thejurisdiction and alcaldia mayor of Lerma, from 
a small stream ; and traversing various provinces 
for more than 500 leagues, in which it collects the 
waters of various other rivers, it takes the name 
of Rio Grande, and empties itself into the S. sea, op 
posite the island of California. In many parts its 
stream is so large as not to admit of being forded, 
especially after that it enters the sea Chapalico or 
lake of Chapala. To pass it near the city of Gua 
dalajara, it has a singular bridge. 

MATLICA, a settlement of the head settlement 
of Yautepec, and alcaldia mayor of Cuernavaca, 
in Nueva Espana. 

MA TO, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Xuuxa in Peru. 

MATO, a river of the province and government 
of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito. It is also 
called COBITU ; see this article. 

MATO DENTRO, a settlement or village of the 
Portuguese, in the province and captainship of 
Espiritu Santo, and kingdom of Brazil ; situate 
near the settlement of Castas Alias, close to the 
river Doce or Dulce. 

MATO GROSO, a province and government of 
the Portuguese, in the country of Las Amazonas ; 
bounded n. by the captainship of Para, w. by the 
viceroyalty of La Plata, s. by the captainship of 
S. Paul s, and e. by the captainship of Goias. It 
abounds in mines of the richest gold. It was de 
sert, and the Portuguese, excited by its riches, 
made themselves masters of and established them 
selves in it, in 1761, placing ia it a governor; his 
residence, which is also the capital, bearing the 
same name as the province. Its principal com- 
inerce is reduced to the working of the gold mines, 
which render well. It is of an hot and moist tern- 
VOL. in. 



MAT 



81 



perature, and scantily supplied with eatables, and 
these are consequently very dear. In 1765, it wa* 
attacked by the President Don Joseph Pestana, 
by order of the viceroy of Peru, Don Manuel 
Arnat, but he was obliged to desist from his enter 
prise, and to retire with his troops in 1766, 
owing to the valour manifested by the Portuguese, 
and the roughness of the territory. 

MATOS, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Guayana or Nueva Andalucfa. It 
runs n. and enters theCaura by the w. side, oppo 
site the Yurunni. 

MATOURI, Qu ARTEL I&amp;gt;E, a settlement and 
parish of the English, in the island of Cayenne; 
situate in the vicinity of a mountainous tract of 
the same name, in the w. part of the island; 

[MATTA DE BRAZIL, a town in the cap* 
tainahip of Pernambuco in Brazil, about nine 
leagues from Olinda. It is very populous, and 
quantities of Brazil-wood are sent from this coun 
try to Europe.] 

[MATTA PONY, a navigable river of Vir 
ginia, which rises in Spotts^lvania county, and 
running a s. e. course, joins Parnunky river below 
the town of De la War, and together form York 
river. This river will admit loaded floats to 
Downer s bridge, 70 miles above its mouth. J 

[MATTES, or MATALINARES, a point on the 
e. coast of S. America, in the S. Atlantic ocean, 
is in lat. 45 23 s. and long. 67 9 a&amp;gt;.] 

[MA1THEO Island, ST. or ST. MATTHEW S 
Island, in the S. Atlantic ocean. Lat. 1 24 s.~\ 

[MATTHEW S Bay, ST. in the gulf of Mex 
ico, on the w. shore of Carnpeachy gulf, is more 
than 100 leagues to the n. of Tumbez.] 

[MATTHEW S, ST. or MATTHEO Bay, on 
the coast of Peru, on the N. Pacific ocean, is six 
leagues to the n. e. by e. from point Galera, and 
five or six leagues s. s. w. from the river St. Jago, 
between which there is anchorage all the way, if 
ships keep at least in six fathoms water. It is all 
high land with hollow red crags, and several points 
runout, forming good retreats for ships driven in 
by hard squalls and flaws from the hills, and by 
the seas running high, which often happen.] 

MATUCANA, SAN JUAN DE, a settlement of 
the province and corregimiento of Guarochiri in 
Peru. 

MATUMAGANTI, a river of the province 
and government of Darien, and kingdom of Tierra 
Firme. It rises in the mountains of the n. coast, , 
and enters the Bayano. 

MATUNA, BOCA DE, the entrance into the 
sea of the dike which communicates this rive* 

M 



82 M A U 

\viththatoftheMagdalena, in the province and 
government of Cartagena, between the point of 
Barbacoa and that of San Bernardo. 

MATURU, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Para in Brazil ; situate on the shore 
of the river of Las Arnazonas, near the town of Cu- 
rupa. 

[MAUGERV1LLE, a township in Sunbury 
county, province of New Brunswick, situated on 
St. John s river, opposite St. Ann s, and 30 miles 
above Bellisle.] 

MAULAS, ARROYO DE, a small river of the 
province and government of Buenos Ayres in Peru. 
It runs w. and enters the Rio Negro, just before 
the mouth by which it enters the Uruguay. 

MAULE, a province and corregimiento of the 
kingdom of Chile; bounded e. by the cordillera, 
s. by the province of Chilian, the river Maule 
serving as the limits, w. by the sea, and n. by the 
province of Colchagua. It is from e. to w. 130 
miles, and about 60 from n. to s. It abounds in 
mines and in lavaderos or washing places of gold, 
and in the district of the curacy of the capital, 
near the ferry where the river Maule is crossed, is 
a mountain called Chivato, where there is a fa 
mous gold mine, which was formerly worked, and 
afterwards abandoned until the year 1767, when 
it was again worked : it always afforded a metal 
of very good quality. 

In this province are cultivated all kinds of 
grain : there are good breeds of cattle of every 
species, especially goats, which are highly prized 
for their hides to make leather. Here are also 
vines more esteemed and of a better quality than are 
those of Peru, and some tobacco, the cultivation 
of which has ceased since that it became monopo 
lized by the crown, and its sowing prohibited. 
In it also, as well as in the provinces of Quillota 
and Calchagua, are large forests of the coco nut 
tree. The rivers which water and fertilize this 
province, are Maule, Claro, and Lontue; this 
latter joins the Teno, divides this jurisdiction from 
that of Colchagua, and after its union is known 
by the name of Mataquito. Here is also a mine of 
brea or tar, which is a kind of bituminous mud, 
and which, although it has been frequently clari 
fied by fire and boiling, yet does it always retain 
a mixture of earth, so that its use will remain small 
until that a better means of preparing it be dis 
covered. 

Through some parts of this province passes the 
cordillera by the e. and in it are many muleteers, 
who carry on a traffic by carrying salt, which is 
found in small pieces of a very white quality in 



M A U 

certain lakes. The inhabitants amount to 12,000, 
and the capital is Talca. 

[The cheese made in this province is the best in 
Chile, and in no way inferior to that of Placentia 
or Holland. Its inhabitants, who are mostly the 
descendants of the ancient Promaucians, are cou 
rageous, robust, and warlike. The capital, Talca 
or St. Augustin, was built in the year 1742: it is 
situated among hills on the river Rioclaro, in lati 
tude 35 15 , and 71 1" of longitude. Its po 
pulation is very considerable, owing, not only to 
rich mines of gold that are found in its mountains, 
but to the plentifulness of provisions, which are 
cheaper than in any other part of Chile. This 
latter circumstance has induced several noble fa 
milies from St. Jago and Concepcion, whose 
finances had become diminished, to retire thither, 
an emigration which has been denominated, in 
derision, the bankrupt colony. In this province 
arc also the towns of Curico, Cariguenes, St. Sa- 
verio di Bella-isla, St. Antonio della Florida, 
Lora, and three or four other Indian villages. 
Curico, or St. Joseph of Buena Vista, was built in 
the year 1742, and is situated ou a pleasant plain 
at the foot of a beautiful hill, in 34 14 of latitude. 
It contains a parish church, a convent of Mere- 
darii, and another of strict Franciscans which is 
very large. Canguenas was built the same year, 
and lies in 35 40 of latitude, between the two 
small rivers Tutuben and Canguenes. Besides 
the parish church it has a convent of Franciscans. 
St. Saverio di Bella-isla and St. Antonio della 
Florida were founded in the year 1755; the first 
is in 35 4 of latitude, and the second in 35 20 
of latitude. Loro, situate near the disembogue- 
ment of the river Mataquito, is a popu lous settlement 
of Promaucian Indians, and is governed by a 
cacique or uhnen.^ 

MAULC, a river of which we have before 
spoken, in the former province, to the s. of the 
city of Santiago, and in the jurisdiction of La 
Concepcion. It rises in the mountains of the cor- 
dillem, and runs from e.iow. collecting the waters 
of several other rivers, of which are the Cau- 
chenes, the Claro, and others of less note. Asfar 
as the last mentioned extended the conquests of 
the Iiica Yupanqui, eleventh emperor of Peru. 

This river runs to empty itself into the Pacific 
ocean, forming a very convenient bay, in lat. 34 
50 s. on the borders of the jurisdiction and 
bishopric of Santiago. The Indians called this 
part Promoc.ac.es , which in their language signi 
fies a place of dancing and delights, to denote the 
pleasantness of this territory. Before it enters the 



M A U 

sea it has a celebrated dock, and here it spreads 
out and forms a very large sheet. The king pro 
vides a ferry for the passage of those who cross the 
river, and near to the ferry is a convent of Angus- 
tip monks, which serves as a parish to the Indians 
and Negroes, ^ ho dwell in different villages situate 
on its bank, and which are here called eslancias. 

[On the left bank of this river, at 400 paces dis 
tance from its mouth, is an insulated mass of 
white marble, consisting of a single piece, 75 
feet in height, 224 in length, and 54 in breadth. 
This immense block, called from its appearance 
The Church, is excavated within like an arch, 
the third part of its height, and has on the out- 
side three doors of a semicircular form, and pro 
portionate height and breadth ; through the one 
on the n\ front the sea continually flows ; the two 
others, which are on then, and s. sides, and placed 
opposite, serve to admit those who wish to visit it 
at the ebl) tide. This natural edifice, constantly 
washed by the sea, serves as a place of resort for 
the sea-wolves, who herd in great numbers in the 
lower part, and make the cavity re-echo with their 
lugubrious cries ; while the upper is occupied by 
a species of sea-bird, very white, called /iV/, in 
figure and size resembling a house-pigeon. 

In this river likewise is to be found a clay as 
white as snow, smooth and greasy to the touch, 
extremely fine, and sprinkled with brilliant specks. 
It is found on the borders of rivers and brooks in 
the province of Maule, in strata which run deep 
into the ground, and its surface, when seen at a 
distance, has the appearance of ground covered 
with snow, and is so unctuous and slippery that 
it is almost impossible to walk upon it without 
falling. It does not effervesce with acids, and in 
stead of losing in the fire any portion of its shining 
whiteness, it acquires a slight degree of transpa 
rency. It is believed to be very analogous to the 
kaolin of the Chinese ; and that, combined with 
fusible spar, of which there are great quantities in 
the same province, it would furnish an excellent 
porcelain.] 

MAULE, an island of the same province and 
kingdom, formed by the rivers Maule, Longo- 
miila, and Putagan. 

MAULE, a morro or mountain of the same pro 
vince ; situate on the shore of the former river, 
from whence it takes its name. 

[MAURA. See SOCIETY Islands.] 

MAURE, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Arica in Peru; annexed to the cu 
racy of Tarata. 

MAURF, a river of the province and corregi- 
micnto of Pacajcs in Peru. It rises at the foot of 



M A U 



83 



the cordillera^ and runs nearly due e. until it 
enters the waste-water which runs into the lake of 
Chucuito. 

[MAUREPAS, an island on the n. e. coast of 
lake Superior, and n. e. of Ponchartrain island.] 

[MAUREPAS, a lake in W. Florida, which, 
communicates w. with Mississippi river, through 
the gut of Ibberville, and e. with lake Ponchar 
train. It is 10 miles long, seven broad, and has 
10 or 12 feet water in it. The country round it is 
lo&amp;gt;v, and covered with cypress, live oak, myrtle, 
&amp;c. Two creeks fall into this lake, one from the 
it. side, called Nattabanie, the other from the 
peninsula of Orleans. From the Ibberville at its 
junction with Maurepas to the river Amit is 27 
miles, and from thence, following the Ibberville to 
the Mississippi at the w. side of the peninsula of 
Orleans, 16 miles. From the Ibberville across the 
lake, it is seven miles to the passage leading to 
Poncharlrain. The length of this passage is seven 
miles, arid only 300 yards in width, which is di 
vided into two branches by an island that extends 
from Maurepas to about the distance of a mile 
from Ponchartrain. The s. channel is the deepest 
and shortest. The passage thence through lake 
Ponchartrain to the gulf of Mexico is above 46 
miles.] 

[MAUREPAS Island, on the coast of Cape Bre 
ton, the same as the ISLE MADAME^ which 
see.] 

MAURI, QUARTET, BE, a settlement and parish 
of the French, in the island of Cayenne; situate 
in the e. part, and at the entrance of the river 
Ocuya. 

[MAURICE Bay, on thea&amp;gt;. side of Cape Fare 
well island, or s. extremity of E. Greenland, and 
the principal harbour of that sea.] 

[MAURICE RIVKR, the name of a place in Cum 
berland county, New .Jersey.] 

[MAURICE River, in some maps called cor 
ruptly Morris, rises in Gloucester county. New 
Jersey, and runs s. about JO miles, and empties 
into Delaware bay ; is navigable for vessels of 
100 tons 20 miles, and for small craft considerably 
further.] 

MALRICIO, S. BAHIA DE, a bay in one of 
the islands which form the Land of Fucgo, to the e. 
nearly opposite that of Los Estados on the w. side 
of Le Mai re straits. It was discovered in 1616 by 
Jacob le Maire, who gave it this name in honour 
of Mauricio de Nassau, Prince of Orange. It is 
throughout its whole circumference of a rough, 
mountainous, and barren soil, and continually 
covered Avith snow. To the n. e. is a road called 
Verschoxsis, which is insecure, and on the s. is 
M 2 



84 MAY 

a bay of the name of Valentins, which is large, 
convenient, and capacious, but very open, having 
anchorage before it in about 12f fathoms from the 
shore, over coral rocks. The cape or point which 
looks s. is called De Buen Suceso, and is in lat. 
55 s. and long. 65 18 w. 

MAURO, S. a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Todos Santos in Brazil ; situate at 
the mouth of the river Yapetinga, and on the shore 
of the bay. 

MAUTACONA, a small river of the province 
and government of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia. 
It rises to the w. of the lake Ipava, from whence 
the Orinoco takes its rise, according to the map of 
the geographer Cms, and enters into the last river 
near fort De S. Barbera. 

MAXALTEPEC, a settlement of the alcaldla 
mayor of Nexapa in Nueva Espana ; situate on 
the skirt of a mountain well covered with fine trees, 
and inhabited by 28 families of Indians. 

[MAXANTALLA Island is near the port of 
Matanchel, on the w. coast of New Mexico, and on 
the N. Pacific ocean.] 

MAXATES, a settlement of the province and 
government of Cartagena ; situate near the dique 
or canal into which the sea enters to surround that 
piece of land. 

MAXI, or MAXIS, a river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas. It rises in some moun 
tains much covered with wild cacao, in the terri 
tory of the Oreguatos and Curanaris Indians, runs 
n. and turning its course w. enters in a large body 
into the Madera, close to the great cataract which 
it forms. 

MAXWELL S, a city of the island of Bar- 
bad oesi 

MAY, a small river of the province and colony 
of Georgia. It runs e. and enters the sea. 

[MAY, Cape, the most s. point of land of the 
state of New Jersey, and the n. point of the en 
trance into Delaware bay and river, in lat. 38 57 
n. and long. 74 54 w. The time of high water 
on spring-tide days is a quarter before nine 
o clock.] 

[MAY COUNTY, Cape. See CAPE.] 

[MAY Point, on the s. side of Newfoundland 
island, a point of the peninsula between Fortune 
and Placentia bays.] 

[MAY S Lick, in Mason s county, Kentucky, 
a salt spring on a branch of Licking river, nine 
miles s. s. a&amp;gt;. of Washington, on the 5. bank of 
the Ohio, aud 15 n. of the Blue licks.] 

MAYA, SANTA ANA DE, a settlement of the 
head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor 
of Cuiceo in Nueva Espana. It contains 12 



MAY 

families of Spaniards and Mustees, and 32 of 
Indians. 

MAYA, a small port on the coast of the province 
and government of Venezue\i\, to the w. of the city 
of Caracas. 

MAYA, or MAYAPAN. Such, in the time of the 
Indians, was the name of the province of Yucatan, 
which was then a kingdom separate from Nueva 
Espana, and which the Spaniards at first believed 
to be an island. It was afterwards discovered to 
be a peninsula surrounded by the N. sea, by this 
rhumb, as also by the e. and w. and united only by 
the s. and the kingdom of Guatemala. Moreover, 
between the two kingdoms laid an extremely 
rugged country, full of mountains and sierras, and 
inhabited by the infidels, the Itzaes, Petenes, La- 
candones, Cheaques, Mopanes, Cholcs, China- 
mitas, Caboxes, Uchines, Ojoyes, Tirampies, and 
various other tribes ; and these, ever after the con 
quest of the kingdom, so stood in the way of any 
connection between the two kingdoms, that this has 
been obliged to be effected by a very circuitous 
sea -voyage. 

MAYACARE, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Guayana. It runs w. and enters the 
sea in a bay near the N. cape. 

MAYAGUANA, an island of the N. sea, one 
of the Lucayas, discovered by Christopher Co 
lumbus in his first voyage; situate n. of His- 
panola or St. Domingo. 

[MAYAGUANA is one of the uninhabited Bahama 
islands. Its s. w. point lies about 10 leagues in an 
e. s. e. direction from the e. point of the French 
Keys, and the s. e. point of it bears about 12 
leagues n. w. from the n.w. point of the Blue Caicos. 
The n. w. point of the island (from whence a reef 
runs out about three miles) is situated about three 
leagues from the s. w. point ; and there is an 
anchorage along the s. end of the island. Fresh 
water is to be found at the n. w. point. Along the 
s. side of the island, which is probably upwards 
of 30 miles in length, vessels may generally anchor, 
and about four leagues from the s. w. point there 
is a reef harbour, at Abraham s reef, for vessels 
drawing about 12 feet. There is fresh water at it. 
A dangerous reef runs out for several miles at the 
e. end of the island, and within it a harbour for 
very small vessels. A reef also runs all along the 
n. side of the island.] 

MAY AGUES, a river of the island of Porto- 
rico. It rises from a mountain in the centre of the 
said island, runs w. and enters the sea between the 
river Guanagive and the bay of A fiasco. 

MAYANALA, SANTA MAIHA DE, asettlement 
of the head settlement of the district and alculdia 



MAY 

mayor of Iguala in Nueva Espafia. It contains 
51 families of Indians. 

MAYASQUE1I, a settlement of the province 
and government of Pastos, in the district of the 
jurisdiction of the audience of Quito. 

MA YE, a mountain on the coast of the province 
and government of Guayana. It stands on the 
coast as it were an isolated platform, at a small 
distance from the river Cowanawini, and is covered 
with trees, serving as a landmark to those sailing 
for Cayenne. It takes its name from a nation of 
Indians who dwell in this part, in lat. 30 15 . 

MA YEN, an island situate to the n. w. of Spi(z- 
bcrgen, in lat. 71 10 n. The sea, which washes 
its coasts, was formerly very abundant in whales, 
but these creatures having shifted to the n. the 
island was abandoned by such as used to occupy 
themselves in the fisheries. In its n. extremity is 
a very lofty mountain called Beerembergen or of 
the Bear; the same traverses the whole island, and 
is discovered at SO miles distant. It has very 
good ports, and abounds in shell and other fish ; 
but the great quantity of ice which forms in the 
sea around it, especially towards the e. renders it 
inaccessible in the spring. 

[MA YES are Indians of N.America, who live 
on a large creek called St. Gabriel, on the bay of 
St. Bernard, near the mouth of Guadalupe river ; 
are estimated at 200 men ; never at peace with the 
Spaniards, towards whom they are said to possess a 
fixed hatred, but profess great friendship for the 
French, to whom they have been strongly attached 
since Mons. de Salle landed in their neighbour- 
hoodt The place where there is a talk of the 
Spaniards opening a new port, and making a settle 
ment, is near them ; where the party, with the go 
vernor of St. Antoine, who were there lately to 
examine it, say they found the remains of a French 
block-house : some of the cannon now at Labahie 
are said to have been brought from that place, and 
known by the engravings now to be seen on them. 

The French speak highly of these Indians, for 
their extreme kindness and hospitality to all 
Frenchmen who have been amongst them : have a 
Janguage of their own, but speak Attakapa, which 
is the language of their neighbours the Caran- 
kouas ; they have likewise a way of conversing by 
signs.] 

[MAYFIELD, a township in Montgomery 
county, New York, adjoining Broadabiu on the 
w. taken from Caujfhnawaga, and incorporated in 
1793. In 1796, 126 of its inhabitants were qua 
lified ele&amp;lt; tors.J 

[MAYNAS, a government, formerly the e. 
limit -of the jurisdiction, of Quito in Peru, and 



MAY 85 

joining on the e. to the governments of Quixos 
and Jaen de Bracamoros. It is separated from 
the possessions of the Portuguese by the famous 
line of demarcation, or the boundary of those 
countries belonging to Spain and Portugal. See 
MAINAS/] 

MAYO, TABLON DE, a settlement of the pro 
vince and government of Popayan in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. 

MAYO, another settlement, of the province and 
corregimiento of Canta in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Arahuay. 

MAYO, an abundant river of the province of 
Ostimuri in Nueva Espana, which divides this 
province from that of Cinaloa, and enters the sea 
in the gulf of California, or Mar Roxode Cortes. 

MAYO, another river, of the province and co 
lony of Virginia, in the county of Lunenburg. 
It runs s. e. and enters the Dan. 

MAYO, a very lofty mountain, of the province 
and captainship of San Vicente in Brazil ; situate 
on the shore of the river Tajai-Meri. 

[MAYO, SANTA CRUZ DE, a port at the mouth 
of the river Mayo, near the middle of the a. , coast 
of the gulf of California. From this place the cou 
rier of Mexico goes to Loreto in California and 
Monterey, on the w. coast of N. America.] 

MAYOBAMBA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Vilcas Huaman in Peru ; an 
nexed to the curacy of Hualla. 

MAYOBAMBA, another settlement, in the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Lucanas in the same 
kingdom ; annexed to the curacy of Chipau. 

M AYOC, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Guanta in Peru. 

MAYOCMARCA. See ANCO. 

MA YORE, a lake of the province and govern 
ment of Paraguay in Peru ; formed in the terri 
tory of the Chiquitos Indians by a pool of waters 
of the river Paraguay, below the lake of Los 
Xareyes. 

MAYORUNAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
who dwell in tUe woods s. of the Maranon, be 
tween the river Cusiquina to the e. and Ucayale to 
the w. bounded s. by the nations of the Cocamas 
and Cocamilas nations. Some of them have been 
reduced to the faith. 

MAYORUNAS, with the dedicatory title of Sin 
Ignacio, a settlement of the above Indians, being 
a reduction of the missions that were held by the 
regulars of the company, in the province of Aiai- 
nas and kingdom of Quito. 

MAYTOL, a river of the province and atcaldta. 
mayor of Los Cholcs in the kingdom of Guate 
mala; discovered in 1675 by the Father Fiau- 



86 



M A Z 



cisco Gal legos, who entered amongst those moun 
tains to the reduction of the infidel Indians, ac 
companied by F. Joseph Delgado, both of the 
order of St. Domingo. This river is large, and 
on its shore is the mountain called Escurruchan, 
but which the Indians denominate God of the 
Mountains. On it is burning a continual fire, 
kept up by their sacrifices ; and they are extremely 
particular to throw something into the flame as 
they pass, firmly believing that if they did not so 
they would soon die. 

MAYUKIAGA, or MARUACAS, a large river 
which laves the country of the Xibaros Indians, in 
the province and government of Mainas, of the 
kingdom of Quito. It runs s. e. and enters the 
Pastata near where this river enters the Maranon. 
[MAYZI, the e. cape of the- island of Cuba, 
and the w. point of the windward passage. Lai. 
20 14 30" n. Long. 74 I 30" w. See MAwr.] 
MAYAHUACAN, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Zochicoatlan in Nueva Espaiia. It contains 16 
families of Indians. 

[MAZALTAN, a province of Mexico or New 
Spain. It is well watered by the Alvarado, which 
discharges itself by three navigable mouths, at 30 
miles distance from Vera Cruz.] 

MAZAP1L, a real of the silver mines and set 
tlement of the head settlement of the district and 
jurisdiction of the bishopric of Guadalaxara in 
Nucva Espaiia, which serves as a limit and divi 
sion of the kingdom of Nueva Galicia with that 
of Nueva Vizcaya ; the territories of the latter 
being on the n. It has always abounded in mines 
of good metal ; and these at first were worked to 
great profit by slaves, owing to the intracticability 
and savage state of the Indians ; but since that 
these have become domesticated, they are not only 
employed in this labour, but also in the agricultu 
ral estates with which the territory is surrounded. 
The population amounts to more than 40 families 
of Spaniards and Muslecs, and many more of 
Mulattoes, with a great number of Indians, there 
being also breeders of cattle of every kind. It is 
220 miles n. n. e. of Guadalaxara, and in lat. 
24 // 27 . Long. 101 c 30 ttf. 

MAZARONI, MAZARUINI, or ATAPARAN, a 
large and abundant river of the province of Guay- 
ana, and government of Cumana. It rises in the 
interior of the province, and runs nearly from*, to 
n. until it enters the Essequibo just close to where 
this runs into the sea. The Dutch, protected by 
the Caribcs, navigate this river to pillage the In 
dians of the province, whom they make slaves to 
work in their estates ; nor arc there any stratagems 



which avarice and tyranny can invent that are not 
adopted for the purpose of entrapping those un 
happy wretches. It is from this policy that the 
Dutch are in alliance and friendship \vith the Ca- 
ribcs. 

MAZATAN, a settlement of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Copala in Nueva Espaiia ; 
situate near the coast of the S. sea. Its population 
is composed nearly altogether of Mulattoes, who 
are under the obligation of guarding its port, it 
having been invaded at various times by enemies. 
It is of a hot temperature, abounding in maize and 
French beans, and particularly in fish, which is 
caught in abundance in the large river of its name, 
and on the borders of which it is situate. 

MAZATEPAN, S. MAIITIN DE, a settlement 
and head settlement of the district of the alcaldia 
mayor of Tehuacan in Nueva Espaiia. It con 
tains 150 families of Indians, and is 16 leagues to 
the e. I to the n. e. of its capital. 

MAZATEPEC, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Huitepec, and alcaldia 
mayor of Ouernavacn, in Nueva Espaiia; it is 
situate on the top of a mountain so barren and ill- 
supplied with water that it is necessary to fetch 
this article from the neighbouring rivers; on its 
skirt, however, is a plain, which is the most woody 
of any part in the Avhole jurisdiction ; and here 
there are many kinds of fruit and sugar-cane, of 
which a certain portion of sugar is made. It has 
a convent of the monks of San Francisco, and con 
tains 57 families of Indians, and 27 of Spaniards 
and Mustees. 

MAZATLAN, SAN JUAN DE, a settlement 
and head settlement of the district of the alcaldia 
mayor of Nexapa in Nueva Espatln. It contains 
111 families of Indians, who trade in cotton, cattle, 
and wood, which they cut. It is 25 leagues to 
the n, of its capital. 

MAZATLAN, another settlement, in the head set 
tlement of Zapotlan, and alcaldia mayor of Te 
pee, in the same kingdom. It contains 34 fami 
lies of Indians, who traffic in seeds and cotton; 
and is a little more than 13 leagues between the e. 
and s. of its capital. 

MAZATLAN, another, of the head settlement 
and alcaldia mayor of La Purificacion in the same 
kingdom ; situate on the coast of the S. sea. Its 
inhabitants occupy themselves in keeping a look 
out after vessels, and in giving intelligence to the 
alcaldes mayores. It is six leagues to the s. of its 
capital. 

MAZATLAN, another, of the head settlement and 
alcaldia mayor of Compostela in the kingdom of 
Nueva Galicia. 



M B O 

MAZATLAN, another, of the head settlement of 
the district of Tuzcacuesco, and alcaldia mayor 
of Araola, in Nueva Esparta. It is of an hot 
temperature; situate between two rising grounds 
on the side of a small stream, with the waters of 
which the inhabitants irrigate their orchards and 
gardens. The population consists of 70 families 
of Indians, and it is four leagues to the w. of its 
head settlement. 

MAZIBA, a large settlement of Indians of (he 
Saliva nation, in the llanos of San Juan; bordering 
upon the river Sinaruco. The Caribes, united 
with the Dutch, took and pillaged it, with other 
settlements, in 1684. 

MAZINGA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Santa Mart a in the Nuevo Key no 
de Granada ; situate near the scrrunia. The 
English, commanded by William Gauson, sacked 
it in 1665. 

MAZO, a settlement of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Chancay in Peru ; annexed to the cu 
racy of Huahura. 

MAZOLA, PUNT A DE, a point on the coast of 
the province and government of Santa Mart a, and 
Nuevo Reynode Granada. It is 22 leagues from 
the cape of Chichibacoa. 

MAZOTECAS, settlements of Indians of the 
province and government of Honduras; disco 
vered by Don Fernando Cortes, conqueror of 
Nueva Espana, in 1574, in the route which he 
made to the aforesaid province. The name of 
Mazotecas signifies, in the Indian language, Coun 
try of Deer, from the abundance of these animals, 
Avhich were discovered to be so tame and domes 
tic that they were not frightened at the appearance 
of the Spaniards. The Indians being asked the 
cause, they said that their god had appeared to 
them in the figure of one of these amimals, and 
that therefore it was unlawful to ill-treat or kill 
them. 

MAZTITLAN, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district of Ixtac, and alcaldia mayor 
of San Juan de los Llanos, in Nueva Espana. 

MBOAPIARI, a river of the provinice and 
captainship of Rey in Brazil. It runs s. w. and 
enters the Rio Grande. 

MBOCAE, a small river of the province and 
government of Paraguay. It runs j?. and enters 
the Parana near the mission of Itapua. 

MBOCARIRAI, a river of the province and 
captainship of San Vicente in Brazil. It runs w. 
between the Tibiquari and the Tapiguy. 

MBOERI, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Paraguay. It runs w. between this river 
and the Parana, and enters the former opposite 






M E C 



87 



the Rio Verde, in the country of the Zamucos 
Indians. 

MBONGUIN, a river of the province and 
captainship of Rey in Brazil. It runs n. and en 
ters the Rio Grande. 

MBOTETE1, a large and copious river of the 
province and government of Paraguay. It runs 
w. and enters the Paraguay in the part Avhich is 
called El Paso, according to Don Juan de Cruz. 
It runs n. n. w. 

MBUTUAY, a river of the same province and 
government as the former. It also enters the Uru 
guay between the Span and the Naumbi. 

MBUTU1, a river of the same province and 
government as the former. It runs w. and enters 
the Uruguay between the Ibicuy and the settle 
ment of the mission of San Borja. 

MEAD, a settlement of the Indians of Barba- 
does, in the district of the parish of St. Philip. 

MEAD, a. river of Virginia, which runs s. s.w. 
and enters the Miamee the Great. 

[MEADOWS, a small river which falls into 
Casco bay, in the district of Maine.] 

[MEADS, a place situated on a fork of French 
creek ; a branch of the Alleghany, in Pennsyl 
vania. Lat. 41 36 n. and about J9 miles n. w. 
of fort Franklin, at the mouth of the creek.] 

MEAN A, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Caxamarquilla in Peru. 

MEARI, or MARI, a large river of the king 
dom of Brazil. It flows down from the mountains 
of the w. part, and in its course receives the wa 
ters of the Ovaquezupi, Pinare, and Maranoa or 
Maracou. It runs into the gulf of Maraiion, and 
forms the island Tatipera ; is navigable for small 
vessels for upwards of ]60 leagues, and its shores 
are covered Avith many cultivated estates and sugar 
cane plantations, Avhere there are some sugar-mills. 
Near its source dwell some barbarian Indians, 
called the Tapaj^os and Tapures. 

MECA, a creek of the coast of the S. sea, in 
the province and corregimiento of Arica in Peru. 

MECALAPA, a small settlement or ward of 
the alcaldia mayor of Guanchinango in Nueva 
Espana ; annexed to the curacy of Pantepec. 

MECAPACA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Sicasica in Peru. 

MECAPALA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Zochi- 
coatlan in NueA a Espana. It contains 46 fami 
lies of Indians, and is four leagues to the w. of 
its capital. 

MECAPILLO, NUESTRA SENORA DEL PIL 
LAR DE, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Tncuman, in the territory of Cbaco; 



r. r; ; j 

. .5 - 






M E C 



M E C 



a reduction of the Pasainas Indians made by the 
Jesuits, and at present under the care of the reli 
gious order of San Francisco. 

MECATINA, GREAT, an island of the gulf of 
St. Lawrence, near the coast of the country of 
Labrador, near the islands of Channel and Little 
Me atin, which is another isle of the name of 
which we treat, but smaller. 

MECATLAN, a settlement of the jurisdiction 
and alcaldia mayor of Valles in Nueva Espana ; 
situate on the shore of the river of the Desague of 
the lake of Mextitlan, and in which there is 
caught abundance of fish. It produces maize and 
other seeds, also cotton, of which are made va 
rious fabrics used by the natives for clothing. It 
is annexed to the curacy of Tamanzuchale, con 
tains 87 families of Indians, and is 31 leagues from 
the capital. 

MECATLAN, another settlement, of the head set 
tlement of the district of Zaltocan, and alcaldia 
mayor of Tepei, in the same kingdom. It con 
tains 15 families of Indians, who exercise them 
selves in the cultivation of maize and many sorts 
of fruit. It has a convent of the religious order of 
San Francisco, and is 14 leagues to the w. of the 
capital. 

MECHICOR, a river of Nova Scotia or Ar 
cadia in N. America. It runs s. e. between those 
of Agoniche and St. Croix, and runs into the sea 
at the entrance of the bay of Fundy. 

MECH1SES, a port of the coast in the pro 
vince of Sagadahoc, between the islands of Seal 
and Little Menan. 

MECHISES, some islands of the aforesaid pro 
vince ; situate at the entrance of the said port. 

MLCHISES, a river of the same province. It 
is small, runs nearly due e. and enters the sea. 

MECHOACAN, a province and bishopric of 
Nueva Espana in N. America, its name signifying 
a Place of Fishing. It is bounded n. by Nueva Ga- 
licia, s. by the Pacific sea, e. and s. e. by the pro 
vince of Mexico, w. by that of Guadalaxara, 
j. w. by that of Xalisco. Its length s. e. n. e. is 
30 leagues from the coast of the S. sea to the boun 
dary of the jurisdiction of Valles, near the juris 
diction of the N. where the bishopric of Mexico 
is bordered by this bishopric and that of Guada 
laxara. Its greatest width, following the coast of 
the S. sea, is 80 leagues, though in parts it nar 
rows to 60, 40, and even 30. 

This province was discovered by Cristoval de 
Olid, chieftain of the celebrated Hernan Cortes, 
and conquered and taken by him from its king 
Calzontzi. It is for the most part of a mild tem- 
peralure, aud so healthy that the Indians, in the 



time of their gentilism, \vhen they were sick, used 
to make it a resort to establish their health, nor 
\vithout succeeding in their object. 

It is watered by many rivers and fountains of 
delicious waters, and of the latter are many that 
are hot and medicinal. It has also various lakes, 
in which are caught abundance of fish. The 
whole of the soil is rich and fertile in vegetable- 
productions, and especially in wheat, maize, chile 
or pimiento, French besms, calabashes, and fruits 
of various sorts. It produces much honey, wax, 
cotton, of which very good woven fabrics are 
made, and silk, there being a large breed of silk 
worms, and these constituting the principal profit 
of its commerce. In the woods are found abun 
dance of the most excellent, and most precious sorts 
of wood ; and they ore full of game, as well 
birds as hares and rabbits. Also in the estates are 
an infinite number of cattle, from the quantify of 
pasture. In different parts of this province are 
found some good saline earths, also a black stone 
which serves for sharpen ing razors, and another of 
a fine grain resembling jet. 

This country is extremely rich in mines of gold, 
silver, copper, and tin ; and, in 1725, a mine of 
silver was discovered so abundant that it was call 
ed De Morcillo; it produced very much metal, 
but a part of the mountain having fallen in, the mine 
became closed, and could not since be discovered. 

The natives before the conquest by the Spa 
niards were most warlike, robust, handsome, and 
very dexterous marksmen with the arrow ; and 
never were the Mexican emperors able to bring 
them under the yoke of the empire. 

It is divided into five jurisdictions and alcaldias 
mayores, which are the following, the capital be 
ing Valladolid. 

Pasquaro, Cuiseo de la Laguna, 

Chaco, Chilchota, 

Zelaya, Zamora, 

Salvatierra, Colima, 

San Miguel el Grande, Tanzitaro, 
Guanajuato, Guirneo, 

Leon, Cinagua, 

S. Luis de la Paz, Motines, 

S. Luis de Potosi, Tinguindin, 

S. Pedro Guadalcazar, Xiquilpa, 
Maravatio, Tlasasaica^ 

Tlalpujagua, Zacatula. 

Jasso y Teremendo, 

Bishops who have presided in Mechoacan, 

1. Don Fr. Luis de Fuensalida, a monk of the 
order of San Francisco, one of the 12 first who 
passed over to Nueva Espaua : he found himself 
guardian in the convent of Tezcoco, when he wa 



MECHOACAN. 



presented to the bishopric of Mechoacan by the 
Emperor Charles V. in 1536, but he refused the 
office with profound humility. 

2. Don Yasco de Quiroga, native of Madrigal ; 
elected, for his virtue and literature, to be oidor 
of the audience of Mexico, and in this nominated 
through the above qualities to be visitor and paci 
ficator of the tumults that had arisen amongst all 
the Indians of the province; and in this calling 
he acted with such skill, that OM information being 
given to the emperor of (he same, he was presented 
to this bishopric in 1537. He removed the epis 
copal see from the city of Tzinzunzan, where it 
had been erected and had remained for a year, to 
to the city of Pasquaro, on account of the bad 
climate of the former place. He passed over to 
Spain in 1547, and returned to his bishopric in 
1554 ; dedicated his time to the making of the 
visitation, and died full of years and virtues in the 
settlement of Uruapan, in 1556. ^ / &amp;gt; 5 1 ^- 

3. Don Antonio Ruiz de Morales y Molina, na 
tive of Cordoba, knight of the order of Santiago, 
chanter of its holy church ; presented to the 
bishopric of Mechoacan in 1557, and promoted to 
La Puebla de los Angeles in 1563. 

4. Don Fr. Alonso de la Vera Cruz, of the order 
of San Agustin ; presented by his Majesty Philip 
II. to this bishopric, which he renounced for 
weighty reasons ; when at this moment the exem 
plary lite and conduct of Fr. Diego de Cliaves y 
Alvarado having excited the public attention, on 
him the bishopric was conferred ; though he died 
before he received the bulls of his consecration. 

5. Don Fr. Juan de Medina Rincon, of the 
order of San Agustin, native of Segovia ; he pass 
ed over to Mexico, and received the habit, was an 
excellent theologist, and one of the most zealous 
evangelical missionaries ; instructed himself in the 
Mexican and Otomian tongue to converse with the 
natives ; was presented to the bishopric in 1572, 
and was obliged to accept after having first re 
fused it; he defended the rights of his church, as 
sisted at the third provincial council, removed the 
cathedral to the city of Valladolid, where it at pre 
sent stands ; and whilst on the visitation died, in 
1580 ; his character being that of an apostle, poor 
in spirit, mild and charitable, and rich, zealous in 
the honour of "God. 

6. Don Fr. Alonso Guerra, of the order of 
Preachers ; he passed from the bishopric of Para- 

fuay to this in 1591, founded the convent of 
anta Catalina de Sena of his own order, and that 
of the barefooted Carmelites; and died in 1596. 

7. Don Fr. Domingo de Ulloa, of the same 
order as the former; descended from the illustrious 

VOL. III. 



house of the Marquises of la Mota; he took the 
habit in the convent of Nnestra Seiiora de la Perm 
of France, was collegiate in the college of San 
Gregorio de Valladolid and its rector, prior of 
various convents, vicar-general of the province of 
Castilla ; presented to the bishopric of Nicaragua, 
promoted to the church of Popuyan, and after 
wards to Ihis of Mechoacan in 1596 ; he governed 
four years with great skill and applause, and died 
in 1600. 

8. Don Fr. Andres de Ubilla, of the same order 
of Preachers, native of Guipuzcoa ; lie took the 
h; bit in Mexico, and having been professor of 
philosophy and theology, he took different prelacies 
unlil he became provincial; he then passed over 
to Spain on weighty matters concerning his religion, 
and was presented to the bishopric of Chiapa, 
and from thence removed to the mitre of Mecho 
acan in 1602, of which he did not fake possession, 
having died before receiving the bulls. 

9. Don Juan Fernandez Rosillo, dean of the 
holy church of Popayan and bishop of Vcra Paz ; 
from whence he was removed to this in 1605; he 
only governed a year and a half, and died in 1606. 

10. Don Fr. fialtasar dc Cobarrubias, native of 
Mexico, a monk of the order of San Agustin ; 
presented through the fame of his virtue and 
literature to the bishopric of La Asuncion of Para 
guay, afterwards to the church of Cazercs in 
Filipinas, from thence to Anteqnera, and lastly 
to Mechoacan in 1608 ; and having governed in 
every situation with zeal and edification, he died 
full of merits in 1622. 

11. Don Fr. Alonso de Enriquez Toledo y 
Armendariz, of the order of ISuestra Senora de 
la Merced, native of Sevilla ; he passed to the 
kingdom of Peru in quality of vicar-general in 
those provinces, and at his return to Spain was 
elected bishop of Cuba in 1622, and from thence 
promoted to the church of Mechoacan, where he 
governed with great skill; and died in the settle 
ment of Irumbo, in 1628. 

12. Don Fr. Francisco de Rivera, of the same 
order as the former, native of Alcala de Ilenares; 
after having finished his studies and filled the 
professorships of philosophy and theology with 
great approbation, he was nominated vicar-general 
of his religion in Nueva Espafia ; made the division 
of the provinces of Mexico and Guatemela ; passed 
over to Spain, where he was nominated vicar- 
gerieral of Aragon, Cataluua, and Castilla, remov 
ed to the bishopric of Guadalaxani, and from 
thence to Mechoacan in 16^9 ; he visited the whole 
of his, diocese, endowed the festival of the Most 
Holy Trinity, and died in 1657. 



MECHOACAN. 



13. Don Fr. Marcos Ramirez cle Prndo, of the 
order of San Francisco, native of Madrid ; he 
studied in the university of Salamanca ; nominated 
vice-commissary-general of the Indies, when he 
was appointed by Philip IV. to be bishop of 
C hia pa, of which dignity he took possession in 
1634 ; and was removed, in 1639, to this church 
of Mechoaean ; in 1648 nominated by his Majesty 
visitor of the tribunal of Crusade, and afterwards 
archbishop of Mexico, where he died before he 
received the pall. 

14. Don Fr. Payo Enriquez de Rivera, of the 
order of San Agustin, native of Sevilla ; he passed 
from the bishopric of Guatemala to this, arid on 
his road received advice of his promotion to the 
archbishopric of Mexico. 

15. Don Fr. Francisco Sarmientoy Luna, of the 
same order as the former ; in which, after having 
filled many situations as well as prelacies, he was 
presented to this bishopric in 1668 ; governed five 
years with great peace and quietness, and in J674 
embarked for Spain, being promoted to the bishopric 
of Almeria. 

16. Don Francisco Berdin de Molina, promoted 
to the bishopric of Guadalaxura in 1674 ; and he 
died 1 1 months after. 

17. Don Francisco de Aguiar Seixas y Villoa, 
native of Betanzos ; he was archbishop of Santiago, 
studied philosophy and theology with much profit, 
and led such an edifying life, that this prelacy 
only prognosticated his future greatness ; he 
visited La B( ea of the college of Fonseca, and 
passed to the university of Salamanca ; was magis 
terial canon of Astorga and penitentiary in the 
church of Santiago ; passed to the mitre of Gna- 
dalaxara, and from thence to this of Mechoacan, 
and afterwards to the archbishopric of Mexico; 
where he dSed, with general regret, in 1698. 

J8. Don Fr. Antonio Monroy, of the order of 
Preachers; he died elected bishop of this church 
before he took possession. 

19. Don .Juan de Ortega Montanes, promoted 
from the church of Guatemala to this; which he 
enriched \\ith the costly silver throne in which the 
sacrament is deposited ; made endowments for 
female children, built the episcopal palace, in 
which he laid out above 80,000 dollars, passed to 
the vice-royalty of Mexico, and afterwards to its 
bishopric. 

20. Don Garcia de Lagaspi, of the church of 
San Luis de Potosi, canon and arch-deacon of the 
cathedral of Mexico; presented to the bishopric 
of Guadiana, and promoted to this, which he held 
until 1704 : passing then to La Pucbla dc los 
Angeles, 



21. Don Manuel de Escalante Colombres j 
Mendoza, native of Peru ; he passed over to 
Mexico with his father, who went as fiscal of that 
audience, studied in the university there, obtained 
the professorship of rhetoric, was morning and 
evening lecturer, chanter in the cathedral, com 
missary in the tribunal of the holy crusade ; 
elected bishop of Durango in 1703, and the follow 
ing year promoted to this, which he entered in 
1706 ; he was so charitable that he devoted the 
most of his episcopal life to the relieving of other s 
necessities, and died in the city of Salvatierra in 
1708. 

22. Don Felipe Ijrnacio de Truxilloy Guerrero, 
native of Cadiz ; co legiate mayor of S.ui Barto- 
lorne cl Viego of the univerity of Salamanca, fiscal 
of the tribunal of the holy office 01 the city of 
Barcelona, inquisitor mayor of the tr.bunal of 
Palermo, judge in ordinary of the royal tribunal of 
Napoles, abbot of Santa Maria de Terrana, gover 
nor of the sacred religion of San Juan, fiscal 
regent in the royal and supreme council of Italy, 
deputy of the kingdom of Sicily, and being 
nominated in the general parliament of the Cortes, 
he was presented to the bishopric of Mechoacan in 
171 1 ; he governed for nine years with great skill, 
and died in 1720. 

23. Don Fr. Francisco de la Cuesta, of the 
order of San Geronimo, native of Colmenar of 
Oreja, in the archbishopric of Toledo; he took 
the habit i;i the royal monastery of San Lorenzo 
del Escorial, where he lived 32 years, and King 
Charles II. presented him with the archbishopric 
of Manila, which he governed 18 years, being 
at the same time president and captain-general ; 
he was promoted to this church of Mechoacan, 
for which place he embarked, but the labours of 
the voyage so harassed him, that he was obliged 
to be carried from Acapuleo in a liiter ; he govern 
ed only a month and 13 days, dying in the year 
172*. 

24. Don Fr. Angel Maldonado, native of Ocana, 
a Basilican monk ; presented to the bishopric of 
Mechoacan at the time that he was serving in that 
of Antequera ; but he refused the office. 

25. Don Francisco Garzeron, inquisitor of 
Mexico, and visitor-general of the kingdom, pre 
sented through the renunciation of the former; but 
he died before he received the cedule. 

26. Don .Juan .Joseph de Escalona and Cala- 
taynd, native of the town of Quer in La Rioja ; 
collegiate in San Geronimo de Alcala :le Henares, 
and of the mayor of San Bartolome el Viejo of 
Salamanca, penitentiary canon of the cathedral of 
Calahorra, and chaplain major of the royal con- 



MEG 

vent of La Encarnacion dc Madrid ; from whence 
he was elected bishop of Caracas, from thence 
promoted to Mcchoaciin in 1729, governed eight 
years with great virtue, and his sanctity was 
borne testimony to by his blood remaining (incor 
rupt for seven years after his death ; this took 
place in the estate of the Rincon in 17.37. 

27. Don Francisco Pablo Matos Coronado, born 
in the Canaries : after that his letters had gain 
ed the general approbation in the universities of 
Sevilla and Salamanca, he was presented to the 
church of Yucatan, and from thence removed to 
this of Mechoaran, which he governed with 
extreme tranquillity; he was much beloved for his 
talents and charity ; he passed over to Mexico for 
the recovery of his health, and died there in 
1744. 

28. Don Martin de Elizacochea, originally of 
the town of Azpilcueta in Navarra ; he studied 
in the university of Alcala, where he graduated as 
doctor in theology, was canon of the holy church 
of Mexico, where he had the dignified titles of 
school-master and dean, was chancellor of that 
university, commissary apostolic, subdelegate of 
the tribunal of the holy cru-ade, bishop of Cuba, 
afterwards of Durango, until 1745, when he was 
promoted to that of Mechoacan, where he erected 
the sumptuous temple of Santa Rosa, endowing 
the collegiates, constructed the episcopal prisons, 
and did innumerable acts of charily ; he died in 
1756. 

29. Don Pedro Ansclmo Sanchez de Tagle, 
originally of Santillana, bishop of Santander ; he 
studied in the universities of Valladolid and 
Salamanca ; was collegiate of the mayor of San 
Bartolome el Viejo, graduated as licentiate of 
canons for the chapel of Santa Barbara, was rector 
and deputy of his university, fiscal and inquisitor 
of Mexico, bishop of Durango; and from thence 
removed to this church of Mechoacan in 1757; 
he died in 1772. 

30. Don Luis Fernando de Hoyos y Mier, 
elected in the aforesaid year, J772: he died in 
1776. 

31. Don Juan I&amp;lt;rnncio de la Rocha, elected in 
1777; he died in 1783. 

32. Don Fr. Antonio de San Miguel, promoted 
from the bishopric of Comayagua to that of Me 
choacan in 1784. 

[MECKLENBURG, a county of Virginia, 
bounded H. by the state of N. Carolina. It contains 
14,733 inhabitants, of whom 6762 are slaves.] 

[MECKLENBURG, a county of N. Carolina, in 
Salisbury district, bounded s. by the state of S. 



MED 91 

Carolina. It contains 11 ,395 inhabitants, of whom 
1603 are slaves. Chief town, Charlotte.] 

[MECOWBANISH, a lake in N. America, in 
lat. 49 .} 

MEDANO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Buenos Ay res in Pern ; situate 
at the source of the river of Las Conchas, to the 
s. of the capital. 

MEDELLIN, a settlement of the jurisdiction 
and government of Vera Cruz in Nueva Espnna ; 
founded by Hernan Cortes, who gave it this name 
in honour of his native place in Estfcmadura. It 
is of a hot temperature, and has at two leagues 
distance the river called Eumcdio, where its 
jurisdiction terminates in that part. It is three 
league n. w. of the capital. 

MEDELLIN, a river of the former jurisdiction 
and kingdom. It rises near the city of SaJi lide- 
fonso de los Zapotecas, runs nearly from e. to w. 
and runs into the sea at the gulf of Campeche, op 
posite the island of Sacrificios. It was discovered 
by Hernan Cortes, who named it us well as the 
above settlement. 

MEDELLIN, a town of the province and govern 
ment of Antioqnia in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada ; situate on the shore of the river S;m Barto 
lome, which empties itself into the Magdalena. 

[MEDFIELD, a township in Norfolk county, 
Massachusetts, 20 miles s. w. of Boston. It was 
incorporated in 1650, and contains 731 inhabi 
tants.] 

[MEDFORD, a pleasant, thriving, compact 
town in Middlesex county, Massachusetts, four 
miles w. of Boston ; situated on Mystic river, three 
miles from its mouth. Here are several distilleries 
and brick-works, which give employment to a con 
siderable number of people. The rivor is navi 
gable for small vessels to this place. The town 
ship was incorporated in 1630, and contains 1029 
inhabitants, who are noted for their industry.] 

MEDINA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Los Llanos in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada; founded by Fr. Alonso Ronquillo, of 
the order of St. Domingo, in 1670. It is of an hot 
temperature, but abounding in wild cacao, and 
other vegetable productions, such as maize, i/ucas, 
and dates. It has a vein of black virgin salt in a 
very strong rock, which is carried to every part of 
the province for the cattle. 

MEDINA, a river of the kingdom of Nueva 
Galicia in N. America, which runs into the sea 
at the bay of San Joseph, of the bay of Mexico. 

MEDIO, Rio OKI,, a river in the island of St. 
Domingo, which rises in the sierras of the mines of 
N 2 



92 M E H 

Ciboo. It runs s. s. w. making a curve, and enters 
the Jacques, a little before this runs into the Neiba. 

ME i) 10, another river, in the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayres. It runs n. n. e. and 
enters the Parana, between those of Pabon and 
Ramallos. 

[MEDOCTU, a settlement in New Brunswick ; 
situated on the w. side of St. John s river, 37 miles 
above St. Ann s.] 

[MEDOROSTA, a lake in the w. part of the 
district of Maine, whose n. point is within eight 
miles of the Canada line, in lat. 47 56 and long. 
68 22 w. It gives rise to Spey river, which runs 
s. .v. e. into St. John s river.] 

MEDOUSA, a lake of Nova Scotia or Acadia, 
in N. America. It is formed by the river Pistoles, 
and empties itself into the San Juan. 

[MEDUNCOOK, a plantation in Lincoln 
county, district of Maine, 230 miles from Boston, 
having 322 inhabitants.] 

[MEDWAY, a township in Norfolk county, 
Massachusetts, bounded e. and s. by Charles river, 
which separates it from Medfield, and of which it 
was a part until 1713. It has two parishes of Con- 
gregationalists, and contains 1035 inhabitants. It 
is 23 miles s.w. of Boston, on the middle post-road 
from thence to Hartford.] 

[Mfii WAY, or MIDWAY, a settlement in Li 
berty county, Georgia, formed by emigrants from 
Dorchester in S. Carolina, about the year 1750, 
and whose ancestors migrated from Dorchester and 
the vicinity of Boston about the year 1700. A 
handsome Congregational meeting-house, belong 
ing to this settlement, was burnt by the British 
during the war, and the settlement was destroyed. 
It has since recovered, in a considerable degree, its 
former important^. Medway is 26 miles s. w. of 
Savannah, and nine w. of Sunbury.] 

MEGENA, a small river of the province and 
government of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia, one 
of those which enter the Orinoco by the e side. 

MEGtJIN, a river of the district of Guadalab- 
quen in the kingdom of Chile. It runs w. and 
enters the sea, between the point of Quenli and the 
Morro Bonifacio. 

M EH A NECK, a settlement of the English, in 
the territory and country of the Iroqnees Indians, 
and on the confines of Pennsylvania ; situate on 
the shore of the river Ohio. 

[MEHERHIN, a principal branch ofChowan 
river, in N. Carolina, which rises in Charlotte 
county, Virginia ; and running an e. by s. course, 
unites with the Nottaway about seven miles s. of 
the Virginia line. See CHOWAN River.] 



MEL 

MEJARI, or MEATUM, a river of the province 
and captainship of Maraiian in Brazil. It rises in 
a lake in the mountains of the Topinambes Indians, 
runs nearly due . and enters the sea in the bay 
formed by the mouth of the river Maraiian. 

MEJORADA. See COTUY. 

[MELA. See MALA.] 

[MELAQUE Port, on the w. coast of New 
Mexico, is to the n. w. of port Natividad or Na 
tivity, and near three leagues at s. e. from a row of 
four or five rocks or naked islands above water, ia 
the direction of n. w. This port is land-locked 
against all winds from the n. w. to the s. w.~\ 

[MELAWASKA, a French settlement of about 
70 families, secluded in a singular manner from 
the rest of mankind, in the n. e. part of the 
district of Maine. These people are Roman Ca 
tholics, and are industrious, humane, and hospi 
table.] 

[MELETECUNK River, in Monmouth coun 
ty, New Jersey, falls e. into Beaver Dam, which 
is at the head of the bay which is n. of Cranberry 
New Inlet.] 

[MELFORD s Place, on Tallapoosee river, in 
the w. part of Georgia, is separated from some In 
dian towns by that river, a considerable distance 
from its mouth,] 

MELGAR, SAN JUAN DE, a settlement of the 
jurisdiction ofTocaima, and government of Mari- 
quita, in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is 
extremely hot, and abounding in fruits of this cli 
mate, such as maize, yucas, dates, and sugar 
cane. 

MELIL.LA, a city in the island of Jamaica, 
one of the first that were founded there by the Spa 
niards, and abandoned shortly after from the bad 
ness of the territory. It stood towards the w. and 
it \yas removed, with the name of Sevilla, towards 
the n. 

[MELINCUE, a parish of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayres ; situate on a plain be 
tween the Tercero and Salad illo rivers, in lat. 33 
44 30" .9. Long. 6 1 49 56" w.} 

MEL1NQUE, a settlement or the province and 
government of Tucuman in Peru ; situate in the 
extremity of the Pampas, where this jurisdiction is 
divided from that of Buenos Ayres. 

MELIPILLA, a province and corregimiento of 
the kingdom of Chile ; bounded e. by the juris 
diction of St. lago, the river Mapocho serving 
as the limits ; i. by the coast, and ,v. by the pro 
vince of Rancagna, the river Meipo running be 
tween. In the w. part is a convent of the religious 
order of San Francisco, called Del Monte. The 



MEL 

extent of this province is very limited ; its vegetable 
productions are barley, wheat, and other seeds; 
it has a good quantity of cattle and wine of excel 
lent quality. On the coast is found much fish, 
especially on the coast of the mouth of the river 
Maipo and the port of San Antonio. The inha 
bitants, who amount to 3000, live for the most part 
in estates in the country, so that the villages or 
towns are but few. Through it passes the road 
which is traversed by the carts going from St. lago 
to Valparaiso. 

This province is of small extent upon the sea, 
but is about 25 leagues from e. to w. Its rivers 
are the Mapocho and Poangue, and it abounds, 
as before observed, with wine and grain. Meli- 
pilla, or St. Joseph de Logiono, situated not far 
from theMaypo, in lat. 32 32 , is the capital. Al 
though the situation of this place is beautiful, and 
the land near it very fertile, yet from its vicinity to 
St. lago, where the greater part of the proprietors 
reside, it is but thinly peopled. Notwithstanding, 
besides a parish church, the Augustins and the 
Mercedarii have establishments there, and the Je 
suits had also a college. Near the river Mapocho 
is the town of St. Francis del Monte, so called from 
an ancient convent of Franciscans, around which 
a number of poor families having collected, for 
med the population of this place. In its vicinity 
are several country houses belonging to some of 
the principal inhabitants of St. lago. Not far 
from the mouth of the river Maypo is the port of 
St. Antonio, which was much frequented at an 
early period of the Spanish settlement; but since 
the trade has been transferred to Valparaiso, few or 
no vessels continue to load there. 

MELIRUPU, a settlement of Indians of the 
kingdom of Chile ; situate at the source of the 
river Cauchupil. 

MELLAQUI, a small river of New France or 
Canada. It runs s. between lake Kitchigamin 
and that of Mitchigan, and turning e. enters the 
latter. 

MELLO, a port of the coast of the N. sea, in the 
province and captainship of Seara in Brazil. It 
lies between the river Omoneses and the Salinas 
Grandes. 

MELO, a town of the province and government 
of Buenos Ayres ; situate at the foot of the sierra 
De S. Paulo, on a small branch of the river Taquari. 
Lat. 32 l ; 3 14" s. Long, 54 17 24" w. 

MELONES, a small and desert island of the 
S. sea, in (he bay and gulf of Panama. 

MEMAROBKE, a small lake of the province 
and country of tUe Ivoquees Indians ; s. of the 



93 

river St. Lawrence, on the confines of New Eng 
land. 

MEMBRILLAR, a settlement of Indians of the 
district of Puchacay in the kingdom of Chile ; si- 
tuate on the shore of the river Ilata, in the part 
where the ferry is. 

MEME, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Esmeraldas in the kingdom of Quito, 
flowing down from the mountain of Guanas. It 
runs n. w. and enters by the e. shore into the 
Toachi, in lat. 13 34 *. 

MEMKECHKAOUCK, a small island near the 
coast of the province of Nova Scotia or Acadia, 
near cape Sable. It is one of those which the 
French call Loups Marins. 

MEMNISTE, a bay of the s. coast of the straits 
of Magellan, five leagues from the bay of Mauricio 
towards cape Deseado. It was discovered by the 
English in J600, and the pilot of the vessel, who 
was a Memnistan Anabaptist, gave it this name. 

[MEMORONCOK, a stream a little w. of 
Byram river. Douglass says the partition line be 
tween New York and Connecticut, as settled Dec. 
1, 1664, ran from the mouth of this river n.n. w. 
and was the ancient limits of New York, until 
Nov. 23, 1683, when the line was run nearly the 
same as it is now settled.] 

[MEMORY Rocks, amongst the Bahama 
islands ; situate 19 miles to the . of Great Bahama 
island, in lat. 27 4 n. and long. 78 49 w.~\ 

[MEMPHREMAGOG, a lake chiefly in the 
province of Canada, 19 miles in length from n. tos. 
and two or three wide from e. to w. The n. line 
of Vermont state passes over the s. part of the lake, 
in lat. 45 n. Memphremagog, which has com 
munication by the river St. Francis with St. Law 
rence river, is the reservoir of three considerable 
streams, viz. Black, Barton, and Clyde rivers, 
which rise in Vermont. The soil on its banks is 
rich, and the country round it is level. See VER 
MONT, &amp;c.] 

[MEMRAMCOOK River has been recom 
mended as the most proper boundary between the 
province of New Brunswick and Nova Scotia. It 
lies a little to the e. of Petitcodiak, and takes an. e. 
direction. 1 

MEMitUNCOOK, a settlement of Indians of 
the province of Nova Scotia or Acadia, in N.Ame 
rica ; situate at the mouth of the river P;itcoiyeak. 
[MENADOU Bay, or PAN Anon, is two leagues 
from port Balene, or port Neuf, on the coast of 
Cape Breton island, at the s. part of the gulf of St. 
Lawrence, having the island of Scatari, heretofore 
called Little Cape Breton, opposite to it.] 



MEN 

MENA-HERMOSA, SANTO DOMINGO DK, a 
settlement of the province and government of 
Tarrna in Peru, with a small fort for its defence ; 
as it is situate in the frontier of the rebellious 
Chunchos Indians. It was founded by Don 
Joseph dc Llamas, Marquis of Mena-hermosa, who 
gave it his name. He was also general of Cal- 
lao and of the armies in Peru, in 1744, when he 
passed, by a commission of the viceroy, into that 
kingdom, in order to settle the disturbances in this 
province, this settlement being made the military 
rendezvous. 

MENAN, the name of two islands, the one 
larger than the other, and distinguished by Menan 
Great, and Menan Small, near the coast of the 
province and colony of Sagadahook, between the 
island of Pascamadie and the port of Mechises. 

MENC1IIXEQUE, or MKNCHIQUIJO, as 
others call it, a settlement of the province ami go 
vernment of Cartagena, in the district and division 
of the town of Mompox ; situate on the shore of 
the river Magdalena, to the.?, of that town. 

MENCOPA, a settlement in the province and 
government of Tucuman in Peru, of the district 
and jurisdiction of the capital ; situate s. s. e. of 
the same. 

MENDAN, a settlement and asiento of the 
silver mines of the province and corregimiento of 
Chachapoyas in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of 
Quillay. 

[MENDIIAM, a township in Morris county, 
New Jersey, three miles w. zo. of Veal town, and 
six a), of Morristown.J 

[MENDOCIN, a cape on the n. w. coast of 
America, and N. Pacific ocean. Lat. 40 25 n. 
Long. 124 25 a?.] 

[MENDON, a post-town in Worcester county, 
Massachusetts, 32 miles s. w. of Boston, and 24 
??. e. of Pom fret in Connecticut. This township, 
called Quanshipauge by the Indians, was incor 
porated in IG 67, and contains two Congregational 
parishes, a society of Friends, and 1555 inhabi 
tants. It is bounded on the s. by the state of 
Rhode Island. It is watered by Charles and Mill 
rivers, and other small streams, which serve five 
grist-mills, two saw-mills, two clolhier s works, 
and a forge. There are three hills here, viz. 
Caleb s, Wigwam, and Miskee, from either of 
which may be seen, in a clear day, the four New 
England states.]] 

MENDOZA, a city, the capital of the province 
ami corregimicnti) of Cuyo, bearing also this latter 
name., in the kingdom of Chile: founded by Don 
Garcia Hurtado de Mcndoza, Marquis of Cancte, 



MEN 

lie being the president, and giving it his name in 
1559, and not in 1593, as is asserted by the ex- 
jestiit Coleti. Its situation is pleasant and beauti 
ful, on the e. part of the cordillera of the Andes, 
and on a level plain. It is of a good size, and has 
some fine buildings, all of the houses having their 
respective orchard or garden : also to irrigate it 
there are some reservoirs formed from the river of 
its name, the which cause it to be extremely fertile 
and abundant in fruit and vegetables. The climate 
is mild and pleasant. It has a very good parish 
church, and some convents of the orders of San 
Francisco, and St. Domingo, San Augustin, La 
Merced, an hospital of Bethlemites, a church witli 
the dedicatory title of Santa Barbara, destined for 
the establishment of a monastery of nuns ; four 
chapels of ease ; of the names of Nnestra Senora de 
Nieva, San Vicente, San Joseph, and Nuestra 
Senora de Buen Viage; and a college which be 
longed to the Jesuits. Its population is composed 
of about 300 families, the half Spaniards and 
whites, and the other half of Misters, Mulattoes, 
and Negroes. It lies in the direct road to Peru, 
and is 95 miles to the e. of the city of Santiago, 
but the journey from thence is very rough. It 
lies on the shore of a river of its name, and e. s. e 
of the volcano of Santiago. On the n. part it has 
various estates, such as those of Cienega and El 
Agua del Chayado ; and between this city and 
that of San Luis de la Punta dwell the Plainches 
and Pehuenches Indians, who, mixed with the 
Hubliches and Moluches, descendants of the an 
cient Aucas, with many outlaw Creoles and Mulat 
toes, have various settlements and dwellings ; from 
whence they sally forth to plunder and destroy the 
inhabitants of the jurisdictions of Mendoza and of 
Cordoba in the province of Tucuman. This city 
is in lat. 32 52 30" n. and long. 68 58 a). 

MENDOZA, a large and abundant river of the 
same province as the former cit} . It rises in the 
cordillera, and running e. collects in its course the 
waters of all the streams which flow down from, 
those mountains, and shortly after forms the lakes 
of lluanacacheor Guanacha, which run 20 leagues, 
forming 1 various others ; and from the last of these 
lakes this river issues into the river of Tunuyan by 
a wide trench called the Desaguadero, near the 
settlement of Corocorto. It also forms many 
islands, and empties itself by different months. It 
meets in one of its courses a mountain which it 
has washed completely through, forming a bridge 
over which three carts may pass abreast. its 
arch is adorned with figures and points, being an 
efflorcsence of stone, resembling the concretion of 



HER 

salt particles, forming an enchanting- appearance, 
and such as could never be equalled by art. Be 
low this natural bridge, which is called of t/ie /??#, 
is a fine tablet of stone, which serves as a pave 
ment, and from which gush out boiling five streams 
of salt water. This river enters the sea with the 
name of Colorado. See CHILI;, Chap. IV. Sect. 29. 
MENDO7JNO, CAHO, an extremity of the 
coast of California, which looks to the S. sea. It 
is near White cape, in lat. 41 and long. 122. 

MENEMOCKAC1, a small river of the pro 
vince and colony of Virginia in N. America. It 
runs us. and enters the Ohio between the rivers 
Scalp and Molcochineeon 

MENE.ARO, a settler.;:-.-;! of the province and 
corregimiftt o of Caxamarquilla in Peru. 

[MENICHLICK La , in the n. w. part of 
N. Amerca ; n. of this is like Dobount.l 

[MENIOLAGOMEKAH, a Moravian settle- 
ment c. of the Great swamp, at the head of Lchigh 
river in Pennsylvania, about 33 miles n. w. by n. 
of Bethlehem.] 

[MENOLOPEN, a wealthy and pleasant farm 
ing settlement in Monmouth county, New Jer 
sey ; making a part of a rich glade of land ex 
tending from the sea w. to Delaware river. It is 
18 miles s. e. of Princeton.] 

MENORES, a settlement of the province and 
government of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Key no 
cle Granada, of the district and division or juris 
diction ol the Rio del Hacha ; situate near this 
city, in the road which leads to Maracaibo. 

MENTOS, a settlement of Indians, of the pro 
vince and government of Luisiana, where the 
French have bnilt a fort. It is situate on the shore 
of the river Akansas. 

MENZABE, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor 
of Nata in the province and government of Tierra 
Firme ; situate on the shore of a river on the coast 
of the S. sea, opposite the isle called Farallon de 
G tiarare. 

MENZAPA, SAN FRANCISCO DE, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the district of Tenantitlan, 
and ulcaldia wuydr of Acayiu a, in Nueva Espafia. 
It contains 73 families of Indians, and is eight 
leagues to the e. one quarter to the n. e. of its head 
settlement. 

[MEKASHEEiV Island, in Placenlia bay, 
New foundland island.] 

MERASSI, an island or neck of land of the 
Atlantic, sea, near the coast of Guayana, opposite 
the month or entrance of the river Surinam. It is 
about 70 miles long from e. to w. and by this part 
covers and defends the bay of Surin im. The river 
Cenecaor Collica divides this island from the con- 



M E R 95 

tinent : the climate here is very hot, and it is little 
cultivated. In lat. 6 n. 

MERCADEN, or MKRCADEUES, a small settle 
ment of the province and government of Popayan; 
situate on the *. of the rivers Mayo and San Jorge, 
in the high road which leads to Quito; and it is 
the first settlement that is met with in leaving this 
kingdom, and from whence you proceed to La 
Herradura, in lat. 146 . 

MERCALO, PUNTA DE, a point on the coast 
of the S. sea, and province and government of 
Veragua in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. It, lies 
between the mountain of Puercos and the Punta 
Blanca. 

MERCED, LA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Sonora in Nueva Espana. 

MERCKD, LA, another settlement, of the district 
of Chanco in the kingdom of Chile ; situate be 
tween the river Tinguiririca and the Eslero of 
Chimbaron^o. It is of the correghmento of 
Manle, and lies at the source of the river R;ipel 

MERCEDES, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Cuyo in the kingdom of Chile; 
situate on the shore of the river Concamy. 

[MERCER, a county of Kentucky, adjoining 
Wood ford, Shelby, and Madison counties. Ha- 
rodsburgh is the chief town.] 

[MEHCKH S Creek, in the n. e. part of the island 
of Antigua in the W. Indies, is a pretty deep inlet 
of the coast, the entrance to which is between the 
islands of Codrington, Crumps, or Pelican. Lavi- 
count s island is a small island, also within it, to 
wards the s. shore ; and in the s. w. part of it is 
Farley s bay, at the mouth of a river.] 

[MERCEHSBOROUGIJ, a village of Penn- 
sylvania, s. e. of N. mountain, and about Id-miles 
s. 70. of Chambersburgh.J 

[MERCHANT S Careening Place, within the 
harbour of Port Royal in Jamaica, on the n. side 
of the long peninsula. Along this narrow slip of 
beach is the only way to pass by land to Port 
Royal, for nine or 10 miles, the careening place 
being almost at midway, but somewhat nearer to 
the e. end of the peninsula.] 

[MERCY, ( ape of GOD S, the most .v. point of 
Cumberland s island, on the n, side of Cumber 
land straits, and has cape Walsingham on its n. e. 
and Exeter sound on its w.] 

MERE, LA, or The MOTHER, a small island 
near the coast of the province and gove.mnerit of 
Guayana, in the part possessed by the English* 
It is opposite the mouth of the river Orapu. 

[.MEREDITH, Cape, among the Falkland 
islands in the S. Atlantic ocean, is between port 
Stephen s and cape Orford.] 



96 



M E R I D A. 



[MEREDITH, a township in Strafford county, 
New Hampshire; situated on the ay. side of lake 
"Winnipiseogee, 15 miles n. of Gilmantown, nine 
s. e. of Plymouth, and 52 n.w. of Portsmouth. It 
was incorporated in 1768. In 1775, it contained 
259, and in 1790, 881 inhabitants. It was first 
called New Salem.] 

MERI, an arm of the river Orinoco, in the pro 
vince and government of Guayana. Jt forms a 
large island opposite the coast of the Hovaronx 
Indians. 

MERIDA, a city of the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada, the capital of the government, in the pro 
vince of Venezuela ; founded in 1558 by Captain 
Juan Rodriguez Suarez,with the name of Santiago 
de los Caballeros, in the province of Las Sierras 
Nevadas, the surname of Merida being added to 
it (and by which it is at present known) in me 
mory of his native place in Estremadura. This is 
as the case really is, and not so, that it was founded 
by Juan de los Pinos in 1562, as according to the 
cx-jesuit Coleti. In the year after its foundation 
it was removed by Captain Juan de Maldonado to 
the spot where it now stands ; this being a plea 
sant plain surrounded by three rivers, the first 
called Chama, which is the largest, and could not 
in the time of the Indians be forded, being now 
passed en taravita, or by cords ; the second 
Mucusin; and the third Albarregas, which sur 
rounds the city, and the water of which is the best, 
being that which is used both for drinking and 
washing. At the distance of three leagues these 
rivers unite, and are entered by another smaller 
river, which passes at no great distance from the 
city. This enjoys the peculiarity of experiencing 
every day the four seasons of the year ; since there 
are 12 hours of cold, in proportion to its climate, 
from six in the evening till six in the morning ; 
five hours of spring, from six to ten o clock, when 
the heat of the sun begins to shed a warmth over 
the Sierra Nevada ; and from ten till six in the 
evening the heat is very great. It is surrounded 
by mountains, and in its vicinity is one in which 
there is a lake, and which is called Mountain de 
las Flores, (of Flowers), from the variety which it 
produces, together with laurels and other trees and 
plants, which cover it and render it pleasing to 
behold, its charms being heightened by a great va 
riety of birds. This city is of a very healthy tem 
perature, fertile, and abounding in wheat, maize, 
papas, arracachcSy cabbages, exquisite cacao, in 
which consists its principal commerce, and which 
is highly esteemed, much cotton, delicate fruits, 
such as apples, peaches, quinces, pomegranates, 
dates, and other fruits of an hot and cold climate. 



It has a beautiful parish churcti, and at its en 
trance four chapels or hermitages, some convents 
of the religious orders of St. Francis, St. Domingo, 
St. Agustin, an hospital, a college which belonged 
to the Jesuits, and a monastery of nuns of the 
order of Santa Clara. The buildings are very good, 
and the streets wide ; the inhabitants should amount 
to 400 housekeepers, and it would be far more 
populous and rich did not the party spirit and 
bickering between the Serradas and Gavirias, two 
classes of its first settlers, continue to perpetuate 
animosity amongst their descendants, causing many 
murders and losses both of fortunes and estates. 
It has suffered much by earthquakes, and more 
particularly in those which happened successively 
in 1644, and which left it nearly desolate. It is, 
at the present day, the head of a bishopric, erected 
in 1782, suffragan of St. Domingo, and afterwards 
of the archbishopric of Santa Fe, its first bishop 
having been Don Fr. Juan Marcos de Lora, of 
the order of San Francises. It 1ms gold mines 
which are not worked. 

[The city of Merida, which was founded in 
1558 by John Rodriguez Suarez, under the name 
of Santiago de los Caballeros, is situate in a valley 
ot about three leagues long, and in the widest part 
about three quarters of a league broad. It is sur 
rounded by three rivers : the first is named Mu- 
cujun, and has its source to the n. in what is 
called Los Paramos de los Conejos, (or the Rabbit 
Heaths) ; it flows from it to s. and runs through 
the e. part of the town. The second is called Al 
barregas, and rises to the n. e. and running to the 
w. of the town. The third is the Chama ; it flows 
from the e. to the n. round the s. side of the 
town until it falls into the lake of Maracaibo. It 
receives the two first-mentioned rivers at a little 
distance from Merida, and by the junction also of 
a multitude of other rivers it at length acquires an 
immense size. There are wooden bridges for foot- 
passengers and horses over these three rivers, 
which are constructed so substantially as to stand 
throughout all the seasons. Not one of them is 
navigable, on account of the rapidity of the current 
and the obstacles of rocks, as well as of the moun 
tains, which, by making the beds of the rivers nar 
row in certain places, form cascades too powerful 
for any vessel whatever to stem. 

Another strong reason why these difficulties are 
not overcome, is the excessive insalubrity of the 
part of the lake of Maracaibo where it receives the 
river Chama. It is indeed impossible to pass two 
hours at this place without catching a fever, the 
malignity of which generally proves fatal. The 
soil is all that benefits by the rivers ; and, to the 



MERID A. 



[praise of (lie inhabitants they have, by their acti 
vity, taken advantage of these favours of Nature. 
At some distance from &amp;lt;he town are plantations of 
sugar, cocoa, and coffee of a very superior quality 
to what is cultivated throughout the rest of the 
province. 

The environs of Merida are covered with the 
provisions of the country, fruits, limes, beans and 
pease oft-very kind, potatoes, wheat, barley, &amp;c. 
These are all consumed by the people of Merida, 
and are so abundant that the poorest have always 
more than sufficient food. Their butchers meat 
comes from Varinas and Pedraza, it is very good 
and exceedingly cheap. 

The climate is very changeable, almost every 
day exhibits (as already observed) the four seasons 
of the year. The people, however, assert that 
they never feel inconvenience from cold or heat, 
and can wear indifferently silk or worsted through 
out the year ; but it is certain that the transitions 
are so rapid and severe as to cause frequently dis 
orders. The w. wind is especially dreaded ; it 
never blows without leaving the effects of its ma 
lignity. The rains fall at all seasons, and are very 
heavy, but they are most violent between March 
and November : they have intervals between the 
rains. 

Merida is the seat of a bishop and has a chapter. 
It has a college and a seminary in which the ca 
tholic clergy and all other professions are in 
structed. There are masters for reading, writing, 
and arithmetic, and professors of theology, philo 
sophy, ethics, and the civil and canon law. These 
schools are all under the management and inspec 
tion of a governor and vice-governor, and are im 
mediately under the authority of the bishop. 

The sciences had made so much progress at 
Merida, that they resolved to obtain a university, 
which would relieve them from going to Santa Fe 
or Caracas to obtain their degrees. They sent in 
J801 the vice-governor of the college to the uni 
versity of Caracas to entreat them to approve of 
the demand they wished to make of his Catholic 
Majesty for the establishment of a university. 
This question was scrupulously examined, and, in 
spite of the talents and personal qualities of the 
delegate, the decision was against the views of the 
applicants. This refusal, more likely to irritate 
than quell their desire, did not repulse the parti 
sans of the new university. Their demand has 
been transmitted to the king. It certainly will not 
be easily complied with, for the system of the go 
vernment is not to multiply this sort of establish 
ments. 

Independently of the cathedral, there are at least 

VOL. III. 



as many chapels in Merida as are proportionate to 
the number of the inhabitants. There are three 
convents of the order of St. Dominic, St. Augustin, 
and St. Claire. A church of a suppressed conventof 
Cordeliers is supported with care. That of the 
hospital is remarkable ; after these succeed the 
chapels of Millay, Mnrugun del Espego, and De 
Uano; and lastly, the chapel of Mercy. 

The number of inhabitants of all descriptions 
amount to 11,500. The slaves are the least nu 
merous class. The whites have for a long time 
been split into two factions ; the Serradas and Gua- 
virias, the names of the two principal founders of 
the city, who had vowed a hatred against each 
other, and which has been perpetuated by their 
descendants, so that the feud cannot be considered 
as extinct, although the violence, formerly so fre 
quent, has not latterly broken out. But for this 
the population would be greater, and the state of 
cultivation more flourishing. 

A frankness, a spirit of justice, and a love of 
literature, are observable among these people. No 
class despises labour. The cultivation of the soil, 
the rearing of cattle, or the pulpit, are the employ 
ments of the whites. The people of colour exer 
cise useful employments. Manufactories of cotton 
and wool are carried on here, and the different 
articles are so cheap as to give them a preference 
over those of Europe. Among these manufactures 
are carpets made of the wool of the country, an 
ell long and more than a half of an ell wide, orna 
mented with flowers and worked with the plants of 
the country : the red, green, blue, and yellow, are 
as bright and as permanent as the tints of the most 
famous manufactories of Europe. It is 112 miles 
n.e. of Pamplona, in lat. 8 11 n. Long. 70 
58 w. 

MERIDA, another city, the capital of the pro 
vince and government of Yucatan in N. America, 
and kingdom of Nueva Espaiiia; founded by Cap 
tain Francisco de Montejo in 1542. It is well 
situate, and has beautiful buildings, and streets 
wide and running straight from e. to w. and divided 
by others which intersect them and form certain 
equal squares; the chief square is also handsomcand 
very large, and is entered by eight streets, the 
front of which is that looking to the e. and in 
which is the cathedral church, one of the hand 
somest of any in Nueva Espana ; another, which 
looks n. containing the governor s house, and an 
other looking s. composed of houses which were 
built with much magnificence by the founder. 
The territory is level, that the streams can scarcely 
run down the streets, and on this account there are 
many wells for holding the water. It is the head 



98 



M E R I D A. 



of a bishopric, erected in 1518, has too curacies 
for the adtninstration of the sacraments, one for the 
Spaniards, another for the Indians, being also used 
by five settlements or wards of the city, called San 
tiago, Santa Ana, Santa Lucia, Santa Catalina, and 
San Sebastian ; two convents of the religious order 
of SanFranciscOjOne called the Grande, and is mag 
nificent, the other the church of Nuestra Senora 
de la Mejorada, built in imitation of that of Dona 
Maria de Aragon in the court of Madrid, and close 
to this the parish church of San Cristoval for the 
Indians, an hospital of San Juan de Dios, a col 
lege which belonged to the abolished order of Je 
suits, and a monastery of nuns. Its population is 
composed of only 400 housekeepers, having much 
diminished through an epidemic disorder experi 
enced in 1548 ; but the number of Mustees, Mu- 
lattoes, and Negroes, is very great. It is 28 miles 
from the sea-coast, in lat. 20 50 M. Long. 89 30 w. 
[MEKIDA, Intendancy of. This intendancy, 
concerning which valuable information has been 
furnished to us by M. Gilbert, comprehends the 
great peninsula of Yucatan, situated between the 
bays of Campeche and Honduras. It is at cape 
Catoche, 51 leagues distant from the calcareous 
hills of cape St. Antony, that Mexico appears, before 
the irruption of the ocean, to have been joined to 
the island of Cuba. 

The province of Merida is bounded on the s. by 
the kingdom of Guatemala, on the e. by the 
intendancy of Vera Cruz, from which it is separat 
ed by the Rio Baraderas, called also the River of 
Crocodiles, (Lagartos), and on the a?, by the English 
establishments which extend from the mouth of 
the Rio Hondo to the n. of the bay of Hanover, 
opposite the island of Ubero, (Ambergris key). 
In this quarter, Salamanca, or the small fort of 
San Felipe de Bacalar, is the most s. point inhabit 
ed by the Spaniards. 

The peninsula of Yucatan, of which the n. 
coast from cape Catoche, near the island of Con- 
toy, to the Punta de Piedras, (a length of 81 
leagues), follows exactly the direction of the 
current of rotation, is a vast plain intersected in 
its interior from n. w. to s. w. by a chain of hills 
of small elevation. The country which extends 
e. from these hills towards the bays of the Ascension 
and Santo Spirito appears to be the most fertile, 
awl was earliest inhabited. The ruins of European 
edifices discoverable in the island Cosumel, in the 
midst of a grove of palm trees, indicate that this 
island, which is now uninhabited, was at the com 
mencement of the conquest peopled by Spanish 
colonists. Since the settlement of the English 
between Omo and Rio Hondo, the government. 



to diminish the contraband trade, concentrated the 
Spanish and Indian population in the part of 
the peninsula w. from the mountains of Yucatan. 
Colonists are not permitted to settle on the e. 
coast on the banks of the Rio Bacalar and Rio 
Hondo. All this vast country remains uninhabited, 
with the exception of the military post (presidio) 
of Salamanca. 

The intendancy of Merida is one of the warmest 
and yet one of the healthiest of Equinoctial Ame 
rica. This salubrity ought undoubtedly to be 
attributed, in Yucatan as well as atCoro, Cumana, 
and the island of Marguerite, to the extreme 
dryness of the soil and atmosphere. On the whole 
coast from Campeche, or from the mouth of the Rio 
de San Francisco to cape Catoche, the navigator 
does not find a single spring of fresh water. Near 
this cape Nature has repeated the same phenomenon 
which appears in the island of Cuba, in the bay of 
Xagua, described by us in another place. On 
the n. coast of Yucatan, at the mouth of the Rio 
Lagartos, 400 metres from the shore, (1312 feet), 
springs of fresh water spout up from amidst the 
salt water. These remarkable springs arc called 
the Mouths ( Boccas) de Conit. It is probable, 
that from some strong hydrostatical pression, the 
fresh water, after bursting through the banks of 
calcareous rock, between the clefts of which it had 
flowed, rises above the level of the salt water. 

The Indians of this intendancy speak the Maya 
language, which is extremely guttural, and of 
which there are four tolerably complete dictionaries, 
by Pedro Beltan, Andres de Avendano, Fray 
Antonio dc Ciudad Real, and Luis de Villalpando. 
The peninsula of Yucatan was never subject to 
the Mexican or Aztec kings. However, the first 
conquerors, Bernal Diaz, Hernandez de Cordova, 
and the valorous Juan de Grixalva, were struck 
with the advanced civilization of the inhabitants 
of this peninsula. They found houses built of 
stone cemented with lime, pyramidal edifices 
(teocallis) which they compared to Moorish mos 
ques, fields enclosed with hedges, and the people 
clothed, civilized, and very different from the 
natives of the island of Cuba. Many ruins, 
particularly of sepulchral monuments, (guacas), 
are still to be discovered to the e. of the small 
central chain of mountains. Several Indian tribes 
have preserved their independence in the s. part 
of this hilly district, which is almost inaccessible 
from thick forests and the luxuriance of the 
vegetation. 

The province of Merida, like all the coun 
tries of the torrid zone, of which the surface 
does not rise more than 1300 metres (4264 feet)] 
2 



^M E R 

[above the level of the sea, yields only for the 
sustenance of the inhabitants maize, jatropha, and 
dioscorca roots, but no European grain. The 
trees which furnish the famous Campeche wood 
(hcematoxylon CampechianumL.) grow in abund 
ance in several districts of this intendancj r . The 
cutting (cartes de palo Campeche) takes place 
annually on the banks of the Rio Champoton, the 
month of which is s. from the town of Campeche, 
within four leagues of the small village of Lerma. 
It is only with an extraordinary permission from 
the intendant of Merida, who bears the title of 
Governor Captain-general, that the merchant can. 
from time to time cut down Campeche wood to the 
e. of the mountains near the bays of Ascension, 
Todos los Santos, and El Espirito Santo. In 
these creeks of the e. coast the English carry on 
an extensive and lucrative contraband trade. The 
Campeche wood, after being cut down, must dry 
for a year before it can be sent to Vera Cruz, the 
Havanah, or Cadiz. The quintal of this dried 
wood (palo de tinta) is sold at Campeche for two 
piastres to two piastres and a half (from 8s. 9d. 
to 10s. lie?.) The haBmotoxylon, so abundant in 
Yucatan and the Honduras coast, is also to be 
found scattered throughout all the forces of Equi 
noctial America, wherever the mean temperature 
of the air is not below 22* of the centigrade 
thermometer (71 of Fahrenheit.) The coast of 
Paria, in the province of New Andalusia, may 
one day carry on a considerable trade in Campeche 
and Brazil (ccesalpinia) wood, which it produces 
in great abundance. 

The most remarkable places of the intendancy of 
Merida are, the capitol of this name, Campeche, 
and Valladolid. Population in 1803, 465,800; 
extent of surface in square leagues, 5977 ; number 
of inhabitants to the square league, 81.] 

In Merida, the capital, which is 10 leagues 
in the interior of the country, and has been al 
ready described, is the small port called Sizal, to 
the w. of Chaboana, opposite a sand bank nearly 
12 leagues in length. The population of the ca 
pital is 10,000. 

[MERIDIONAL, See SOUTH.] 

[MERIM, a large lake in Paraguay in S. Ame 
rica, very near the coast of the S. Atlantic ocean, 
where the land is very flat. Fort St. Miguel stands 
at the s. end, and fort Manga veira at its w. e. ex 
tremity. There is a very narrow lake parallel to 
lake Merim, between it and the ocean, and nearly 
as long. The forts command the extremities of 
the peninsula.] 

[MERIMEG, or MAUAMEG, a large river of 
Louisiana, which empties into the Mississippi, 



M E R 



99 



below the mouth of the Missouri, and 22 miles 
above the settlement of Genevieve. Fine meadows 
lie between this and the Missouri.] 

[MER1ON, UPPER and LOWER, twe town 
ships in Montgomery county, Pennsylvania.] 

[MERISCHI, a settlement of the province and 
government of Sonora in N. America ; situate on 
the shore of a river to the e. of Santa Maria Mag- 
dalena. 

MERLO, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayres in Peru ; situate on the 
shore of the river La Plata, to the n. w. of its 
capital. 

MERO, PUNT A DE, a point on the coast of the 
S. sea, of the province and corregimiento of Pi um 
in the bay of Turnbez, one of the two which form 
the same bay. It is low and covered with sand, 
and at ebb-tide a passage is open to the shore of 
the road which leads from Turnbez to Piura. It 
is extremely barren. 

[MERO District, in the state of Tennessee, on 
the banks of Cumberland river. It comprehends 
the counties of Davidson, Sumner, and Tennes 
see. In 1790, it contained 7042 inhabitants, in 
cluding 1151 slaves. By the state census of 1795 
there were 14,390, of which number 2466 were 
slaves.] 

[MERR1MACK River has its course.?, through 
the state of New Hampshire, till it enters Massa 
chusetts ; it then turns e. and passes into the ocean 
at Newbury port. This river is formed by the 
confluence of Pemigewasset and Winnipiseogee 
rivers, in about latitude 43 26 . This river is 
navigable for vessels of burden about 15 miles from 
its mouth, where it is obstructed by the first falls 
or rapids, called Mitchell s Eddy, between Brad 
ford and Haverhill. Vast quantities of ship- 
timber, and various kinds of lumber, are brought 
down in rafts, so constructed as to pass all the 
falls in the river except those of Amuskeag and 
Pawtucket. In the spring and summer, consi 
derable quantities of salmon, shad, and alewives are 
caught, which are either used as bait in the cod- 
fishery, or pickled, and shipped to the W. Indies. 
As many as six or seven bridges have been thrown 
over this fine river, atdifferentdistances, from New 
Concord, downwards; the most elegant and expen 
sive are the one two miles above Newbury port, and 
the one at Haverhill. A canal is now in process 
to open a communication between the waters of 
the Merrimack at Cbelmsfbrd and the harbour of 
Boston, through Mystic river. See MIDDLESEX 
Canal. The bar across the mouth of this river 
is a very great incumbrance to navigation, and is 
especially terrible to strangers. There are 16 feet 
o 2 



100 



M E S 



of water upon it at common tides. There are two 
light-houses of wood removable at pleasure, accord 
ing to the shifting of the bar. The lights now 
bear e. one-half n. and w. one-half s. Bringing 
both the light-houses to bear into one, until yon are 
abreast of the lower one, will bring you in over the 
bar in the deepest water, where is a bold shore 
and good anchoring ground. The n, point of 
Plumb island, which forms the s, side of the 
entrance into the river, lies in lat. 42 47 40 // .J 

[MERIUMACK, a township in Hillsborough 
county, New Hampshire; situated orithes. side of 
Souhegan river, which runs e. into the Merrimack. 
It is 35 miles w. of Portsmouth, was incorporated 
in 1746, and contains 819 inhabitants.] 

[MERRIMICHI River, tails into the head of a 
bay of that name on the n. e. coast of the province 
of New Brunswick. A little above its confluence 
with the bay, it forms into two branches, and runs 
through a fertile tract of choice intervale land ; 
and the land is, in general, well clothed with tim 
ber of all kinds. From this river there is a com 
munication with St. John s, partly by land, but 
principally by water carriage in canoes. The 
salmon fishery is carried on with success, and the 
cod fishery is improving near the entrance of the 
bay.] 

fMERRYCONEAG. See HARPSWELL.] 

[MERRY-MEETING Bay, in Stafford coun 
ty, New Hampshire, is the s. e. arm of lakeWinni- 
piseogee. Mount Major stands on its w. side.] 

[MERIIY-MEETING Bay, in the district of 
Maine, is formed by the junction of Androscoggin 
and Kennebeck rivers, opposite to the town of 
Woolwich, 20 miles from the sea. Formerly from 
this bay to the sea, the confluent stream was called 
Sagadahoc. The lands here are good. Steven s 
river heads within a mile of the bay, and a canal 
has lately been opened which unites these waters. 
A company has been incorporated to build abridge 
over Androscoggin river, at its entrance into the 
bay, to connect the towns of Brunswick and 
Topsham ; the former on its s. side, the latter on 
its n. side.] 

[MERTEQUE, a town in the province of 
Honduras in New Spain, which produces the 
cochineal.] 

MESCA, a settlement and head settlement of 
the district of the alcaldia mayor of Senticpac in 
Nueva Espana. It is of an hot temperature, con 
tains 60 families of Indians, whose trade is fishing 
for prawns and other fish, being close to the sea, 
and it is five leagues re. of its capital. 

[MESCALA, Villageof. Humboldt found itslat. 
by the culmination of Antares, 17 56 4", and the 



M E S 

long, by the chronometer, 6 47 16", supposing 
Acapulco 6 48 24 . The city of Chilpanzingo, 
from angles taken at Mescala, appears to be 17 36 
of lat. and 6 46 53" of long.] 

MESLE, a bay on the s. coast and in the 
French possessons of the island of St. Domingo, 
opposite the Isla Vaca. 

MESPA, a head settlement of the district of the 
alcaldia mayor of Xala in Nueva Espana. It 
contains 20 families of Indians, who occupy them 
selves only in the barter of seeds ; and it is 
somewhat less than a quarter of a league s. w. of 
its capital. 

MESQUIC, a settlement of the afcaldia mayor 
of Chalco in Nueva Espana ; situate on the 
shore of the lake, and with the greater part of it 
within the same. It is fertile and of an agreeable 
temperature : by it pass the canoes loaded with 
vegetable productions, such as sugar, sugar-canes, 
honey, and fruit, which render its prospect very 
pleasing; and, as we before observed, it is neces 
sary to go from one part to another, in a great 
degree, by water. It contains 197 families of In 
dians, and a convent of the monks of St. Augustin. 
It is four leagues s. s. e. of Chalco. 

MESQULQUEJOS, a small and poor settle- 
ment of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, taking 
the name of the nation thus called, and of whom 
it was first composed. It is situate n. of Chilloa, 
and s. of the town of Mom pox, on the w. shore 
of the river Magdalena. Its climate is very hot 
and unhealthy, and in it is produced the most de 
licate plantains of any in the kingdom. Lat. 9 
10 w. 

MESQUITAL, a settlement and real of the 
gold mines of the alcaldia mayor of Juchipila in 
Nueva Galicia. It contains 200 families of Spa 
niards, Mustees and Mulattoes, and many In 
dians who live by the labour and commerce of its 
mines; they are very rich, and the gold is excellent 
for its fine colour, ductility, and superior quality. 
This settlement is eight leagues from the capital, 
and 18 to the n. one-fourth to the n. e. of Gua- 
daluxara. 

MKSQUITAL, another settlement of the missions 
held by the religious order of San Francisco in 
the kingdom of Nueva V^izcaya in N. America. 

MESQUITAT,, another, with the surname of 
La Sierra ; situate opposite that of Tulazinco, 60 
leagues from Mexico, having a beautiful plain of 
more than six leagues in length. 1 i one of its 
mountains are found described on a rock a cross 
and other characters, which, as the tradition goes, 
were done by the apostle St. Thomas when he 
preached in that province. 



MET 



101 



MESQU1TIC, SAN MIGUEL DE, a settlement 
of the alcaldia mayor of San Luis cle Potosi, and 
bishopric of Mechoacan, in Nueva Espana. It 
contains 80 families of Indians, and a convent of 
monks of the order of San Francisco. It is a 
boundary of division between the aforesaid bishop 
ric and that of Guadalaxara ; and in it begins the 
sierra of Pinos of La Nueva Galicia. It is five 
leagues to the n. w. of its capital. 

MESQU1TLAN, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Chi- 
lapa in Nueva Espana. It contains 22 families of 
Indians, and is three leagues to the n. of its ca 
pital. 

MESQU1TULA, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Ju- 
chipila in Nueva Espaiia; four leagues to the s. 
of the said head settlement. 

MESSA, a settlement of the government and ju 
risdiction of Merida in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada. It is of a mild, healthy, and pleasant cli 
mate, produces maize, yitcas^ plantains, many 
yuamas, and other fruits of a warm climate. It 
has mills for expressing the sugar from the canes ; 
and its population is composed of 50 Indians, 
and of about 30 or 40 housekeepers. It is four 
leagues from Merida. 

MESSA, another settlement, with the dedicatory 
title of San Marcelo, in the province and govern 
ment of Veragua, and kingdom of Tierra Firme ; 
situate on the top of a mountain called the Mesa 
de Tabaraba, and abounding in vegetable produc 
tions and swine. It is five leagues from the 
capital. 

MLSSA, another, with the surname of Tonati, 
of the missions that were held by the regulars of 
the company of Jesuits in the province of Naya- 
rith, and kingdom of Nueva Galicia, in N. Ame 
rica. 

MESSA, another^ with the addition of Grande, 
in the province and government of Neiba, of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; situate on the shore 
of the Rio Grande de la Magdalena. 

MESSA, another, a small settlement and ward 
otl\\e alcaldia mayor of Guauchinango in Nueva 
Espana ; annexed to the curacy of Pantepec. 

[MESSASAGUES, Indians inhabiting between 
lakes Superior and Huron. They have about 
1500 warriors.] 

ME8SETA, a settlement of Indians of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Maule in the kingdom 
of Chile ; situate on the bank and at the head of 
the river Carampangue. 

[MESS1LLONES, MIXILLONES, (by the Spa 
niards), or MUSCLE Bay, on the coast of Chile in 



S. America. It is 33 miles n. e. of Morro Jorge, 
and 74 s. s. w. of Atacama, and is so deep on the 
s. side that there are no soundings ; but at the 
entrance or anchoring-place it is moderate, and 
ships may ride in 15 fathoms, clean ground, and 
secured from most winds.] 

MEST1TLAN, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district and akaldia mayor of Cuquio 
in Nueva Espana; nine leagues distant to the n. 
of the same head settlement. 

MESTIZOS, PUNTA DE, a point on the coast 
of the province and government of Cartagena, and 
Nuevo lioyno de Granada ; one of those which 
form the bay of Zipato. 

[ME8TRE Bay, LITTLE, on the n. e. part of 
Newfoundlad island, s. of St. Julian, and n. by a?. 
of the islands Gros and Belle.] 

[MESUCKAMA Lake, in the. n. part of N. 
America. Lat. 50 10 n. Long. 80 w. 

MET A, a large, abundant, and navigable river 
of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, which gives its 
name to the llanos of San Juan, through which it 
runs. It rises in the mountains which lie between 
Santa Fe and Tunja, in the paramo of Albarracin, 
thus called from an inn and estate of this name 
which are upon it. This river runs e. and after 
collecting the waters of many others, enters, 
united with the Pato, by the w. shore, into the 
Orinoco. Passing the valley of Turmeque in 
the Nuevo Reynode Granada, it takes this name, 
and being increased by other streams which it col 
lects in the different valleys of that broken ser- 
rania, enters with a large body into the llanos of 
San Juan, with the name of Upia, turns its course 
. w. and receives the Cusiana, which has its ori 
gin in the paramos of Toquilla, not far distant 
from Tunja : shortly afterwards it collects the 
waters of the Cravo, at the mouth of which stands 
the colony of La Concepcion de Achagua, is then 
entered by the Guirripa, near the mission of San 
Miguel of Salivas Indians, below the Guanapo, 
four leagues from Panto, and lastly by the rich 
streams of the Casanareand Elne, and being swoln 
to an immense size by them, and after running 300 
leagues, enters, as we have before said, into the 
Orinoco ; forming, however, first such a level 
body of water as that its current is scarce suscep 
tible, and forming a beautiful appearance before 
the settlement of the mission of Santa Teresa of 
Salivas Indians, the same being near its mouth or 
entrance. 

In its vicinity dwell some barbarian nations of 
Indians, spread through the spacious llanuras of 
Cazanare and Meta or San Juan, where the re 
gulars of the abolished order of Jesuits of the 



102 



MET 



MET 



province of Santa Fe had some flourishing mis 
sions, by which they had reduced to the Catholic 
faith an infinite number of barbarians, and which, 
since 1767, have been under the care of the monks 
of the barefooted order of San Francisco. The 
mouth of this river is in lat. 6 10 30" n. Long. 
67 45 w. 

[The source of the Meta, observes Depons, 
is 150 leagues s. w. of Us junction with the Orinoco. 
Several rivers of Santa Fe fall into it. It is navi 
gable as far as Macuco, near the plains of Santiago 
de las Atalayas, 40 leagues from the capital of the 
kingdom. Its banks are still deserted or inhabited 
only by Indians, who have an equal aversion to 
civilized life and to labour. They are intractable 
without being fierce, and for this reason more 
adapted to attack than to defence-; they, therefore, 
owe their independence to flight. The navigator 
can traverse their country without danger. Se 
venty-five leagues before the Meta falls into the 
Orinoco it receives the river Casanare. Its course 
is silent and majestic, and it may be distinguished 
from the other rivers that are received into the Ori 
noco by the silence with which it forms the 
junction.] 

META, with the addition of Incognita, a piece 
of territory which was taken possession of for 
Queen Elizabeth of England, in 1578, by Mar 
tin Forbisher, in his third voyage to discover a 
n. ic. pass; but which has not been met with or 
seen by any navigator since. 

METALTEPEC, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district of Atitlan, and alcaldia 
mayor of Villalta, in Nueva Espana. It contains 
39 families of Indians, and is 14 leagues from its 
capital. 

METATI, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Darien and kingdom ofTierra Frime. It 
rises near the e. coast, and following a course to 
this rhumb, enters the grand river Atrato near its 
mouth. 

METATLAN, a settlement and head settle 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Pa- 
pantla in Nueva Espana. It contains 70 families 
of Indians. 

METAU, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Tucuman in Peru, and of the juris 
diction of the city of Salta. It runs e. and enters 
the Pasage between the Concha and Yatasco. 

METCH1GAM1A, a lake of the province and 
government of Louisiana in N. America, on the 
shore of the river San Francisco, and from which 
it is formed, just where this river enters into the 
Mississippi. 

METCHIGAMIA, a settlement of the former pro 



vince and colony, founded by the French on the 
shore of the river Mississippi. 

METENQUEN, a settlement of Indians of the 
province and corregimiento of Maule in the king 
dom of Chile. 

METEPEC, a small settlement or ward of the 
head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor 
of Tetela del Volcan in Nueva Espana. It is close 
to its capital. 

METE PEC, another settlement, in the head set 
tlement of the district of Ocotcpec, and alcaldia 
mayor of Villalta, in the same kingdom. It con 
tains 33 families of Indians, and is six leagues s.za\ 
of its capital. 

METEPEC, a jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor of 
Nueva Espana, and one of the largest there, ex 
tending more than 20 leagues from n. to s. and 12 
from e. to w. divided into two other districts, 
which are Ixtlahuaca and Tianguistengo, and in 
w h ich the alcalde m^yor nominates two lieutenants, 
for the better and more ready administration of 
justice. It is very fertile in maize, barley, beans, 
and lentils, these being the vegetable productions 
in which it trades ; also in a good quantity of 
swine, which are bred for the supply of Mexico, 
and by which the inhabitants make great profit. 
The population consists of 56 principal settlements, 
which are heads of districts ; and to these are sub 
ject above 300 small settlements or wards, reduced 
to 13 curacies. 
S. Miguel Temazcalzin- Calimaya, 

go, S. Mateo Mexicalzingo, 

S. Pedro de Tultepec, S. Miguel Chapultepec, 
S. Francisco Chichico- S. Miguel Mimialpa, 

cuitla, Asuncion Yalatlaco, 

S. Francisco Xonacat- S. Mateo Tlachichilpa, 

Ian, Santiago Tlacotepec, 

S. Juan Xiquipilco, Santa Maria Atlamulco, 

Santiago Temoya, S. Mateo Atengo, 

S. Lorenzo Huitzizlapa, S. Gaspar, 
S. Geronimo Amanalco, Santiago Tianguistengo, 
S. Pedro Atlapulco, Santa Ana Xilotzingo, 

Ixtlahuaca, S, Bartolome Otzolote- 

S. Felipe, peque. 

Asuncion de Malacate- Xocotitlan, 

pec, S. Bartolome Capulu- 

S. Miguel Almololoya, aque, 

S. Miguel Zinacante- Asuncion de Tepexoyu- 



pec, 



ca, 



S. Mateo Texcalicaque, S.Martin Ocuyoacaque, 
Tepemaxalco, S. Juan Guapanoya. 

The capital is of the same name, with the dedi 
catory title of San Juan, situate in the spacious 
valley of Toluca, at the foot of a small mountain. 
Its population consists of 62 families of Spaniards 



MET 

and Mustees, and nearly 900 of Indians, includ 
ing- those of the wards of its district. It has a con 
vent of the religious order of San Francisco, and is 
33 miles to the s. w. of Mexico, in long. 99 20 w. 
Lat. 19 20 n. 

METETA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of San Juan de los Llanos in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. It rises between those of 
Meta and Doma, runs e. and enters the Orinoco 
near the settlement of San Francisco de Borja, of 
the missions that were held there by the regulars 
of the company of Jesuits. 

[METHUEN, the n. westernmost township in 
Essex county, Massachusetts; situate on the e. 
bank of Merrimack river, between Dracut and 
Haverhill. It contains two parishes and 1297 in 
habitants. It was incorporated in 1725. Hus 
bandry and the cutting and selling lumber divide 
the attention of the inhabitants.] 

METINACAS, some islands of the N. sea ; 
situate near the coast of the province and colony 
of Sagadahock. They are many, all small, and 
lying opposite the bay of Penobscot. 

METLATONO, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district and alcaldiamayor of Tlapa, 
in the same kingdom as the former. It contains 
55 families of Mexican Indians, employed in the 
cultiv ition of seeds, cochineal, and cotton. 

METOS, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayres in Peru. It runs n. n. w. 
and enters the Santa Lucia Grande. 

METRANO, a settlement of the province and 
correg/miento of Xacamarquilla in Peru. 

METWAY, a port of the s. coast of Nova 
Scotia or Acadia, between those of Senior and La 
Ileve. 

METZTITLAN, an ancient province of Nueva 
Espana in the time of the Indians, and, when the 
Spaniards entered, bounded by the province at 
the present day called Panuco. It was peopled 
at that time by an infinite number of the Chichi- 
mecas Indians, a ferocious people and cannibals, 
and who, together with the Aculhuas, were the 
first inhabitants. They rebelled against the Em 
peror Tlaltecatzin, who fought them in a battle 
which, according to Torquemada, lasted 40 days 
successively, and in which they lost the greater 
part of their people ; so that they were obliged to 
surrender, obtaining pardon, with the exception 
of some few of their ringleaders who were severely 
chastised. In the time of Techotlalatzin, the suc 
cessor of the former emperor, they returned to their 
state of rebellion, at least such of them as lived in 
the sierra; and these are called at the present day 
by the title of those of La Misteca Alta. 



M E X 



103 



MEUIS, a name which the English give to 

one of the Antilles isles. See NIEVES. 

[MEW Islands, on the coast of the Spanish 
main in the W. Indies, between cape Cameron 
and cape Gracias a Dios, lie across the entrance 
into the bay of Cotroe or Crotoe. They are sur 
rounded with rocks, and are very dangerous, 
especially in case of hard gusts from the n. and 
n. eJ] 

MEX1CAL, a river of the island of St. Do 
mingo, which rises near the n. coast, runs to this 
rhumb, and enters the Jacques. 

MEXICALTZ1NCO, a jurisdiction and cor- 
regimiento of Nueva Espaua, very fertile in maize, 
beans, barley, French beans, and garden herbs. 
It is as it were the principal key of the lake of 
Chalco. Carried in vessels through this lake, 
pass not only all the vegetable productions of the 
province of Chalco, but also of all the other 
neighbouring provinces of a warm climate ; and 
by the channel called the Real are introduced 
honey, sugar, fruit, grain, and other effects, 
which being warehoused in Chalco, avoid the 
duties of freightage, and are conveyed by the 
lake up to the bridge of the palace of Mexico. 
This corregimiento contains three settlements 
which are head settlements of districts, and sub 
ject to these are five others, as follows : 

The capital, 

Ixtapalapan, which was the court of the King 
Cuitlahuatzin, exalted to the empire of Mexico 
through the death of Motezuma, and where there 
remains a beautiful pool for breeding fish, as also 
vestiges of royal fabrics of the gentiles. 

Santa Maria Aztahuacan, 

Santa Marta, 

Couhuacan, 

Santiago Chahualtepeque, 

San Lorenzo, 

San Mateo Huitzolopozteo, Noviciado of the 
Dieguinos. 

The capital is of the same name, beautifully situ 
ate, and very pleasant and fertile, from the waters 
of the lake which are close to it, the richness of 
foliage, and as being the direct road to Mexico 
either by water or by land, the latter lying along 
the causeway ol the llano of Santa Marta, and 
much frequented by the drovers of other jurisdic 
tions. It is two leagues to the s. a quarter to the 
s. e. of Mexico, and contains 61 families of In 
dians. Near this settlement, and in the middle 
of i he lake going to Mexico, at the distance of 
about two leagues from this capital, is a stream of 
water which is called the Estrilla, and which is 
easily to be distinguished by its pellucid course in 



104 



M E X 



the lalte. Not far from the same spot are some 
flower gardens, and pcionies and other flowers are 
to be seen mixed amongst the brush-wood and 
reeds of the lake. Here the Indians have their 
dwellings and estates, changing them as often as 
they think proper. 

MEX1CALZINCO, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Analco, in the kingdom of Nueva Galicia and 
bishopric of Guadalaxara. It contains 15 families 
of Indians, who occupy themselves in carrying 
for sale to this chy wheat, maize, seeds, and fruits. 
It lies a little to the n. of its head settlement. 

MEXICAI.ZINCO, another, with the dedicatory 
title of San Maleo, the head settlement of the dis 
trict of the alcaldia mayor of Metepec in Nueva 
Espafia. It contains 415 families, of Indians. 

MEXICANOS, BARRIO DE LOS, a settlement 
of the province and alcaldia mayor of Sonsonate in 
the kingdom of Guatemala. 

MKXICANOS, a nation of Indians of Nueva Es- 
pana, and one of the principal and most nume 
rous of all in the new world. They are descen 
dants of the Aztecas, one of the first nations that 
left the kingdom called Aztan, taking the name of 
Mexicos from their idol, and who, being led by 
Huitziton and Tecpatzin, great idolaters and sooth 
sayers, wandered about for above 50 years without 
establishing themselves in any place, until that, as 
they say, directed by their god Huitzilopuchtli, 
they collected and fixed themselves on the lake, 
which takes its name from its floating inhabitants, 
having been before called Tenuititlan, meaning 
Stone of Tuna. 

Having collected themselves here, from the rea 
sons we have just mentioned, as also from their 
having lost their two leaders in the privations, sick 
ness, and disasters they had undergone, their fa 
milies began to increase, and their population to 
multiply, until they at last nominated a king, and 
formed the powerful Mexican empire. These In 
dians are of a darker colour than the rest, of a 
quick genius, and lived in civil and political order 
previous to the arrival of the Spaniards. They 
were idolatrous, and had an infinite number of 
gods and deities, to whom they made sacrifices of 
human blood, in order to draw down mercies in 
their necessities ; and as they had different deities 
as tutelar to different circumstances, and as they 
all were thought to require sacrifice, the number 
of captives that were slain before these monstrous 
representations of a divinity were exceedingly 
great. 

Their government was monarchical, and orga 
nized with singular skill and harmony. In the 



M E X 

court they had a council of revenue, which took 
cognizance of the expences of (lie royal palace, 
audio which the collectors of the tributes of the 
different provinces rendered in their accounts; a 
court of justice, in which was vested the nomina 
tion of inferior tribunals ; a council of war, which 
took charge of the formation and supplies of the 
army; another of state, which frequently delibe 
rated in the king s presence; also judges of com 
merce and of supplies, and other ministers of the 
police. The judgments were summary and verbal, 
the plaintiff and defendant with their witnesses 
told their story, and the cause was finished. They 
had no written laws, but they were governed by 
traditional ordinances, save in cases where the will 
of the prince interfered. They were regardful of 
rewards and punishments, holding as capital 
crimes, theft, homicide, and adultery ; also what 
ever was committed against the king or religion, 
however trifling, although other crimes were easily 
pardoned. Any fault of integrity amongst the 
ministers was to be paid by the life of ihe person 
offending ; pardon in this instance was never 
granted, and indeed such was the diligence used 
in scanning the faults of such persons, that even 
the emperor s friends and confidants were obliged 
to silence the investigators by bribes. 

They took singular care of the education of 
their youth in public schools and colleges for the 
nobility, taught them their mode of writing, which 
consisted of certain characters and figures, and 
made them learn by heart certain historical songs, 
which contained an account of the exploits of their 
ancestors, and which were in praise of their deities; 
after these they instilled modesty, courteonsness, 
decent deportment, and when they became old 
enough, exercised them by trying their strength 
by carrying weights, running, and wrestling, in 
the use of arms, to endure hunger and thirst, and 
to combat the inclemencies of the weather ; and 
thus they were, according to the report of their 
different masters, destined either for political go 
vernment, to the army, or to the priesthood, 
which were the three roads to nobility. On the 
other hand, the girls of rank were brought up by 
certain matrons, who lived in other colleges, and 
who were dedicated to the care of the temples ; 
they were kept closely confined from their earliest 
infancy, nor suffered to leave their mistresses but 
by the approbation of their parents and the kingly 
consent ; nor were they ill-skilled in all those arts 
and occupations which render the female character 
useful and interesting. 

The Mexicanos constituted all their happiness 
in war, a profession which their kings looked 



MEXICO. 



105 



upon as \vhat principally constituted their power, 
and all the vassals as the peculiar attribute of their 
nation : these considerations made them naturally 
valorous, eager of gaining the prizes that were 
offered as rewards to bravery, and historians re 
count that Mocthezuma had no less than 30 vas 
sals, so powerful that each of them could bring into 
the field 30,000 men at the first order. This mix 
ture of their barbarian and savage customs with 
those of civilized life would deserve a more exten 
sive description than we can admit in this article, 
but an account may be seen in Herrera, Gornara, 
Acosta, Torquemada, Solis, Garcia, and others, 
such as will give every satisfactory information 
that may be further required. 

The empire of the Mexicanos was conquered by 
the incomparable Hernaa Cortes in 152), nor 
was it less than a miracle that with an army of 
little more than 300 Spaniards he should succeed 
in subjecting so many millions of men, whose pa 
triotism might be put in competition with that of 
the Romans. 

MEXICAPA, SAN MARTIN DE, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the district of the town of 
Marquesado del Voile, and of i\\calca1dia mayor of 
Quatro Villas, in Nueva Espana. It contains 30 
families of Indians, who live by cultivating and 
trading in wheat, maize, cochineal, and fruit, and in 
collecting woods, coal, salt, and fuel. It is one 
mile to the w. with an inclination to the s. w. of its 
capital. 

MEXICO, a province and corregimienlo of 
Nueva Espana in N.America. It is 313 miles 
long in a direct line from s. w. to n. e. from the 
port of San Diego de Acapulco in the S. sea to the 
bay or lake of Panuco near the 11. It is bounded 
by the province and bishopric of Mechoacan on 
one side, and on the other by the province of 
Tlaxcala, a line being drawn through these from 
e. s. e. to w. Its width is 37 leagues, forming an 
irregular figure ; for being narrow in the strip on 
the coast of the S. sea, it continues widening as it 
runs n. 

It enjoys different climates, is for the most part 
mountainous, but not without many fertile valleys, 
watered by different rivers, which render it a coun 
try extremely productive of grain, fruit, seeds, and 
herbs. It produces also cochineal, which is cul 
tivated in many parts, and an incredible multi 
tude of cattle of every species. The woods are 
thronged with birds notorious for their plumage 
and their song ; but, as this forms a part of Nueva 
Espana, we reserve a further description for that 
article. The extent of this province, which is as 
fur as its archbishopric reaches, comprehends many 

VOL. III. 



alcaldias ma yores and corrc^imientos^ in which are 

counted 235 curacies and 23 missions, viz. 

S. Agustin de las Cue- Santa Ana Tianguis- 

bas, tenco, 

S. Angel, San Bartolome Ozolo- 

Ascapotzaico, tepee, 

San Bartolome, Chapantongo, 

Naucalpan, Chilcuautla, 

S. Christoval Ecatepec, Cardonal, 

Culhuaccin, Chautla, 

Cuyuaciin, Coatlinchan, 

Churubusco, Chimalhuacun Atenco, 

Santa Fe, Coatepec, 

Ntra. Senora de Guada- Chimalhuacan Chalco ? 

lupe, Chalco, 

Ixtapalapan, Chiconcuautla, 

Ixtacalco, Chapa de Mota, 

Mexicalzinco, Capuluac, 

Mixcoac, Calimaya, 

Tlalneplantla, Cacalotenango, 

Tacuba, Coatepec de los Costa- 

Tacubaya, les, 

Xochirnilco, Coyuca, 

Atitalaquia, Cucrnavaca, 

Actopam, Casas Viejas, 

Alfaxayuca, Canada, 

Acolman, Cadereita, 

Acapuxco, Calnale, 

A pan, Coscatlan, 

Ayozinco, Real del Doctor, 

Ayapango, Escanela, 

Amecamecan, Ecazinco, 

Atzompan, Epazoyncan, 

Achichipico, S. Felipe Ixtlahuaca, 

Real de Atotonilco Ixtapan, 

Chico, Ixcatiopan, 

Atotonilco el Grande, Yautepec, 

Acatlan, Iguala, 

Aculco, S. Juan Teotihuacan, 

Acambay, S. Joseph Malacatepec, 

Atlacomulco, S. Juan del Rio, 
Asuncion de Malacate- Landa, 

pec, Lerma, 

Amanalco, Lolotlan, 

Almoloyan, Misquiahuala, 

Acamistla, Misquic, 

Acapetlahuayan, Milpa Alta, 

Amatepec Tlatlaya, Real del Monte, 

Alahuistlaiij S. Martin Ozoloapan. 

Apaxtla, Metepec, 

Atlatlauca, Malinalco, 

Ayacapixtla, Malinaltenanco, 

Acapulco, Ma&amp;lt;zatepec, 

Amealco, Mestitlan, 

Ayahualican, Molanco, 



106 

Otumba, 

Ocuituco, 

Real de Omitlan, 

Ocoyoacan, 

Ocuila, 

Oapan, 

Pacula y Xiliapan, 

Real de Pachuca, 

Pilcayan, 

Pueblito, 

Panuco, 

Quantitlan, 

Quautla Amilpas, 

Singuilucan, 

Sinacantepec, 

Santiago de Queretaro, 

S. Sebastian de Quere- 

taro, 

Sochicoatlan, 
Tultitlan, 
Tepotzotlan, 
Teoloyucan, 
Tequisquiac, 
Tetepanco, 
Tepexi del Rio, 
Tula, 
Tepititlan, 
Tasquillo, 
Tepeapulco, 
Tepatlastoc, 
Tezcuco, 
Tlahuac, 

Tenango Tepopula, 
Temamatlac, 
Tlalraanalco, 
Tetela del Volcan, 
Tochimilco, 

Tecama, 

Tizayucan, 

Tolcayucan, 

Tetzontepec, 

Tulancinco, 

Tlaola, 

Temoaya, 

Temascalcinco, 

Temascaltepec del Valle, 

Real de Temascaltepec, 

Texupilco, 

Toluca, 

Tenango del Valle, 

Tescaliacac, 

Tenancinco, 

Tecualoyan, 

Real de Tezicapan, 

Tetipac, 



MEXICO. 



Real de Tasco, 

Teloloapan, 

Tetela del Rio, 

Tlayacapan, 

Tlalneplanta, 

Totolapun, 

Tlaltizapan, 

Tlalquitenanco, 

Tenango del Rio, 

Tepoxtlan, 

Tepequacuilco, 

Tolimanejo, 

Toliman, 

Tequisquiapan, 

Tecoutzatla, 

Tlalchichilco, 

Tlalchinol, 

Tepehuacan, 

Tamazunchale, 

Tampamolon, 

Tancanhuitz, 

Tempoal, 

Tantoyuca, 

Tantima, 

Villanueva de la Pena 

de Francia. 
Xacala, 
Xalpan, 
Xuchitepec, 
Xumiltepec, 
Xaltenco, 
Xiquipilco, 
Xocotitlan, 
Xilotepec, 
Xulatlaco, 
Xantetelco, 
Xonacatepec, 

Xiutepec, 

Xocbitepec, 

Xiclm de Indios, 

Real de Xichu, 

Real de Zimapan, 

Zempoala, 

Zumpango de la La- 
guna, 

Ziautehutla, 

Real de Zultepec, 

Zumpahuacan, 

Real de Zacualpan, 

Zacualpan del Rio, 

Zaqualtipan, 

Zontecomatlan, 

Zoquiatipan. 

The Missions. 

Tampico, 



Palma,orSultodelAgua, 

Tamuya, 

Huayabos, 

Sauz, 

Tanlacrin, 

Tanlacun, 

Santa Maria Acapulco, 

Santa Barbara, 

Escandon, 

Horcasitas, 

Las Palmas. 



Ozuluama, 

Tarabon, 

Tanquayalal, 

Tanlaxac, 

Altamira, 

Huehuetlan, 

Tamaquichimin, 

Tamapach, 

Tamitas, 

Villa del Valles, 

Tarnpasquil, 

The capital is the city of the same name, with 
the dedicatory title of San Hipolito, in memory of 
the day on which the Spaniards took it from the 
Indians. It is the court and metropolis of the 
Mexican empire, or of Los Aculhuas, an arch 
bishop s see, and the residence of the viceroy, 
governor, and captain-general, and of the audi 
ence and royal chancery of Nueva Espaiia, 
erected in 1527, and the jurisdiction of which ex 
tends from the cape of Honduras to that of Flo 
rida in the N. sea, and by the S.sea from the 
point where the jurisdiction of the audience of 
Guatemala terminates to where that of Guada- 
laxara or Nueva Galicia begins, and to the pro 
vinces of Yucatan, Cozumel, and Tabasco. It is 
the most beautiful, grand, and sumptuous city of 
the whole of the Spanish monarchy. 

It was founded by the Indians in 1327, with the 
name of Tenochitlan, upon a lake in the midst of 
a valley, 14 leagues long, seven wide, and 40 in 
circumference. It is surrounded by 90 leagues of 
mountains and serranias, fruitful in cedars, trees, 
both rare and common, gums, drugs, salts, and 
metallic productions of all classes, marbles and 
precious stones, plain and vari-coloured. As well 
in the mountains as in the valley are beautiful 
settlements, farms, granges, and estates, in which 
the European fruits and those peculiar to the 
country are cultivated. The fields abound in 
herbage, which render the prospect beautiful, and 
afford pasturage for innumerable herds of cattle of 
every kind. The rivers and lakes fertilize the ter 
ritory, and by them are carried to the capital all 
the most delicate fruits, during the different sea 
sons of the year. Here are all kinds of vegetables, 
garden herbs, and grain, ducks, geese, widgeons, 
quails, fish, eels, arid other productions, birds 
much valued for their song arid plumage; and 
above all, the soil is extremely fertile in flax, 
hemp, cotton, tobacco, indigo, sugar, and ma- 
gueyes or pita, of the branches of which is made a 
great commerce, and such as greatly enriches the 
royal exchequer. 

In the time of the gentilism of the Indians there 



MEXICO. 



107 



were 140,000 houses, and these were divided into 
four quarters or wards, an infinite number of tem 
ples dedicated to their idols, the most celebrated 
of which was that erected to Huitzilopochitli, the 
god of war, built upon a pyramidical square table 
land of 40 feet high, and to which there was an 
ascent by a staircase of 140 steps, wide enough to 
receive eight men abreast ; the whole forming an 
edifice so magnificent as to strike the Spaniards 
with astonishment ; though not less so did the 
great plaza or market-place of Tlateluco, of the 
which now not even the vestiges remain. 

The Spaniards, led on by the celebrated Hcrnan 
Cortes, gained this city on the 13th day of August 
1521. It was dedicated to the martyr San Hipo- 
lito, its sworn patron, and in memory of whom 
the pennant is taken down every year by the royal 
Alferez, and carried in splendid procession by 
the viceroy, the audience, the tribunals, the city 
council, and the nobility, to the church of the said 
saint, to the vespers, and to the mass, said by way 
of gratitude and thanks. 

The plant of the city is square ; its diameter 
within the gates is 4340 Spanish yards from n. to s. 
and 3640 from e. to vs. ; the ground is level, the 
streets straight, and drawn at right lines, being 
a little more than 14 yards wide. The town is 
surrounded with a wall of uncemented stones, and 
the channels which lead from the lake disperse 
their waters in various small canals, which flow 
through some beautiful streets, and are covered 
with craft and canoes, which every day appear 
loaded with supplies of fruit, flowers, &amp;c. and 
make their way up as far as the walls of the palace 
of the viceroy, which is situate in the plaza mayor. 
The buildings are magnificent, and some of them 
of the most beautiful architecture. There tire dif 
ferent markets, where there is a regular supply of 
every thing that the public can require. This 
city is entered by seven stone causeways, which 
are, Guadalupe to the n. Tacuba to the w. San 
Antonio to the s. built by the Indians, and the 
others by the Spaniards, their names being La 
Piedad, Ascapuscalo, Tacuba, Santiago, and Cha- 
pultepec. The whole of the city is paved, the 
principal streets with free-stone, and some of these 
are arched, so that the filth is carried off. 

Here are some beautiful fountains, the waters of 
which come from various parts : but that which 
has the best and sweetest water is that which is 
brought from the settlement of Santa Fe, for more 
than two leagues upon an aqueduct of more than 
900 arches, each of eight yards diameter, above 
three high, and a quarter wide : this canal is open 
at top, and has a rail-way of half a yard deep on 



each side. Another aqueduct similar to this comes 
from the pool of Chapultepcc, about a league s 
distance, and formerly there was one towards they, 
through Churubusco, of which nothing but the 
vestiges remain. Here are some beautiful prome 
nades, both in the country and by the water side, 
the principal of which is that which was made in 
the time of the viceroy Don Antonio Bucareli ; 
also a theatre for plays, a cock-pit, a tennis-court, 
&amp;c. ; many gambling places, billiard tables, inns, 
and taverns ; 42 pulquerias, in which are sold daily 
100,000 quarts of pulque^ this being the liquor or 
wine of the Magueyes. There are different pa 
laces and public buildings, such as that of the 
viceroy, where reside the tribunals, the secretaries, 
the officers of the treasury and of the royal reve 
nues. There is also a mint, in which in soirio 
years have been coined upwards of 23,000,000 of 
dollars ; also the inquisition, together with the ofiice 
for its ministers, and the prison for the culprits. 

Here is a royal and pontifical university, 
erected by the Emperor Charles V. in 1551, with 
the same privileges as that of Salamanca ; its clois 
ter being composed of more than 225 doctors and 
masters, with 22 professors of all the sciences, with 
a grand library ; a most ancient royal college of 
San Ildefonso, which superb edifice contains within 
it two other colleges, namely, those of Filolbs and 
that of Rosario, containing above 300 students ; 
likewise the Real de Christo, incorporated on the 
day of St. Peter and St. Paul ; the college called of 
Los Comendadores de San Ramon, for the natives 
of Valladolid and the Havana ; that of Santiago 
Tlateluco, for the Indians of rank, the same having 
been founded by the Emperor Charles V.; the Real 
de San Juan de Letran, the Semenario Tridentino 
de San Gregorio, for the Indians, and the seminary 
of Los Infantes ; not to mention various other col 
leges for religious students, and, besides the uni 
versity, public professorships, amounting altoge 
ther to the number of 43. Besides these there are 
some free schools and academies for the instruction 
of youth, especially those under the care of the re 
ligious order of the Betlemitas, the royal college 
for the instruction of miners, a royal academy of 
the three noble arts of painting, sculpture, and 
architecture, erected in the reign of Don Carlos III. 
four colleges for educating female children, with 
the names of Santa Maria de la Caridad, or De las 
Ninas, San Ignacio, San Miguel de Bellen, and of 
Guadalupe, for the Indian nobility; the Miseri 
cord ia, being a refuge for married women, the 
Beaterio de San Lorenzo, the Casa de Magdalena, 
or house of repentants, for the chastisement of bad 
women ; the Cuna, or a house for foundlings; and 
p2 



108 



MEXICO. 



a general house of entertainment for poor invalids 
and beggars ; 13 hospitals, which are the General 
and the Heal for the Indians, and those of San 
Andres, Espiritu Santo, Santissiraa Trinidad or 
San Pedro, San Juan do Dios, San Lazaro, San 
Anton, Amor de Dios, De la Concepcion or Jesus 
Nazareno, Betlemitas, San Hipolito, El Salva 
dor dc Sayago, and La Tercera Ordcn de San 
Francisco. 

Its archbishopric extends ISO leagues from the 
port of Acapulco, in the S. sea, to the bay of San 
Esteban, of the port of Panuco, in the n. upon a 
line which runs from s. tr. tow. e. and bounded zo. 
by the province and bishopric of Mechoacan, and 
e. by that of Tlaxcala. It was first only a bishop 
ric, and the church was called Carolense, with 
the dedicatory title of La Asuncion de Maria San- 
tisima, in 1555, and afterwards erected into a 
bishopric by Pope Clement VII. during the reign 
of the Emperor Charles V. in 1534. It has for 
suffragans the bishops of La Puebla, Tlaxcala, 
Mechoacan, Gnadalaxara, Oaxaca, Yucatan, 
Durango, Nuevo Iteyno de Leon, &amp;c. Its ca 
thedral is a sumptuous and magnificent temple, 
94 years old, and ornamented by the piety and 
generosity of the Kings Philip II. III. and IV. 
and Charles II. and in which 18 viceroys have 
seemed to shew their competition in benefiting the 
sacred cause of religion. It is 133 Spanish 
yards in length, 74 in width ; of Ionic order, and 
with 74 windows : divided into five naves, with 
three doors on the s. side, two on the e. and w. 
and two on the n. In it is venerated two images of 
Maria Santisima, the one of the Assumption, of the 
most pure gold, weighing 6984 castellanos, and 
adorned with precious stones, and the other of 
silver, concerning the mystery of the Conception, 
and weighing 38 marks ; in short, the grandeur, 
riches, and majesty with which the worship is ex 
ecuted in this temple by the archbishop and vene 
rable cabildo, exceeds all description. The other 
sumptuous temples, and at which a numerous 
clergy officiate, amount to above 100. Here are 
14 parishes, with the titles of Sagrario, San Mi 
guel, Santa Catalina, Martir, La Santa Vera 
Cruz, San Joseph, Santa Ana, Santa Cruz, San 
Sebastian, Santa Maria de lledonda, San Pablo, 
Santa Cruz Acatlan, Nuestra Senora del Salto del 
Agua, Santo Tomas, and San Antonio de las Huer- 
tas ; four convents of Dominican monks, which 
are, the Convento Grande, Porta Celi, La Piedad, 
and San Jacinto ; five convents of the order of 
San Francisco, namely, ConventoGrande, Santiago 
Tlatelolco, Recolleccion de San Cosme, San Fer 
nando de Misoneros de Propoganda Fide, and of 



Los Descalzos de San Diego ; four of the order of 
San Agustin, the Convento Grande, San Pablo, 
and the house of entertainment of San Nicolas de 
llecoletos y Santo Tomas; three of La Merced, 
the Convento Grande, San Pedro Pasqual de Be- 
len y la Merced de las Huertas ; one of the Car 
melites ; two of San Juan de Dios ; tAVO of the 
order of La Caridad, of which the one is San 
Hipolito, where resides the general of the reli 
gion, and the other the Espiritu Santo ; one of 
the religious Betlemitas, the residence of the 
general of its order ; the Casa de San Antonio 
Abad, for the regular canons ; the Oratorio de San 
Felipe Neri, the house of entertainment of Monges 
Benitos ; a college of the Padres Agonizantes; 
besides other chapels and churches of the follow 
ing orders, viz. that of San Francisco of La Orden 
Tercera, that of Santa Escuela, the parish of In 
dians of San Joseph, Nuestra Senora de Aran- 
zazu, Santo Christo de Burgos, and Nuestra Se 
nora de Balvanera; 20 monasteries of nuns, en 
titled the Convento Real dela Concepcion, Regina, 
Balvanera, Real de Jesus Maria, Real de San 
Geronimo, of the same order, Lorenzo el Real de 
Escorial, where the Mexican poetess Sor Juana 
Inez de la Cruz flourished : La Incarnaeion, San 
Lorenzo, Santa Inos, San Joseph de Garcia, San 
Bernardo, Santa Teresa la Antigua, Santa Teresa 
la Nueva, Capuchinas, Santa Brigida, La Ense- 
nanza or Salesas, Santa Catalina de Sena, Santa 
Clara, San Juan dela Penitencia, where flourished 
the venerable Sebastiana ; Santa Isabel and Cor 
pus Christi de Senoras Capuchinas Indias. It also 
had a possessed house of the regulars of the com 
pany, a Mexican college of San Pedro y San 
Pablo, an house of noviciates of the title of San 
Andres, and a college of San Gregorio; and under 
its charge the Real de San Ildefonso, the Chico 
del Rosario, and that of Guadalupe de Indias. 

What further tends to ornament this city are 
the royal audience and court for the judgment of 
crimes, composed of the viceroy, the regent, 10 
oidors, five alcaldes, three fiscals, an alguacil 
may or ) a chancellor, four secretaries of the cham 
ber, and corresponding subordinate officers ; the 
general court of justice for those beyond the seas, 
or who have died intestate ; the royal tribunal, 
mayor, and audit of accounts ; (he real caxa matrix , 
or general treasury ; that of land and water ; that 
of the general of the Indians; that of the half- 
yearly revenue and of the spear-armed soldiery ; 
and the superintendance of the azogues or quick 
silver; of the scaled paper; that of the general 
direction of the alcababas and pulques; of the 
real stores ; the mint ; the tribunal of La Santa 



MEXICO. 



109 



Hermandad ; the office that takes cognizance of 
forbidden drinks ; the royal junta of tobacco, and 
the general direction of this revenue; a general 
post-office, and the office for the revenues arising 
from powder, cards, &amp;c. ; the royal depots of dies, 
colours, leather and snow ; the tribunals of the in 
quisition, crusade, temporalities, missions of Cali 
fornia, for the direction of the lottery ; the sacral 
and royal place called the Monte de Picdad, for 
the erection of which the Count of Reg hi most 
beneficently and patriotically advanced a sum of 
315,000 dollars; also the royal tribunal of the con- 
sulado, of the mines, the college of physicians, 
and the tribunal of the Estado and Marquesado 
del Valle ; and lastly, the most illustrious cabildo, 
and the other offices of justice, &amp;c. 

Independently of the title of most noble, most 
loyal, renowned, and imperial city, there was con 
ceded to it by the Emperor Charles V. in 1523, 
the title of Cabeza y Corte del Reyno, (Head and 
Court of the Kingdom), who also granted to it the 
liberty of using the arms which it had in the time 
of its gentilism, the which were, a shield, with a 
castle of three towers, an eagle upon a tunal tree, 
with a snake in its beak ; at the foot of the tree 
ran some waters; on the side without the shield 
were two lions, and upon the top a crown : also 
by a cedule of 4th of July, of the same year, there 
were further conceded for the arms of its corpora 
tion and of the city, a blue shield of the colour of 
water, to represent the lake, a gold castle in the 
middle, and three bridges of stone leading to it, 
the two side bridges not quite touching the castle, 
and upon each a lion standing, and having his 
feet upon the bridge and his talons on the castle ; 
and within the orle were ten green tuna leaves, and 
above all the imperial crown. 

In 1530, the same emperor granted to this city 
the title and privileges of Burgos Cabeza de Cas- 
tilla, and in 1548, the titles of most noble, most 
loyal and illustrious city : and again the Senor 
Don Felipe V. confirming the above ordinances, 
granted them to be perpetual, in 1728. 

It also enjoys the privilege and pre-eminence of 
being called the Grande de Espana, and the 
Senor Don Carlos III. granted in 1773, to the 
persons belonging to the chapter, the use of gold 
embroidery to their dress and undress uniforms, 
declaring that they should be preferred before all 
the tribunals and bodies, with the exception of the 
royal audience and the tribunal of accounts. 

The principal patroness of this city is Maria 
Santisima de Guadalupe, [the most holy Maria of 
Guadalupe], who was solemnly shown as such in 



1737, and from thence she has become almost uni 
versal patroness in America. There is a repre 
sentation of her here, which was found to be mira 
culously painted on the cloak of the Indian Juan 
Diego, in the presence of the first archbishop, 
in 1531. 

The temperature of this place is most benign, 
and it enjoys a continual spring, neither the heat 
nor the cold being at any time troublesome ; and 
alt-hough, indeed, the four seasons are perceptible, 
yet do they all abound almost equally in the pro 
duction of flowers and fruits. The whole of the 
city is surrounded by estates, orchards, and gar 
dens, so as to pour in a continual supply of flowers, 
fruits, vegetables, and garden herbs, for the use and 
luxury of the inhabitants, save on the e. side, 
which is barren, owing to the great lake of Tez- 
coco, the vapours arising from which, and the par 
ticles of saltpetre surrounding it, give a complete 
check to all kinds of vegetation. 

The population consists of more than 350,000" 
souls of all classes and casts; and amongst these 
are counted many noble families, descendants from 
the conquerors and settlers; and for the subsist 
ence of this population there are consumed an 
nually 300,000 sheep, 15,500 cows and calves,. 
30,000 swine, near 2,000,000 arrobas of flour, and 
170,000 bushels of maize. The natives are clever, 
and have a great disposition for the liberal arts ; 
and in these some have excelled very much, as is 
proved by the paintings of Cabrera, Enriquez, 
Vallcjo, Pelaez, and Don Juan Patricio. The 
general character of the Mexicans is that of being 
liberal, courteous, affable, and charitable. Mex 
ico, in its university and colleges, has produced 
many characters noted tor their virtue, science, 
and arts, in all times ; it has had 84 archbishops 
and bishops, many viceroys, captains-general, am 
bassadors, generals of religious, counsellors, oidors^ 
dignitaries, and magistrates, who have done ho 
nour to the tribunals, ecclesiastic and secular ; to 
enumerate all of whom would form a catalogue 
too extensive for the limits of this article ; we shall 
therefore confine ourselves to the mention of such 
only as have rendered themselves pre-eminently 
conspicuous, viz. 

San Felipe de Jesus, sworn patron of the city 
after the Virgin of Guadalupe : he was baptized in 
the cathedral church, in the chapel of which the 
font is still preserved, suffered martyrdom in Ja- 
pon, his mother having the glory of assisting at 
his beatification in 1629, and his father, Alonsode 
las Casas, that of declaring in his will that he had 
two sons who had died martyrs to the holy faith. 



no 



MEXICO. 



The venerable mother, Sebastiana, of the Most 
Holy Trinity, a nun in the monastery of San Juan 
de la Pcnitencia. 

The venerable Don Alonso de las Culvas Dava- 
los, descended of the most illustrious families, 
whose virtues and learning raised him to the dig 
nity of archbishop of his native place, where he 
died, as it is supposed, a saint. 

The venerable Fr. Bartobme Gutierrez, burnt 
at Japon on account of (he faith. 

Don Fr. Antonio Monrroy, general of St. Do 
mingo ; a most religious character, and archbishop 
of Santiago. 

Don Nicolas Gomez dc Cervantes, of the an 
cient houses of the noble founders of Mexico, 
imitator of St. Tonias de Villaniicva, archbishop 
of Guatemala. 

Don Manuel de Ocio y Villafanc, collegiate of 
the re/De San Ildefonso, and of that of San Ra 
mon, doctor and dean of Manila, bishop of Zebu ; 
in the troublesome visitation of which he died from 
a venomous bite. 

Don Fr. Ignacio de Padilla y Estrada, bishop 
of Yucatan, archbishop of St. Domingo ; the 
honour of his family, and in his religion of the 
order of Preachers. 

Don Miguel Poblete, archbishop of Manila ; a 
model of wise and holy prelates. 

Don Manuel Antonio Roxo del Rio y Vieira, 
collegiate real of San Ildefonso, rector of Sala 
manca, archbishop, governor, and captain-general 
of Manila : the calamities which were suffered 
here at the time of the assault made by the English, 
preyed so much on his kind heart that he died a 
victim to his feelings for the interest of his country 
and his king. 

The Father Christobal de Villafaile, a victim to 
his charity ; having been put to death whilst 
visiting the prisons in the city of Guatemala, 
where he was prefect of prisons. 

DonJoaquinAntonio de Ribadeneira, collegiate 
mayor of Santa Maria de los Santos, advocate, 
fiscal, and oidor of the royal audience; his learn 
ing is borne testimony lo by his works. 

Don Francisco Xavia de Gamboa, collegiate of 
the raz/De San Alfonso, alcalde del criaicn t oidor , and 
actual regent of that audience ; noted both in Eu 
rope and America for h is talent s,and for his celebrated 
Treatise on Mining which he published at Madrid. 
Don Antonio dc Villaurrutia, collegiate of the col 
lege of Todos los Santos, oidor of the audience of 
St. Domingo, deacon of that of his native place, and 
regent in that of Guadalaxara ; a minister most 
exemplary for his probity, justice, and humility. 



Don Baltasar Ladron dc Guevara, who, following 
the career of jurisprudence, was invited, from his 
literature and talents, to accept the vicetoyalty ; 
he was fiscal-agent, alcalde del crimen, and oidur 
in his native place, manifesting a continual xeal 
and ability in the service of God and of his king. 

The Doctor Don Juan Joseph de Eguiara, 
magistrate and dignitary of the church of Mexico, 
his native place; elected bishop of Yucatan, 
which office he renounced: wrote more than 40 
volumes, and died a victim to fatigue and study; 
not more than one of the volumes of his excellent 
work, the Mexican bible, being published at the 
time. 

We here finish this list, and observe that Mexico 
is 167 miles s. w. of Acapulco in the S. sea, and 
about the same distance from the N. sea, or from 
the port of Vera Cruz. In lat. 19= 26 53", and long. 
274 10 . [!3utthe long, taken by Humboldt, at the 
convent of St. Augustin, makes it in 101 25 SO 7 
or 99 a 5 30" w. from Greenwich ; the lat. being 
19 25 45". 

Some further and very interesting accounts of 
this city, extracted from the above author, will be 
found interspersed amongst the new matter inserted 
under the head MEXICO, Intendancy of, Chap. I. 
the whole of which new matter we have inserted 
before Alccdo s chronological series of the Indian 
cmperorsj 

[INDEX TO NEW MATTER RESPECTING 

MEXICO. 

CHAP. I. Mexico , Inlendancy of, viz. Popula 
tion, extent, and boundaries. Physical ap 
pearance. Teocalli andolher edifices. Lake of 
Tezcuco. Grandeur of the city. Its monu 
ments and antiquities. Its population. Its 
consumption of provisions . Floating islands. 
Valley of Tenochtitlan. HillofC hapultepec. 
Ilydrographical view of the valley of Mexico. 
Remarkable cities, towns, and mines of this 
inlendancy. 

CHAP. II. Recent mediation between Spain and 
her colonies, containing concise particulars of 
the secret sittings of the Cortes on that subject. 

CHAP. III. Account of the present revolution. 

CHAP. IV. Distances from Mexico to Acapulco. 

CHAP. V. General considerations on the extent 
and physical aspect of the kingdom of Nueva 
E span a. 

CHAP. VI. Particular statistical account of the 
inlendancies of Nueva Espana. 

CHAP. VII. Minuter details of the state of the 
agriculture of Nueva Espana, and of its metallic 
mines. ] 



MEXICO. 



Ill 



[CiiAP. VIII. Table of the geographical positions 
of the kingdom of Nucva Espana, for which 
see the end of the general preface to this work. 

CHAP. IX. Table of the most remarkable dera 
tions measured in the interior of Nueva Espana. 

CHAP. X. General considerations on the possi 
bility of uniting the South sea and Atlantic ocean, 
viz. By the ri~cers of Peace and Tacovtche 7 "csse 
Sources of the Rio Bravo and Rio Colorado 
Isthmus of Tehuanlepec Lake of Nicaragua 
Isthmus of Panama Bay of Cupica Canal 
of Choco Rio Guallaga Gulf of St. George. 

CHAP. XI. Glance on the coast of the Great 
ocean, which extends from the port of San Fran 
cisco and from cape j\Jendocino to the Russian 
establishments in Prince William s sound. 

CHAP. I. 

Mexico, Intendancy of. Population, extent, 
and boundaries. Physical appearance. Teo- 
calli and other edifices. Lake of Tezcuco. 
Grandeur of the city. Its monuments and an 
tiquities. Its population. Its consumption of 
provisions. Floating islands. Valley of Tenoch 
titlan. Hill of Chapultcpec.Ilydrographi- 
cal view of the valley of Mexico. Remarkable 
cities, towns, and mines of this intcndancy. 
The population of this intendancy, in 1803, 
amounted to 1 ,5 1 1 ,800 souls ; the extent of surface 
in square leagues to 5927 ; making the number of 
inhabitants to the square league 255. 

The whole of this intendancy is situated under 
the torrid zone. It extends from the 16 34 to the 
21 57 of n. lat. It is bounded on the n. by the 
inlendancy of San Luis Potosi, on the sy. by the 
intendancies of Guanaxuato and Valladolid, and 
on the e. by those of Vcra Cruz and La Puebla 
de los Angeles. It is washed towards the s. by the 
S. sea, or Great ocean, for a length of coast of 82 
leagues from Acapulco to Zacatula. 

Its greatest length from Zacatula to the mines of 
the Doctor is 136 leagues ; and its greatest breadth 
from Zacatula to the mountains situated to the e. 
of Chilpansingo is 92 leagues. In its n. part, 
towards the celebrated mines of Zimapan and the 
Doctor, it is separated by a narrow strip from the 
gulph of Mexico. Near Mextitlan this strip is 
only nine leagues in breadth. 

More than two-thirds of the intendancy of 
Mexico arc mountainous, in which there are im 
mense plains, elevated from 2000 to 2SOO metres 
(6561 and 7545 feet) above the level of the ocean. 
From Chalco to Queretaro are almost uninterrupted 
plains of 50 leagues in length and eight or ten 
in breadth. In the neighbourhood of the w. coast 



the climate is burning and very unhealthy, One 
summit only, the Nevado de Toluca, situated in 
a fertile plain of 2700 metres (or 8857 feet) in 
height, cn(ers the region of perpetual snow. Yet 
the porphyritical summit of this old volcano, whose 
form bears a strong resemblance to that of Pichi ri 
ch a near Quito, and which appears to have been 
formerly extremely elevated, is uncovered with 
snow in the rainy months of September and Oc 
tober. The elevation of the Pico del Fraile, or 
the highest summit of the Nevado de Toluca, is 
4520 metres (2370 toises, or 15,156 feet.) No 
mountain in this intcndancy equals the height of 
Mount Blanc. 

The valley of Mexico, or Tenochtitlan, of 
which M. Hnmboldt has published a very minute 
map, is situated in the centre of the corditlera of 
Anahuac, on the ridge of the porphyritical and 
basaltic amygdaloid mountains, which run from 
the s. s. e. to the n. n. w. This valley is of an 
oval form. According to his observations, and 
those of a distinguished mineralogist, M. Don Luis 
Martin, it contains, from the entry of the Hio Te- 
nango into the lake of Chalco, to the foot of the 
Cerro de Sincoque, near the desugue real of 
Huehuetoca, 18^ leagues in length, and from S. 
Gabriel, near the small town of Tezcuco, to the 
sources of the Rio de Escapusalco, near Guisqui- 
luca, 12{ leagues in breadth. The territorial 
extent of the valley is 244^ square leagues, of 
which only 22 square leagues are occupied by the 
lakes, which is less than a tenth of the whole surface. 
The circumference of the valley, reckon ing from 
the crest of the mountains, which surround it like 
a circular wall, is 67 leagues. This crest is most 
elevated on the s. particularly on the s. e. where 
the great volcanoes of La Puebla, the Popocatepetl, 
and Iztaccihuatl, bound the valley. One of the 
roads which lead from the valley of Tenochtitlan 
to that of Cholula and La Puebla passes even 
between the two volcanoes, by Tlamanalco, Ameca, 
La Cumbre, and La Cruz del Coreo. The small 
army of Cortes passed by this road on his first 
invasion. 

Six great roads cross the cordi/lera which in* 
closes the valley, of which the medium height is 
3000 metres (or 9842 feet) above the level of the 
ocean. 1 . The road from Acapulco to Guchilaque 
and Cuervaracca by the high summit called La 
Cruz del Marques (alluding to Hernan Cortes, 
Marques del Valle de Oaxaca.) 2. The road of 
Toluca by Tianguillo and Lerma, a magnificent 
causeway, not sufficiently to be admired, con 
structed with great art, partly over arches. 3. The 
road of Querctaro, Guanaxuato, and Durango e/} 



MEXICO. 



[caTnino de tierra adentro, which passes by Guautii- 
lan, Huehuetoca^ and the Puerto de Reyes, near 
Bata, through hills scarcely 80 (or 262 feet) metres 
above the pavement of the great square of Mexico. 
4. The road of Pachuco, which leads to the cele 
brated mines of real del Monte, by the Cerro 
Ventoso, covered with oak, cypress, and rose trees, 
almost continually in flower. 5. The old road 
of La Puebla, by S. Bonaventura and the Llanos 
de Apan. And, 6. the new road of La Puebla by 
Rio Frio and Tesmelucos, s. e. from the Cerro del 
Telapon, of which the distance from the Sierra 
Nevada, as well as that from the Sierra Nevada 
(Iztaccilmatl) to the great volcano (Popocatepetl), 
served for bases to the trigonometrical operations 
of MM. Velasquez and Costanzo. 

From being long accustomed to hear the capital 
of Mexico spoken of as a city built in the midst 
of a lake, and connected with the continent merely 
by dikes, those who look at Humboldt s map will be 
no doubt astonished on seeing that the centre of the 
present city is 4500 metres (or 14,763 feet) distant 
from the lake of Tezcuco, and more than 9000 
metres (or 29,527 feet) from the lake of Chalco. 
They will be inclined, therefore, either to doubt the 
accuracy of the descriptions in the history of the 
discoveries of the new world, or they will believe 
that the capital of Mexico does not stand on the 
same ground with the old residence of Montezuma, 
or Muteczuma ; but the city has certainly not chang 
ed its place, for the cathedral of Mexico occupies 
exactly the ground where the temple of Muitzilo- 
pochtli stood, and the present street of Tacuba is 
the old street of Tlacopan, through which Cortes 
made his fnmous retreat in the melancholy night 
of the 1st of July 1520, which goes by the name 
of noche triste. The difference of situation be 
tween the old maps and those published by Hnrn- 
boldt, arises solely from the diminution of water 
of the lake of Tezcuco. 

It may be useful in this place to lay before the 
readers a passage from a letter addressed by Cortes 
to the Emperor Charles V. dated 30th October 1520, 
in which he gives the description of the valley of 
Mexico. This passage, written with great simplicity 
of style, gives us at the same time a very good idea 
of the sort of police which prevailed in the old 
Tenochtitlan. " The province in which the resi 
dence of this great lord Muteczuma is situated," 
says Cortes, u is circularly surrounded with elevated 
mountains, and intersected with precipices. The 
plain contains near 70 leagues in circumference, 
and in this plain are two lakes, which fill nearly 
the whole valley ; for the inhabitants sail in canoes 
for more than 50 leagues round." (We must 



observe that the General speaks only of two lakes, 
because he knew but imperfectly those of Zum- 
pango and Xaltocan, between which he hastily 
passed in his flight from Mexico to Tlascala, before 
the battle of Otumba.) " Of the two great Jakes 
of the valley of Mexico, the one is fresh and the 
other salt water. They are separated by a small 
range of mountain (the conical and insulated hills 
near Iztapalapan) ; these mountains rise in the mid 
dle of the plain, and the waters of the lake mingle 
together in a strait between the hills and the high 
cordillcra (undoubtedly the e. declivity of Cerros 
de Santa Fe.) The numerous towns and villages 
constructed in both of the two lakes carry on their 
commerce by canoes, without touching the con 
tinent. The great city of Temix .itan or Tenoch 
titlan is situated in the midst of the salt-water lake, 
which has its tides like the sea ; and from the city 
to the continent there are two leagues, whichever 
way we wish to enter. Four dikes lead to the 
city : they are made by the hand of man, and are 
of the breadth of two lances. The city is as large 
as Seville or Cordova. The streets, 1 merely 
speak of the principal ones, are very narrow and 
very large ; some are half dry and half occupied 
by navigable canals, furnished with very well 
constructed wooden bridges, broad enough for JO 
men on horseback to pass at the same time. The 
market-place, twice as large as that of Seville, is 
surrounded with an immense portico, under which 
are exposed for sale all sorts of merchandize, eat 
ables, ornaments made of gold, silver, lead, pewter, 
precious stones, bones, shells, and feathers ; delft 
ware, leather, and spun cotton. We find hewn 
stones, tiles, and timber fit for building. There 
are lanes for game, others for roots and garden 
fruits ; there are houses where barbers shave the 
head (with razors made of obsidian); and there 
arc houses resembling our apothecary shops, where 
prepared medicines, unguents, and plasters are sold. 
There are houses where drink is sold. The mar 
ket abounds with so many things, that I am unable 
to name them all to your highness. To avoid 
confusion, every species of merchandize is sold in 
a separate lane ; every thing is sold by the yard, 
but nothing has hitherto been seen to be weighed 
in the market. Jn the midst of the great square 
is a house, which 1 shall call Vaudiencia^ in which 
10 or 12 persons sit constantly for determining any 
disputes which may arise respecting the sale of 
goods. There are other persons who mix conti 
nually with the crowd, to see that a just price is 
asked. We have scon them break the false measures 
which they had seized from the merchants." 
Such was the state of Tenochtitlan in 1520,] 



MEXICO. 



113 



Faccording to the description of Cortes himself. 
Humboldt sought in vain in the archives of his 
family, preserved at Mexico in the Casa del Estado, 
for the plan which this great captain ordered to be 
drawn up of the environs of the capital, and which 
he sent to the emperor, as he says, in his third 
letter published by Cardinal Lorenzana. The 
Abbe Clavigero has ventured to give a plan of 
the lake of Tczcuco, such as he supposes it to 
have been in the sixteenth century. This sketch is 
very inaccurate, though much preferable to that 
given by Robertson, and other European authors, 
equally unskilled in the geography of Mexico. 
Humboldt has drawn on the map of the valley of 
Tenochtitlan the old extent of the salt-water lake, 
such as he conceived it from the historical account 
of Cortes, and some of his contemporaries. In 
1520, and long after, the villages of Iztapalapan, 
Coyohuacan (improperly called Cuyacan), Tacu- 
bajn, and Tacuba, were quite near the banks of 
the lake of Tezcuco. Cortes says expressly, 
(Lorenzana^ p. 229, 195, 102), that the most part 
of the houses of Coyohuacan, Culuacan, Chulu- 
buzco, Mexicaltzingo, Iztapalapan, Cuitaguaca, 
and Mizqueque, were built in the water on piles, 
so that frequently the canoes could enter by an 
under-door. The small hill of Chapultepec, on 
which the viceroy Count Galvez constructed a 
castle, was no longer an island in the lake of Tez 
cuco in the time of Cortes. On this side, the 
continent approached to within about 3000 metres 
(or 9842 feet) of the city of Tenochtitlan, conse 
quently the distance of two leagues indicated by 
Cortes in his letter to Charles V. is not altogether 
accurate : he ought to have retrenched the one half 
of this, excepting, however, the part of the w. 
side at the small porphyritical hill of Chapultepec. 
We may well believe, however, that this hill was, 
some centuries before, also a small island, like the 
Peiiol del Marques, or the Penol de los Bafios. It 
appears extremely probable, from geological obser 
vations, that the lakes had been on the decrease 
long before the arrival of the Spaniards, and before 
the construction of the canal of Huehuetoca. 

The Aztecs, or Mexicans, before founding on 
a group of islands, in 1325, the capital which yet 
subsists, had already inhabited for 52 years ano 
ther part of the lake farther to the s. of which the 
Indians have not been lately able to point out the site. 
The Mexicans left Aztlan towards the year 1 ICO, 
and only arrived, after a migration of 56 years, in 
the valley of Tenochtitlan, by Malinalco, in theeor- 
dillera of Toluca, and by Tula. They established 
themselves first at Zumpango, then on thes. decli- 
yity of the mountains of Tepeyac, whe.re the mag- 

VOL. III. 



nificent temple, dedicated to Our Lady of Guada- 
loupe, is situated. In the year 1245 (according to 
the chronology of the Abbe Clavigero), they ar 
rived at Chupultepec. Harassed by the petty 
princes of Zaltocan, whom the Spanish historians 
honour with the title of kings, the Aztecs, to pre 
serve their independence, withdrew to a group of 
small islands called Acocolco, situated towards the 
s. extremity of the lake of Tezcuco. There they 
lived for half a century in great want, compelled 
to feed on roots of aquatic plants, insects, and a 
problematical reptile called axolotf, which Mr. 
Cuvier looks upon to be the nympha of an un 
known salamander. Having been reduced to 
slavery by the kings of Tezcuco or Acolhuacan, 
the Mexicans were forced to abandon their village 
in the midst of the lake, and to take refuge on the 
continent at Tizapan. The services which they 
rendered to their masters in a war against the in 
habitants of Xochimilco again procured them li 
berty. They established themselves first at 
Acatzitzintlan, which they called Mexicalzing, 
from the name of Mexitli, or Huitzilopochtli, 
their god of war, and next at Iztacalco. They re 
moved from Iztacalco to the little islands which 
then appeared to the e. n. e. of the hill of Chapul 
tepec, in the w. part of the lake of Tezcuco, in 
obedience to an order of the oracle of Aztlan. An 
ancient tradition was preserved among this horde, 
that the fatal term of their migration was to be a 
place where they should find an eagle sitting on 
the top of a nopal, of which the roots penetrated 
the crevices of a rock. This nopal (cactus), al 
luded to in the oracle, was seen by the Aztecs in 
the year 1325, which is the second calli of the 
Mexican era, on a small island, which served for 
foundation to the Teocalli, or Teopan, i. e. the 
house of God, afterwards called by the Spaniards 
the Great Temple of Mexitli. 

The first TeocalU, around which the new city 
was built, was of wood, like the most ancient Gre 
cian temple, that of Apollo at Delphi, described 
by Pnusanias. The stone edifice, of which Cortes 
and Bernal Diaz admired the symmetry, was con 
structed on the same spot by King Ahuitzotl in the 
year 1486. It was a pyramidal monument of 37 
metres, or 121 feet, in height, situated in the middle 
of a vast inclosure of walls, and consisted of five 
stories, like several pyramids of Sacara, and par 
ticularly that of Mehedun. The Teocalli of Te 
nochtitlan, very accurately laid out, like all the 
Egyptian, Asiatic, and Mexican pyramids, con 
tained 97 metres, or 3J8 feet, of base, and formed 
so truncated a pyramid, that when seen from a 
distance the monument appeared an enormous] 
Q 



114 



MEXICO. 



[cube, with small altars, covered with wooden cu 
polas on the top. The point where these cupolas 
terminated was 54 metres, or 177 feet, elevated 
above the base of the edifice or the pavement of 
the inclosure. We may see from these details 
that the Teocalli bore a strong resemblance in 
form to the ancient monument of Babylon, called 
by Strabo the Mausoleum of Belus, which was only 
a pyramid dedicated to Jupiter Belus. (Zoega 
dc Obelise is ) p. 50.) Neither the Teocalli nor the 
Babylonian edifice were temples, in the sense which 
we attach to the word, according to the ideas de 
rived by us from the Greeks and Romans. All 
edifices consecrated to Mexican divinities formed 
truncated pyramids. The great monuments of 
Teotihuacan, Cholula, and Papantla, still in pre 
servation, confirm this idea, and indicate what the 
more inconsiderable temples were in the cities of 
Tenochtitlan and Tezcuco. Covered altars were 
placed on the top of the Teocallis ; and these 
edifices must hence be classed with the pyramidal 
monuments of Asia, of which traces were anciently 
found even in Arcadia ; for the conical mausoleum 
of Callistus (Pausanids, lib. viii. c. 35.) was a 
true tumulus, covered with fruit trees, and served 
for a base to a small temple consecrated to Diana. 

We know not of what materials the Teocalli of 
Tenochtitlan was constructed. The historians 
merely relate, that it was covered with a hard and 
smooth stone. The enormous fragments which 
are from time to time discovered around the pre 
sent cathedral are of porphyry, witli a base of 
grunstein filled with amphibolos and vitreous feld- 
spath. When the square round the cathedral was 
recently paved, carved stones were found at a 
depth of 10 and 12 metres, or 32 and 38 feet. 
Few nations have moved such great masses as 
were moved by the Mexicans. The calendar 
stone and the sacrifice stone, exposed to public 
view in the great square, contain from eight to 
10 cubic metres, or from 282 to 353 cubic feet. 
The colossal statue of Teoyaomiqui, covered with 
hieroglyphics, lying in one of the vestibules of the 
university, is three metres, or 9 feet, in breadth. 
M. Gamboa, one of the canons, assured Hurnboldt, 
that on digging opposite the chapel of the Sa- 
grario, a carved rock was found among an immense 
quantity of idols belonging to the Teocalli, which 
was seven metres in length, six in breadth, and 
three in height, viz. 22|, 194, anc ^ ^T * eet -T ie y 
endeavoured in vain to remove it. 

The Teocalli was in ruins a few years after the 
siege of Tenochtitlan, which, like that of Troy, 
ended in an almost entire destruction of the city. 
We are therefore inclined to believe that the ex 



terior of the truncated pyramid was clay, covered 
with porous amygdaloid called tetzontli. In fact, 
a short time before the construction of the temple, 
under the reign of King Ahuitzotl, the quarries of 
this cellular and spongy rock began to be worked. 
Now nothing could be easier destroyed than edi 
fices constructed of porous and light materials, like 
pumice-stone. Notwithstanding the coincidence 
of a great number of accounts, it is not impossible 
that the dimensions attributed to the Teocalli arc 
somewhat exaggerated ; but the pyramidal form 
of this Mexican edifice, "and its great analogy to 
the most ancient monuments of Asia, ought to in 
terest us much more than its mass and size. 

The old city of Mexico communicated with the 
continent by the three great dikes of Tepejacac, 
(Guadalupe), Tlacopan, (Tacuba), and Iztapala- 
pau. Cortes mentions four dikes, because he 
reckoned, without doubt, the causeway which led 
to Chapultepec. The Calzada of Iztapalapan had 
a branch which united Coyohuacan to the small 
fort Xaloc, the same in which the Spaniards were 
entertained at their first entry by the Mexican no 
bility. Robertson speaks of a dike which led to 
Tezcuco, but such a dike never existed, on account 
of the distance of the place, and the great depth of 
the e. part of the lake. 

In 1338, 17 years after the foundation of Tenoch 
titlan, a part of the inhabitants, in a civil dissen 
sion, separated from the rest : they established 
themselves in the small islands to the n. w. of the 
temple of Mexitli. The new city, which at first 
bore the name of Xaltilolco, and afterwards Tlate- 
lolco, was governed by a king independent of 
Tenochtitlan. In the centre of Anahuac, as well 
as in the Peloponnesus, Latium, and wherever the 
civilization of the human species was merely com 
mencing, every city, for a long time, constituted 
a separate state. The Mexican king Axajacatl 
(Clavigero, i. p. 251. Axajacatl reigned from, 
1464 to 1477, iv. p. 58.) conquered Tlatelolco, 
which was thenceforth united by bridges to the 
city of Tenochtitlan. Humboldt discovered in 
the hieroglyphical manuscripts of the ancient 
Mexicans, preserved in the palace of the viceroy, 
a curious painting, which represents the last king 
of Tlatelolco, called Moquihuix, as killed on the 
top of a house of God, or truncated pyramid, and 
then thrown down the stairs which led to the stone 
of the sacrifices. Since this catastrophe, the great 
market of the Mexicans, formerly held near the 
Teocalli of Mexitli, was transferred to Tlatelolco. 
The description of the Mexican market, which we 
have given from Cortes, relates to the market of 
Tlatelolco.] 



MEXICO. 



115 



[What is now called the Barrio of Santiago 
composes but a part of the ancient TIatelolco. 
We proceed for more than an hour on the road to 
Tanepantla and Ahnahuetes, among the ruins of 
the old city. We perceive there, as well as on 
the road to Tacuba and Iztapalapan, ho\v much 
the Mexico rebuilt by Cortes is smaller than 
Tenochtitlan under the last of the Montezumas. 
The enormous magnitude of the market-place of 
TIatelolco, of which the boundaries are still dis 
cernible, proves the great population of the ancient 
city. The Indians show in this same market 
place an elevation surrounded by walls. It was 
one of the Mexican theatres, the same on which 
Cortes, a few days before the end of the siege, 
erected his famous Catapulta, trabucode palo, (Zo- 
renzanftj p. 289.) the appearance of which alone 
terrified the besieged ; for the machine was inca 
pable of being used from the awkwardness of the 
artillery-men. This elevation is now included in 
the porch of the chapel of Santiago. 

The city of Tenochtitlan was divided into four 
quarters, called Teopan, or Xochimilca, Atzacu- 
alco, Moyotla, and Tlaguechiuchan,or Cuepopan. 
The old division is still preserved in the limits 
assigned to the quarters of St. Paul, St. Sebastian, 
St. John, and St. Mary ; and the present streets 
have for the most part the same direction as the 
old ones, nearly from n. to s. and from e. to w. 
though more properly from the s. 16 zo&amp;gt; to n. 74 
e. at least towards the convent of St. Augustin, 
where Hnmboldt took his azimuths. The direc 
tion of the old streets was undoubtedly determined 
by that of the principal dikes. Now, from the 
position of the places where these dikes appear to 
have terminated, it is very improbable that they 
represented exactly meridians and parallels. But 
what gives the new city, as we have already ob 
served, a peculiar and distinctive character, is 
that it is situated entirely on the continent, be 
tween the extremities of the two lakes of Tezcuco 
and Xochimiico, and that it only receives, by 
means of navigable canals, the fresh water of the 
Xochimiico. 

Many circumstances have contributed to this 
new order of things. The part of the salt-water 
lake between the s. and re. dikes was always the 
shallowest. Cortes complained that his flotilla, 
the brigantines which he constructed at Tezcuco, 
could not, notwithstanding the openings in the 
dikes, make the circuit of the besieged city. 
Sheets of water of small depth became insensibly 
marshes, which, when intersected with trenches or 
small defluous canals, were converted into chinam- 



pas and arable land. The lake of Tezcuco, which 
Valmont de Bomare (in his Dictionnaire ffllisloire 
Naturdlc, article Lac) supposed to communicate 
with the ocean, though it is at an elevation of 
2277 metres, or 7468 feet, has no particular 
sources, like the lake of Chalco. When we con 
sider, on the one hand, the small volume of water 
with which in dry seasons this lake is furnished by 
very inconsiderable rivers, and on the other, the 
enormous rapidity of evaporation in the table-land 
of Mexico, of which Mumboldt has made repeated 
experiments, we must admit, what geological ob 
servations appear also to con firm, that tor centuries 
the want of equilibrium between the water lost by 
evaporation, and the mass of water flowing in, has 
progressively circumscribed the lake of Tezcuco 
within more narrow limits. We learn from the 
Mexican annals, (viz. paintings preserved in the 
Vatican, and testimony of Father Acosta), that in 
the reign of King Ahuizotl, this salt-water lake 
experienced such a want of Water as to interrupt 
navigation; and that to obviate this evil, and to 
increase its supplies, an aqueduct was constructed 
from Coyohuacan to Tenochtitlan. This aqueduct 
brought the sources of fluitzilopochco to several 
canals of the city which were dried up. 

This diminution of water, experienced before 
the arrival of the Spaniards, would no doubt have 
been very slow and very insensible, if the hand of 
man, since the period of the conquest, had not 
contributed to reverse the order of nature. Those 
who have travelled in the peninsula know how 
much, even in Europe, the Spaniards hate all plan 
tations which yield a shade round towns or vil 
lages. It would appear that the first conquerors 
wished the beautiful valley of Tenochtitlan to re 
semble the Castilian soil, which is dry and desti 
tute of vegetation. Since the 16th century they 
have inconsiderately cut, not only the trees of the 
plain in which the capital is situated, but those on 
the mountains which surround it. The construc 
tion of the new city, begun in 1524, required a 
great quantity of timber for building and piles. 
They destroyed, and they daily destroy, without 
planting any thing in its stead, except around the 
capital, where the last viceroys have perpetuated 
their memory by promenades, (namely, by the 
Paseos dc Buccarclli, de Rcvillagigedo, de Galvez^ 
de As(ittza)) which bear their names. The want 
of vegetation exposes the soil to the direct influ 
ence of tli e solar rays; and the humidity which is 
not lost by filtration through the amygdaloid, ba 
saltic, and spongy rock, is rapidly evaporated and 
dissolved in air, wherever the foliage of the trees] 
Q2 



116 



MEXICO. 



[or a luxuriant verdure does not defend the soil 
from the influence of the sun and the dry winds of 
the s. 

As the same cause operates throughout the 
whole valley, the abundance and circulation of 
water has sensibly diminished. The lakeofTez- 
cuco, the finest of the five lakes, which Cortes in 
his letters habitually calls an interior sea, receives 
much less water from infiltration than in the 16th 
century. Every where the clearing and destruc 
tion oi forests have produced the same effects. 
General Andreossi, in his classical work on the 
Canal du Midi, has proved that the springs have 
diminished around the reservoir of St. Feneol, 
merely through a false system introduced in the 
management of the forests. In the province of 
Caracas, the picturesque lake of Tacajigua has 
been drying gradually up ever since the sun darted 
liis rays without interposition on the naked and 
defenceless soil of the valleys of Aragua. 

But the circumstance which has contributed 
the most to the diminution of the lake of Tezcuco 
is the famous open drain, known by the name of 
the Desague real de Huchuetoca, which we shall 
afterwards discuss. This cut in the mountain, 
first begun in 1607 in the form of a subterranean 
tunnel, has not only reduced within very narrow 
limits the two lakes in the n. part of the valley, 
/. e. the lakes of Zumpango (Tzompango) and 
San Christobal ; but has also prevented their 
waters in the rainy season from flowing into the 
basin of the lake of Tezcuco. These waters for 
merly inundated the plains, and purified a soil 
strongly covered with carbonate and muriate of 
soda. At present, without settling into pools, and 
thereby increasing the humidity of the Mexican 
atmosphere, they are drawn off by an artificial 
canal into the river of Panuco, which flows into 
the Atlantic ocean. 

This state of things has been brought about 
from the desire of converting the ancient city of 
Mexico into a capital better adapted for carriages, 
and less exposed to the danger of inundation. The 
Avater and vegetation have in fact diminished with 
the same rapidity with which the tcquesquite (or 
carbonate ol soda) has increased. In the time of 
Montezuma, and long afterwards, the suburb of 
Tlatelolco, the barrios of San Sebastian, San Juan, 
and Santa Cruz, were celebrated for the beautiful 
verdure of their gardens ; but these places now, 
and especially the plains of San Lazaro, exhibit 
nothing but a crust of efflorescent salts. The fer 
tility of the plain, though yet considerable in the 
s. part, is by no means what it was when the city 



was surrounded by the lake. A wise distribution 
of water, particularly by means of small canals of 
irrigation, might restore the ancient fertility of the 
soil, and re-enrich a valley which nature appears 
to have destined for the capital of a great empire. 

The actual bounds of the lake of Tezcuco are 
not very well determined, the soil being so argilla 
ceous arid smooth that the difference of level for a 
mile is not more than two decimetres, or 7874 
inches. When the e. winds blow with any vio 
lence, the water withdraws towards the w. bank of 
the lake, and sometimes leaves an extent of more 
than 600 metres, or 1968 feet, dry. Perhaps the 
periodical operation of these winds suggested to 
Cortes the idea of regular tides, (See Journal de 
Savans for the year 1676, p. 34. The lake of 
Geneva manifests also a regular motion, which, 
Saussure attributes to periodical winds.) of which 
the existence has not been confirmed by late ob 
servations. The lake of Tezcuco is in general only 
from three to five metres, or 9f to 16| feet, in 
depth, and in some places even less than one. 
Hence the commerce of the inhabitants of the 
small town of Tezcuco suffers much in the very 
dry months of January and February; for the 
want of Water prevents them from going in canoes 
to the capital. The lake of Xochimilco is free 
from this inconvenience; for from Chalco, Mes- 
quic, and Tlahuac, the navigation is never once in 
terrupted, and Mexico receives daily, by the canal 
of Iztapalapan, roots, fruits, and flowers in abun 
dance. 

Of the five lakes of the valley of Mexico, the 
lake of Tezcuco is most impregnated with muriate 
and carbonate of soda. The nitrate of barytes 
proves that this water contains no sulphate in dis 
solution. The most pure and limpid water is that 
of the lake of Xochimilco, the specific weight of 
which Humboldt found to be 1.0009, when that of 
water distilled at the temperature of 18 centigrade, 
or 54 Fahrenheit, was 1.000, and when water 
from the lake of Tezcuco was 1.0215. The water 
of this last lake is consequently heavier than that 
of the Baltic sea, and not so heavy as that of the 
ocean, which, under different latitudes, has been 
found between 1.0269 and 1.0285. The quantity 
ol sulphuretted hydrogen which is detached from 
the surface of all the Mexican lakes, and which 
the acetite of lead indicates in great abundance in 
the lakes of Tezcuco and Chalco, undoubtedly 
contributes in certain seasons to the unheaUhiness 
of the air of the valley. However, and the fact 
is curious, intermittent fevers are very rare on 
the banks of these very lakes, of which the sur-j 



MEXICO. 



117 



i face is partly concealed by rushes and aquatic 
herbs. 

Adorned with numerous Teocallis, like so many 
Mahometan steeples, surrounded with water and 
dikes founded on islands covered with verdure, 
and receiving hourly in its streets thousands of 
boats, which vivified the lake, the ancienlTenoch- 
titlan, according to the accounts of the first con 
querors, must have resembled some of the cities of 
Holland, China, or the Delta of Lower Egypt. 
The capital, reconstructed by the Spaniards, exhi 
bits, perhaps, a less vivid, though a more august 
and majestic appearance. Mexico is undoubtedly 
one of the finest cities ever built by Europeans in 
either hemisphere. With the exception of Peters- 
burgh, Berlin, Philadelphia, and some quarters of 
Westminster, there does not exist a city of the 
same extent which can be compared to the capital 
of New Spain, for the uniform level of the ground 
on which it stands, for the regularity and breadth 
of the streets, and the extent of the public places. 
The architecture is generally of a very pure style, 
and there are even edifices of very beautiful struc 
ture. The exterior of the houses is not loaded 
with ornaments. Two sorts of hewn stone, the 
porous amygdaloid called tetzontli^ and especially 
a porphyry of vitreous feld-spath without any 
quartz, give to the Mexican buildings an air of 
solidity, and sometimes even magnificence. There 
are none of those wooden balconies and galleries to 
be seen which disfigure so much all the European 
cities in both the Indies. The balustrades and 
gates are all of Biscay iron, ornamented with 
bronze, and the houses, instead of roofs, have 
terraces, like those in Italy and other s. countries. 

Mexico has been very much embellished since 
the residence of the Abbe Chappe there in 1769. 
The edifice destined to the school of mines, for 
which the richest individuals of the country fur 
nished a sum of more than 3,000,000 of francs, 
or 124,800/. sterling, would adorn the principal 
places of Paris or London. Two great palaces, 
were recently constructed by Mexican artists, 
pupils of the academy of fine arts of the capital, 
One of these palaces, in the quarter Delia Tras- 
pana, exhibits in the interior of the court a very 
oeautiful oval peristyle of coupled columns. The 
traveller justly admires a vast circumference paved 
with porphyry flogs, and inclosed with an iron 
railing, richly ornamented with bronze, contain 
ing an equestrian statue of King Charles IV. 
placed on a pedestal of Mexican marble, in the 
midst of the plaza major of Mexico, opposite the 
cathedral and the viceroy s palace. This colossal 
statue was executed at the expence of the Marquis 



de Branciforte, formerly viceroy of Mexico, bro 
ther-in-law of the Prince of Peace. It weighs 450 
quintals, and was modelled, founded, and placed 
by the same artist, M. Tolsa, whose name deserves 
a distinguished place in the history of Spanish 
sculpture. The merits of this man of genius can 
only be appreciated by those who know the diffi 
culties with \&amp;gt;hich the execution of these great 
works of art are attended even in civilized Europe. 
However, it must be agreed, that nowithstanding 
the progress of the arts within these last 30 years, 
it is much less from the grandeur and beauty of 
the monuments, than from the breadth and 
straightness of the streets, and much less from its 
edifices than from its uniform regularity, its ex 
tent and position, that the capital of IMew Spain 
attracts (lie admiration of Europeans. Humboldt, 
who, from a singular concurrence of circumstances, 
had seen successively, within a very short space 
of time, Lima, Mexico, Philadelphia, Washing 
ton, Paris, Rome, Naples, and the largest cities 
of Germany ; and notwithstanding such unavoid 
able comparisons, of which several, one would 
think, must have proved disadvantageous for the 
capital of Mexico, remained nevertheless smit 
ten with a recollection of the grandeur of this latter 
city, a circumstance which he attributes princi 
pally to the majestic character of its situation and 
the surrounding scenery. 

In fact, nothing can present a more rich and 
varied appearance than the valley, when, in a fine 
summer morning, the sky without a cloud, and of 
that deep azure which is peculiar to the dry and 
rarefied air of high mountains, we transport our 
selves to the top of one of the towers of the cathe 
dral of Mexico, or ascend the hill of Chapultepec. 
A beautiful vegetation surrounds this hill. Old 
cypress trunks, (namely, the Ahuahuetes Cu- 
pressus disticha Lin.), of more than 15 and 16 
metres, (49 and 52 feet), in circumference, raise 
their naked heads above those of the; schittus, which 
resemble in their appearance the weeping willows 
of the east. From the centre of this solitude, (he 
summit of the porphyritical rock of Chapultepec, 
the eye sweeps over a vast plain of carefully culti 
vated fields, which extend to the very feet of the 
colossal mountains covered with perpetual snow. 
The city appears as if washed by the waters of the 
lake of Tezcuco, whose basin, surrounded with 
villages and hamlets, brings to mind the most 
benuiiiiil lakes of the mountains of Switzerland. 
Large avenues of elms and poplars lead in every 
direction to the capital ; and two aqueducts, con 
structed over arches of very great elevation, cross 
the plain, and exhibit an appearance equally] 



118 



MEXICO. 



[agreeable and interesting. The magnificent con 
vent of Nuestra Sefiora de Guadalupe appears 
joined to the mountains of Tepeyacac, among ra 
vines which shelter a few date and young yuca 
trees. Towards the s. the whole tract between San 
Angel, Tacabaya, and San Agustin de las Cue- 
vas, appears an immense garden of orange, peach, 
apple, cherry, and other European fruit trees. 
This beautiful cultivation forms a singular con 
trast with the wild appearance of the naked moun 
tains which inclose the valley, among which the 
famous volcanoes of La Puebla, Popocatepetl, and 
Iztaccicihuatl, are the most distinguished. The 
first of these forms an enormous cone, of which 
the crater, continually inflamed and throning up 
smoke and ashes, opens in the midst of eternal 
snows. 

The city of Mexico is also remarkable for its 
excellent police. The most part of the streets 
have very broad pavements ; and they are clean 
and well lighted. These advantages are the fruits 
of the activity of the Count de Revillagigedo, 
\vho on his arrival found the capital extremely 
dirty. 

Water is every where to be had in the soil of 
Mexico, a very short way below the surface, but 
it is brackish, like the water of the lake of Tez- 
cuco. The t\vo aqueducts already mentioned, by 
which the city receives fresh water, are monu 
ments of modern construction worthy of the travel 
ler s attention. The springs of potable water are 
situated to the e. of the town, one in the insulated 
hill of Chapultepec, and the other in the cerros of 
Santa Fe, near the cordillera, which separates the 
valley of Tenochtitlan from that of Lerma and 
Toluca. The arches of the aqueduct of Chapul 
tepec occupy a length of more than 3500 metres, 
or 10,826 feet. The water of Chapultepec enters 
by the s. part of the city, at the Salto del Agna. 
It is not the most pure, and is only drank in the 
suburbs of Mexico. The water which is least 
impregnated with carbonate of lime is that of the 
aqueduct of Santa Fe, which runs along Almeda, 
and terminates at La Traspana, at the bridge De 
la Marescalla. This aqueduct is nearly 10,200 
metres, or 33,464 feet, in length ; but the declivity 
of the ground is such, that for not more than a 
third of this space the water can be conducted 
over arches. The old city of Tenochtitlan had 
aqueducts no less considerable. (Clavigero, iii. p. 
195; Softs, i. p. 406.) In the beginning of the 
siege, the two captains Alvarado and Olid de 
stroyed that of Chapultepec. Cortes, in his first 
letter to Charles V. speaks also of the spring of 
Amilcoj near Churubusco, of which the waters 



were brought to the city by pipes of burnt earth. 
This spring is near to that of Santa Fe. We still 
perceive the remains of this great aqueduct, which 
was constructed with double pipes, one of which 
received the water, while they were employed in 
cleaning the other. This water was sold in canoes, 
which traversed the streets of Tenochtitlan. The 
sources of San Agustin de las Cuevas are the 
finest and purest; and Humboldt imagined he- 
discovered on the road leading from this charming 
village to Mexico traces of an ancient aqueduct. 
The largest and finest construction, however, of 
the Indians in this way is the aqueduct of the city 
of Tezcuco. We still admire the traces of a great 
mound which was constructed to heighten the level 
of the water. How must we admire the industry 
and activity displayed in general by the ancient 
Mexicans and Peruvians in the irrigation of arid 
lands! In the maritime part of Peru Humboldt 
saw the remains of walls, along which water was 
conducted for a space of from 5 to 6000 metres, 
(from 16,404 to 19,685 feet), from the foot of the 
cordillera to the coast. The conquerors of the 
16th century destroyed these aqueducts, and that 
part of Peru is become, like Persia, a desert desti 
tute of vegetation. Such is the civilization carried 
by the Europeans among the people whom they 
are pleased to call barbarous. 

How much it is to be regretted that Robertson 
gives usually such general descriptions, that we 
have a difficulty in forming any thing like a dis 
tinct conception of the subjects of them ! He says 
of the Peru canals of irrigation, " By means of 
artificial canals, conducted with much patience 
and considerable art from the torrents that poured 
across their country, they conveyed a regular sup 
ply of moisture to their fields." Would it have 
been beneath the dignity of a historian to have 
specified that art and that patience to his readers, 
for which he did not want materials ? 

We have already named the three principal 
dikes by which the old city was connected with 
the Tierra Firme. These dikes partly still exist, 
arid the number has been even increased. They 
form at present great paved causeways across 
marshy grounds ; and as they are very elevated, 
they possess the double advantage of admitting the 
passage of carriages, and containing the overflow 
ings of the lake. The Calzada of Astapalapan is 
founded on the very same old dike on which 
Cortes performed such prodigies of valour in his 
encounters with the besieged. The Calzada of 
San Anton is still distinguished in our days for the 
great number of small bridges which the Spaniards 
and Tlascultecs found there, when Sandoval,J 



MEXICO. 



119 



[Corfes s companion in arms, was wounded near 
Coyohuacan. These Calzadas of San Antonio 
Abad, of La Piedad, of San Christobal, and of 
Guadalupe, (anciently called the Dike of Tcpe- 
yacac), were newly reconstructed after the great 
inundation of 1604, under the viceroy Don Juan 
de Mendoza y Lima, Marquis De Montesclaros. 
The only savans of that time, Fathers Torque- 
mada and Geronimo de Sarate, executed the sur 
vey and marking out of the causeways. At this 
period the city of Mexico was paved for the first 
time ; for before the Count De Revillagigedo, no 
other viceroy had employed himself more success 
fully in effecting a good police than the Marquis 
de Montesclaros. 

The objects which generally attract the attention 
of the traveller are, J. The cathedral, of which a 
small part is in the style vulgarly called Gothic : 
the principal edifice, which has two towers orna 
mented with pilasters and statues, is of very beau 
tiful symmetry and very recent construction. 2. 
The treasury, adjoining to the palace of the vice 
roys, a building from which, since the beginning 
of the 16th century, more than 6,500,000,000, or 
270,855,000/. sterling, in gold and silver coin, 
have been issued. 3. The convents, among which 
the convent of St. Francis is particularly distin 
guished, which from alms alone possesses an an 
nual revenue of half a million of francs, or 20,835/. 
sterling. This vast edifice was at first intended to 
be constructed on the ruins of the temple of Huit- 
zilopochtli ; but these ruins having been destined 
for the foundation of the cathedral, the convent 
was begun in 1531 in its actual situation. It owes 
its existence to the great activity of a serving bro 
ther or lay monk, Fray Pedro de Gante, an ex 
traordinary man, who was said to have been the 
natural son of the Emperor Charles V. and who 
was a great benefactor of the Indians, to whom he 
was the first who taught the most useful mechani 
cal arts of Europe. 4. The hospital, or rather the 
two united hospitals, of which the one maintains 
600, and the other 800 children and old people. 
This establishment, in which both order and clean 
liness may be seen, but little industry, has a re 
venue of 250,000 francs, or 10,470/. sterling. A 
rich merchant lately bequeathed to it by his testa 
ment 6,000,000 of francs, or 250,020/. sterling, 
which the royal treasury laid hold of, on the pro 
mise of paying five per cent, for it. 5. The Acor- 
dada, a fine edifice, of which the prisons are 
generally spacious and well aired. They reckon 
in this house, and in the other prisons of the Acor- 
dada which depend on it, more than 1200 indi 
viduals, among whom arc a great number of 



smugglers, an;] the unfortunate Indian prisoners 
dragged to Mexico from the provincias internets 
(Indies Mecos.) 6. The school of mines, the 
newly begun edifice, and the old provisory esta 
blishment, with its fine collections in physics, me 
chanics, and mineralogy. 7. The botanical gar 
den, in one of the courts of the viceroy s palace. 
It is very small, but extremely rich in vegetable 
productions, cither rare or interesting for com 
merce. 8. The edifices of the university and the 
public library, which is very unworthy of so 
great and ancient an establishment. 9. The acade 
my of fine arts, with a collection of ancient casts. 
10. The equestrian" statue of King Charles IV. 
in the plaza mayor and the sepulchral monu 
ment which the Duke de Monteleone consecrated 
to the great Cortes, in a chapel of the Hospital de 
los INaturales. It is a simple family monument, 
adorned with a bust in bronze, representing the 
hero in the prime of life, executed by M. Tolsa. 
Wherever we traverse Spanish America, from 
Buenos Ayres to Monteroy, and from Trinidad 
and Portorico to Panama and Veragua, we no 
where meet with a national monument erected by 
the public gratitude to the glory of Christopher 
Columbus and Hernan Cortes! 

Those who are addicted to the study of history, 
and who love to investigate American antiquities, 
will not find in this capital those great remains of 
works which are to be seen in Peru, in the envi 
rons of Cusco and Guamachuco, at Pachacamac 
near Lima, or at Mansiche near Truxillo ; at 
Canar and Cayo in the province of Quito ; and in 
Mexico, near Mitia and Cholula, in the inten- 
dancies of Oaxaca and Puebla. It appears that 
theTeocallis (of which we have already attempted 
to describe the strange form) were the sole monu 
ments of the Aztecs. Now the invading Spa 
niards were not only highly interested in their de 
struction, but the very safety of the conqueror 
rendered such a destruction necessary. It was 
partly effected during the siege; for those trun 
cated pyramids, rising up by layers, served for re 
fuge to the combatants, like the temple of Baal- 
Berith to the people of Canaan. They were so 
many castles from which it was necessary to dis 
lodge the enemy. 

As to the houses of individuals, which the 
Spanish historians describe as very low, we are not 
to be surprised to find merely their foundations or 
low ruins, such as we discover in the Barrio de 
Tlatelolco, and towards (he canal of Ktacalco. 
Even in the most part of our European cities, how 
small is the number of houses of which the con 
struction goes so far back as the beginning of the] 



120 



MEXICO. 



[16th century ! However, the edifices of Mexico 
are not fallen into ruins through age. Animated 
by the same spirit of destruction \vhich the Ro 
mans displayed at Syracuse, Cartilage, and in 
(j reece, the Spanish conquerors believed that the 
siege of a Mexican city never was finished till they 
had razed every building in it. Cortes, in his 
third letter (f.orenzuna, p. 278.) to the Emperor 
Charles V. discloses himself the fearful system 
which he followed in his military operations. 
" Notwithstanding all these advantages," says he, 
" which we have gained, I saw clearly that the 
inhabitants of the city of Temixtitlan (Tenochtit- 
lan) were so rebellious and obstinate that they 
wished rather to perish than surrender. I knew 
not what means to employ to spare so many dan 
gers and hardships, and to avoid completing the 
entire ruin of the capital, which was the most 
beautiful thing in the world, (a la.ciudad, porque 
era la mas hermosa cosa del mundo.) It was in 
vain to tell them that I would never raise my camp, 
nor withdraw my flotiHa of brigantmes; and that 
I would never cease to carry on the war by land 
and water till I was master of Temixtitlan ; and 
it was in vain I observed to them that they could 
expect no assistance, and that there was not a 
nook of land from which they could hope to draw 
maize, meat, fruits, and water. The more we 
made these exhortations to them, the more they 
showed us that they were far from being discou 
raged. They had no other desire but that of 
fighting. In this state of things, considering that 
more than 40 or 50 days had already elapsed 
since we began to invest the place, I resolved at 
last to adopt means, by which, in providing for 
our own security, we should be able to press our 
enemies more closely. I formed the design of de 
molishing on all sides all (he houses in proportion 
as we became masters of the streets, so that we 
should not advance afoot without having destroyed 
and cleared down whatever was behind us, convert 
ing into jinn ground whatever was water, however 
slow the operation might be, and notwithstanding 
the delay to zohich we should expose ourselves. 
(Accorde de tomar un medio para nuestra segtiri- 
dad y para poder mas estrechar a los cnemigos ; y 
fue que como fucssemos ganando por las calles de 
la ciudad, que fuessen derocando todas las casas 
de ellas, de un lado y delotro; por manera que 
no fucssemos un passo adelante sin la dejar todo 
asolado y que lo que era agua hacerlo tierra firme ; 
aunque hubiesse todo la dilacion que se pudiesse 
seguir. .Lorenzana, No. xxxiv.) For this pur 
pose I assembled the lords and chiefs of our allies ; 
and I explained to them the resolution which I 



had formed. 1 engaged them to send a great 
number of labourers with their coas, which are 
somewhat like the hoes which are used in Spain 
for excavations ; and our allies and friends ap 
proved my project, for they hoped that the city 
would be laid in complete ruins, which they had 
ardently desired tor a long time. Three or four 
days passed without fighting, for we waited the 
arrival of the people from the country, who were 
to aid us in demolishing." 

After reading the naif recital of this commander 
in chief to his sovereign, we are not to be sur 
prised at finding almost no vestige of the ancient 
Mexican edifices. Cortes relates that the Indians, 
to revenge themselves for the oppressions which 
they had suffered from the Aztec kings, flocked 
in great numbers, even from the remotest pro 
vinces, whenever they learned that the destruction 
of the capital was going on. The rubbish of the 
demolished houses served to fill up the canals. 
The streets were made dry to allow the Spanish 
cavalry to act. The low houses, like those of 
Pekin and China, were partly constructed of wood 
and partly of tetzontli a spongy stone, light, and 
easily broken. " More than 50,000 Indians as 
sisted us," says Cortes, " that day, when, march 
ing over heaps of carcases, we at length gained 
the great street of Tacuba, and burned the house 
of King Guatimucin." The true name of this un 
fortunate king, the last of the Aztec dynasty, was 
Quauhtemotzin. He is the same to whom Cortes 
caused the soles of the feet to be gradually burned, 
after having soaked them in oil. This torment, 
however, did not induce the king to declare in 
what place his treasures were concealed. His end 
was the same as that of the king of Acolhuacan 
(Tczcuco), and of Tetlepanguetzaltzin, king of 
Tlacopan (Tacuba.) These three princes were 
hung on the same tree, and, as Humboldt saw in a 
hieroglyphical picture possessed by Father Pi- 
chardo (in the convent of San Felipe Neri), they 
were hung by the feet to lengthen out their tor 
ments. This act of cruelty in Cortes, which re 
cent historians have the meanness to describe as 
the effect of a far-sighted policy, excited mur 
murs in the very army. " The death of the young 
king," says Bernal Diaz del Castillo (an old sol 
dier full of honour and of naivety of expression &amp;gt;, 
"was a very unjust thing; and it was accord 
ingly blamed by us all, so long as we were in 
the suite of the captain, in his march to Coma- 
jahua.") 

The Abbe Clavigero observes, on what autho 
rity we know not, that this cruelty made Cortes 
very melancholy, and gave him a few sleepless] 



MEXICO. 



121 



I nights, una gran mah nconia, cd alcune vegghie. 
Well indeed it might ; but whether we arc in 
debted for these regghie to the native suggestions 
of his own conscience, or to the murmurs of his 
army, is not so easy to be determined ; for heroes 
consciences are made of stern stuff, as many can 
witness, who have known several of them perform 
certain actions in a certain neighbouring country, 
and neither eat nor sleep the worse for it ; at the 
bare recital of which other people s cheeks turn 
either pale or flushed as their different tempera 
ments dispose them. We must not think that the 
Spaniards monopolized cruelty in foreign settle 
ments. Mr. Orrne, in his excellent History of 
Hindostan, celebrates some feats of our own coun 
trymen, and those the bravest of our countrymen, 
which yield very little to any thing in the Mexi 
can annals. Three or four hundred of the brave 
grenadiers who long distinguished themselves so 
gallantly on the plains of Trichinopoly, and who, 
rushing on certain destruction, swore, in their 
energeTic way, * they would follow their leader to 
hell," on taking possession of a fortified town in 
Arcot put every soul in it to death, man, woman, 
and child, for no other reason than that the place 
had been gallantly defended. Heroes are nearly 
the same all the world over. 

But, to be sure, the poor Mexican kings were bet 
ter off. Juan de V arillas, a friar of the order of Nu- 
cslra Senora de la Merced, confessed them,- and 
comforted them in their sufferings, that they were 
good Christians, and that they died in good prepa 
ration, seeing they were baptized : li confessb e con- 
fortb nel snpplicio : (h eglino erano buoni Cristiani^ 
e che morirono ben disposti: oncC e manifesto ch* erano 
stato battezzati. (Clavigero, Hi. p. 233, note.) 

But to continue the observations of Cortes: 
"No otherthing accordingly," observes he, " was 
done than burn and demolish houses. Those 
of the city said to our allies, that they did wrong 
in assisting us to destroy, because one day they 
would have to re-construct with their hands the 
very same edifices, either for the besieged if they 
were to conquer, or for us Spaniards, who, in rea 
lity, now compel them to rebuild what was de 
molished." (Lorcnzana, p. 286.) In going over 
the Libro del Cabildo, Humboldt found a manu 
script containing the history of the new city of 
Mexico, from the year 1524 to 1529, in all the 
pages of which there was nothing but names of 
people who appeared before the alguazils " to de 
mand the situation(sofer) on which formerly stood 
the house of such or such a Mexican lord." Even 
at present they are occupied in filling and drying 
up the old canals which run through the capital. 

VOL. III. 



The number of these canals has diminished in a 
particular manner since the government of the 
Count de Galvez, though, on account of the great 
breadth of the streets of Mexico, the canals are 
less inimical to the passage of carriages than in the 
most part of the cities of Holland. 

We may reckon among the small remains of 
Mexican antiquities which interest the intelligent 
traveller, either in the bounds of the city of Mex 
ico, or in its environs, the ruins of the Aztec dikes 
(albaradones] and aqueducts ; the stone of the sa 
crifices, adorned with a relievo which represents 
the triumph of a Mexican king; the great calendar 
monument (exposed with the foregoing at the 
plaza mayor ;) the colossal statue of the goddess 
Teoyaomiqui, stretched out in one of the galleries 
of the edifice of the university, and habitually co 
vered with three or four inches of earth ; the Aztec 
manuscripts, or hieroglyphical pictures, painted 
on agave paper, on stag skins and cotton cloth, (;i 
valuable collection unjustly taken away from the 
Chevalier Boturini, (the author of the ingenious 
work, Ydea de una nueva Hisloria general dz la 
America Septentrional), very ill preserved in the 
archives of the palace of the viceroys, displaying 
in every figure the extravagant imagination of 
a people who delighted to see the palpitating heart 
of human victims offered up to gigantic and mon 
strous idols ; the foundations of the palace of the 
kings of Alcolhuacan at Tezcuco ; the colossal re 
lievo traced on the w. face of the.porphyritical 
rock, called the Peiiol de los Bailos ; as well as 
several other objects which recal to the intelligent 
observer the institutions and works of people of 
the Mongol race, of which descriptions and draw 
ings are promised to be given by Humboldt, in the 
historical account of his travels to the equinoctial 
regions of the new continent. 

The only ancient monuments in the Mexican 
valley which from their size or their masses can 
strike the eyes of an European, are the remains of 
the two pyramids of San Juan de Teotihuacan, 
situated to the n. e. of the lake of Tezcuco, conse 
crated to the sun and moon, which the Indians 
called Tonatiuh Ytzaqual, House of the Sun, and 
Meztli Ytzaqual, House of the Moon. According 
to the measurements made in 1803, by a young 
Mexican savant, Dr. Oteyza, the first pyramid, 
which is the most s. has in its present state a base 
of 208 metres (682 feet English) in length, and 55 
metres (66 Mexican vara, containing exactly 31 
inches of the old pied du roi of Paris), or 180 feet, 
of perpendicular elevation. The second, the py 
ramid of the moon, is eleven metres, or 36 feet, 
lower, and its base is much less. These monu-1 
it 



MEXICO. 



[ments, according to the accounts of the first tra 
vellers, and from the form which they yet exhibit, 
were the models of the Aztec Teocallis. The na 
tions whom the Spaniards found settled in New 
Spain attributed the pyramids of Tcotihuacan to 
the Tpultec nation ; consequently their construc 
tion goes as far back as the eighth or ninth cen 
tury ; for the kingdom of Tolula lasted from 667 
to 1031. Sigucnza, however, in his manuscript 
notes, believes them to be the work of the Olmec 
nation, which dwelt round the Sierra de Tlascala, 
called Matlacueje. If this hypothesis, of which 
we are unacquainted with the historical founda 
tions, be true, these monuments would be still more 
ancient. For the Olrnccs belong to the first na 
tions mentioned in the Aztec chronology as exist 
ing in New Spain. It is even pretended that the 
Olmccs are the only nation of which the migration 
took place, not from the . and n. w. (viz. 
Asia), but from the e. (Europe.) The faces 
of the above edifices are to within 52 exactly 
placed from n. to s. and from &amp;lt;?. to w. Their in 
terior is clay mixed with small stones. This 
kernel is covered with a thick wall of porous 
amygdaloid. We perceive, besides, traces of a 
bed of lime which covers the stones (the tctzontli) 
on the outside. Several authors of the 16th cen 
tury pretend, according to an Indian tradition, 
that the interior of these pyramids is hollow. Bo- 
turini says, that Siguenza, the Mexican geome 
trician, in vain endeavoured to pierce these edi 
fices by a gallery. They formed four layers, of 
which three are only now perceivable, the injuries 
of time and the vegetation of the cactus and agaves 
having exercised their destructive influence on the 
exterior of these monuments. A stair of large 
hewn stones formerly led to their tops, where, ac 
cording to the accounts of the first travellers, were 
statues covered with very thin lamina? of gold. 
Each of the four principal layers was subdivided 
into small gradations of a metre, or three feet three 
inches, in height, of which the edges are still dis 
tinguishable, which were covered with fragments 
of obsidian, that were undoubtedly the edge instru 
ments with which the Toultec and Aztec priests 
in their barbarous sacrifices (Papahua Tlemacaz- 
quc or Teopixqui) opened the chest of the hu 
man victims. VVe know that the obsidian (itzlli) 
was the object of the great mining undertakings, 
of which we still see the traces in an innumerable 
quantity of pits between the mines of Moran and 
the village of Atotonilco el Grande, in the por 
phyry mountains of Oyamel and tlie.Jacal, a re 
gion called by the Spaniards the Mountain of 
Knives, El Cerro de las Navajas. 



It would be undoubtedly desirable to have the 
question resolved, whether these curious edifices, 
of which the one (the Tonatiuh Ytsaqiwl), accord 
ing to the accurate measurement of M.Oteyza, 
has a mass of 128,910 cubic toises, or 33,743,201 
cubic feet, were entirely constructed by the hand 
of man, or whether the Toultecs took advantage of 
some natural hill which they covered over with 
stone and lime? This very question has been re 
cently agitated with respect to several pyramids 
of Giza and Sacara ; and it has become doubly in 
teresting from the fantastical hypotheses which 
M. Witte has thrown out as to the origin of the 
monuments of colossal form in Egypt, Pcrsepolis, 
and Palmyra. As neither the pyramids of Teoti- 
huacan, nor that of Cholula, have been diametri 
cally pierced, it is impossible to speak with cer 
tainty of their interior structure. The Indian tra 
ditions, from which they are believed to be hol 
low, are vague and contradictory. Their situa 
tion in plains where no other hill is to be found, 
renders it extremely probable that no natural rock- 
serves for a kernel to these monuments. What is 
also very remarkable (especially if we cull to mind 
the assertions of Pococke, as to the symmetrical po 
sition of the lesser pyramids of Egypt) is, that 
around the Houses of the Sun and Moon of Tcoti 
huacan we find a group, we may say a system, 
of pyramids, of scarcely nine or 10 metres of ele 
vation, or 29 or 32 feet. These monuments, of 
which there are several hundreds, are disposed in 
very large streets, which follow exactly the direc 
tion of the parallels and of the meridians, and 
which terminate in the four faces of the two great 
pyramids. The lesser pyramids are more frequent 
towards the s. side of the Temple of the Moon than 
towards the Temple of the Sun ; and, according 
to the tradition of the country, they were dedi 
cated to the stars. It appears certain enough that 
they served as burying-places for the chiefs of 
tribes. All the plain which the Spaniards, from 
a word of 1 he language of the island of Cuba, call 
Llano de los Cues, bore formerly in the Aztec and 
Toultec languages the name of Micaotl, or Road 
of the Dead. 

Another ancient monument, worthy of the tra 
veller s attention, is the military entrenchment of 
Xochicalco, situated to the s. s. w. of the town of 
Cuernavaca, near Tetlama, belonging to the parish 
of Xochitepeque. It is an insulated hill of 117 
metres of elevation, surrounded with ditches or 
trenches, and divided by the hand of man into five 
terraces covered with masonry. The whole forms 
a truncated pyramid, of which the four faces are 
exactly laid down according to the four cardinal] 



MEXICO. 



123 



| points. The porphyry stones \viih basaltic bases 
are of a very regular cut, and are adorned with 
hieroglyphical figures, among which are to be 
seen crocodiles spouting up water, and, what is 
very curious, men sitting cross-legged in the 
Asiatic manner. The platform of this extraordi 
nary monument contains more than 9000 square 
metres, or 96,825 square feet, and exhibits the 
ruins of a small square edifice, which undoubtedly 
served for a last retreat to the besieged. 

We shall conclude this rapid view of the Aztec 
antiquities with pointing out a few places which 
may be called classical, on account of the interest 
they excite in those who have studied the history 
of the Spanish conquest of Mexico. 

The palace of Motezuma occupied the very 
same site on which at present stands the hotel of 
the Duke de Monteleone, vulgarly called Casa del 
Estado, in the plaza mayor, s. w. from the cathe 
dral. This palace, like those of the emperor of 
China, of which we have accurate descriptions 
from Sir George Staunton and M. Barrow, was 
composed of a great number of spacious but very 
low houses. They occupied the whole extent of 
ground between the Empedradillo, the great street 
of Tacuba, and the convent De la Professa. Cortes, 
after the taking of the city, fixed his abode oppo 
site to the ruins of the palace of the Aztec kings, 
where the palace of the viceroy is now situated. 
But it was soon thought lhat the house of Cortes 
was more suitable for the assemblies of the audim- 
cia, and the government consequently made the 
family of Cortes resign the Casa del Estado, or the 
old hotel belonging to them. This family, which 
bears the title of the Marqucsado del Valle de 
Oaxaca, received in exchange the situation of the 
ancient palace of Motezuma, and they there con 
structed the fine edifice in which the archives Del 
Estado are kepi, and which descended, with the 
rest of the heritage, to the Neapolitan Duke de 
Monteleone. 

At the first entry of Cortes into Tenochtitlan, on 
the 8th November 1519, he and his small army 
were lodged, not in the palace of Motezuma, but in 
an edifice formerly possessed by King Axajacatl. 
It was in this edifice that the Spaniards and (he 
Tlascaltecs, their allies, sustained the assault of 
the Mexicans ; it was there that the unfortunate 
King Motezuma perished of the consequences of a 
wound which he received in haranguing his people. 
We still perceive inconsiderable remains of these 
quarters of the Spaniards in the .ruins behind the 
convent of Santa Teresa, at the corner of the streets 
of Tacuba and Del Jndio Trisie. 



A small bridge near Bonavista preserves the 
name of Alvarado s Leap (Salto de Alvarado), in 
memory of the prodigious leap of the valorous Don 
Pedro de Alvarado, when in the famous melan 
choly night, (noche triste, July J, 1520), the dike 
of Tlacopan having been cut in several places by 
the Mexicans, the Spaniards withdrew from the 
city to the mountains of Tepayacac. It appears 
that even in the time of Cortes the historical truth 
of this fact was disputed, which, from popular 
tradition, is familiar to every class of the inhabi 
tants of Mexico. Bernal Diaz considers the his 
tory of the leap as a mere boast of his companion 
in arms, of whose courage and presence of mind 
he, however, elsewhere makes honourable mention. 
He affirms that the ditch was much too broad to 
be passed at a leap. We have, however, to ob 
serve, that this anecdote is very minutely related 
in the manuscript of a noble Mestizoe of the repub 
lic of Tlascala, Diego Muiioz Camargo, which 
Humboldt consulted at the convent of San Felipe 
Neri, and of which Father Torqucmada appears 
also to have had some knowledge. This Mestizoe 
historian was the contemporary of Hernan Cortes. 
lie relates the history of Alvarado s leap with much 
simplicity, without any appearance of exaggera 
tion, and without mentioning the breadth of the 
ditch. We imagine we perceive in his naif re 
cital one of the heroes of antiquity, who, with his 
shoulder and arm supported on his lance, takes an 
enormous leap to escape from the hands of his 
enemies. Camargo adds, that other Spaniards 
wished to lollow the example of Alvarado, but 
that, having less agility than he had, they fell into 
the ditch (azcquia.) 

Strangers are shown the bridge of Clerigo, near 
the plaza mayor de Tlatclolco, as the memorable 
place where the last Aztec King Quauhtemotzin,. 
nephew of his predecessor King Cuitlahuatzin, 
and son-in-law of Motezuma II. was taken. But 
the result of the most careful researches which 
Humboldt and the Father Pichardo could make, 
was, that the young king fell into the hands of 
Garci Holguin, in a great basin of water which was 
formerly between the Garita del Peralvillo, the 
square of Santiago de Tlatelolco, and the bridge 
of Amaxaca. This event, happened on the 31st 
of August 1521, the 75th day of the siege of 
Tenochtitlan, and Saint Hyppolittis s day. The 
same day is still celebrated every year by a tour 
round the city by the viceroy and oidores on horse- 
hack, following the standard. Cortes was upon 
the terrace of a house of Tlatelolco when the young 
king was brought a prisoner to him. " I made I 
R . 




MEXICO. 



[him sit down," says the conqueror in his third 
letter to the Emperor Charles V. "and I treated 
him with confidence ; but the young man pnt his 
hand on the poniard which 1 wore at my side and 
exhorted me to kill him, because, since he had done 
all that his duty to himself and his people de 
manded of lum, he had no other desire but death." 
This trait is worthy of the best days of Greece and 
Rome. Under every zone, and whatever be the 
colour of men, the language of energetic minds 
struggling with misfortune is the same. 

After the entire destruction of the ancient Te- 
nochtitlan, Cortes remained with his people for 
four or five months at Cojohuacan, a place for 
which he constantly displayed a great predilec 
tion. He was at first uncertain whether he should 
reconstruct the capital on some other spot around 
the lakes. He at last determined on the old situa 
tion, " because the city of Temixtitlan had ac 
quired celebrity, because its position was delight 
ful, and because in all times it had been considered 
as the head of the Mexican provinces," (como 
principal y senora de todas estas provincias .) It 
cannot, however, admit of a doubt, that, on ac 
count of the frequent inundations suffered by Old 
and New Mexico, it would have been better to 
have rebuilt the city to the e. of Tezcuco, or on 
the heights between Tacuba and Tacubaya. The 
capital was, in fact, about to be transferred to these 
heights by a formal edict of King Philip III. at 
the period of the great inundation in 1607. The 
(tjuntamientOjOt magistracy of the city, represented 
to the court that the value of the houses condemned 
to destruction amounted 105,000,000 of francs, or 
4,375j350/. sterling. They appeared to be igno 
rant at Madrid that the capital of a kingdom, con 
structed for more than 88 years, is not a flying 
camp, which may be changed at will. It is, how 
ever, to be confessed, that the most part of the 
great cities of the Spanish colonies, however new 
their appearance may be, are in disagreeable situa 
tions. We do not here speak of the site of Ca 
racas, Quito, Pasto, and several other cities of 
S. America, but merely of the Mexican cities; for 
example, Valladolid, which might have been 
built in the beautiful valley of Tepare ; Guada- 
laxara, which is quite near the delightful plain of 
the Rio Chiconahuatenco, or San Pedro; Paz- 
ctiaro, which we cannot help wishing to have been 
built at IVintzontza, One would say that every 
where the new colonists of two adjoining places 
have uniformly chosen cither the one most moun 
tainous, or most exposed to inundations. But in 
deed the Spaniards have constructed almost no new 



cities ; they merely inhabited or enlarged those 
which were already founded by the Indians. 

It is impossible to determine with any certainty 
the number of inhabitants of old Tenochtillan. 
Were we to judge from the fragments of ruined 
houses, and the recital of the first conquerors, and 
especially from the number of the combatants whom 
the kings Cuitlahuatzin and Quaulnimotzin op 
posed to the Tlascaltccs and Spaniards, we should 
pronounce the population of Tenochtillan three 
times greater than that of Mexico in our days. 
Cortes asserts, that alter the siege, the concoti s: of 
Mexican artisans who wrought for the Spaniards, 
as carpenters, masons, weavers, and foundeis, was 
so enormous, that in 1524 the new city of Mexico 
already numbered 30,000 inhabitants. Modern 
authors have thrown out the most contradictory 
ideas regarding the population of this capital. 
The Abbe Clavigero, in his excellent work on the 
ancient history of New Spain, proves that these 
estimations vary from 60,000 to 1 ,500,000 of inha 
bitants. (ClavigerO) iv. p. 278, note p.) We 
ought not to be astonished at these contradictions, 
when we consider how new statistical researches 
are even in the most cultivated parts of Eu 
rope. 

According to the most recent and least uncertain 
data, the actual population of the capital of Mex 
ico appears to be (including the troops) from 135 
to 140,000 souls. The enumeration in 1780, by 
orders of the Count de Revillagigedo, gave a re 
sult of only 112,926 inhabitants for the city ; but 
we know that this result is one-sixth below the 
truth. The regular troops and militia in garrison 
in the capital are composed of from 5 to 6000 
men in arms. We may admit with great proba 
bility that the actual population consists of 
2,500 white Europeans. 

65,000 white Creoles. 

33,000 indigenous (copper-coloured.) 

26,500 Mestizoes, mixture of whites and Indians. 

10,000 Mulattoes. 



137,000 inhabitants. 

There arc consequently in Mexico 69,500 men 
of colour, and 67,500 whites ; but a great number 
of the Mestizoes are almost as white as the Euro 
peans and Spanish Creoles ! 

In the 23 male convents which the capital con 
tains there are nearly 1200 individuals, of whom 
580 are priests and choristers. In the 15 female 
convents there are 2100 individuals, of whom 
nearly 900 are professed religieuses. 

The clergy of the city of Mexico is extremely] 



MEXICO. 



125 



[numerous, though less numerous by one-fourth 
than at Madrid. The enumeration of 1790 gives 

Individuals. 



of monks. 



of nuns. 



59 novices. 
^235 lay brothers. 

In the con vents $888 professed religieuses &amp;gt; Q Q O 
35 novices. $ 



? 



867 



Prebendaries . 
Parish priests (cures) 
Curates . . 
Secular ecclesiastics 



26 
16 
43 
517 



Total 2392 

and without including lay-brothers and novices, 
2068. The clergy of Madrid, according to the 
work of M. de Laborde, ( which received several 
contributions from M. de Humboldt), is composed 
of 3470 persons: consequently the clergy is to the 
whole population of Mexico as 1| to JOO, and at 
Mad rid as 2 to 100. 

The archbishop of Mexico possesses a revenue 
of 682,500 livres, or 18,420/. sterling. This sum 
is somewhat less than the revenue of the convent of 
Jeronimitesof the Escurial. Anarchbishopof Mex 
ico is, consequently, much poorer than the arch 
bishops of Toledo, Valencia, Seville, and Santiago. 
The first of these possesses a revenue of 3,000,000 
of livres, or 125,000/. sterling. M. de Laborde 
lias proved, and the fact is by no means generally 
known, that the clergy of France, before the re 
volution, \vasmore numerous, compared to (he total 
population, and richer as a body than the Spanish 
clergy. The revenues of the tribunal of inquisi 
tion of Mexico, a tribunal which extends over the 
whole kingdom of New Spain, Guatemala, and the 
Philippine islands, amount to 200,000 livres, or 
S334/. sterling. 

The number of births at Mexico, for a mean 
term of 100 years, is 5930; and the number of 
deaths 5050. In the year 1802 there were even 
C155 births, and 5166 deaths, which would give, 
supposing a population of 137,000 souls, for every 
22| individuals, one birth, and for every 26| 
one death. They reckon in general, in the coun 
try parts, in Nueva Espana, the relation of the 
births to the population as one to 17 ; and the rela 
tion of the deaths to the population as one to 50. 
There is consequently, in appearance, a very great 
mortality and a very small number of births in the 
capital. The conflux of patients to the city is con 
siderable, not only of the most indigent class of the 
people, who seek assistance in the hospitals, of 
-winch the number of beds amounts to 1 100, but 



also of persons in easy circumstances, who are 
brought to Mexico because neither advice nor re 
medies can be procured in the country. This cir 
cumstance accounts for the great number of deaths 
on-the parish registers. On the other hand, the con 
vents, the celibacy of the clergy, progress of lux 
ury, the militia, and the indigence of the Saragates 
Indians, who live like the Lazaroui of Naples, in 
idleness, are the principal causes which influence the 
disadvantageous relation of the births to the popu 
lation. 

MM. Alzate and Clavigero, from a comparison 
of the parish registers of Mexico with those of se 
veral European cities, have endeavoured to prove 
that the capital of Nueva Espana must contain 
more than 200,000 inhabitants ; but how can we 
suppose in the enumeration of 1790 an error of 
87,000 souls, more than two-fifths of the whole 
population ? Besides, the comparisons of these two 
learned Mexicans can, from their nature, lead to no 
certain results, because the cities of which they 
exhibit the bills of mortality are situated in very 
different elevations and climates, and because the 
state of civilization and comfort of the great mass 
of their inhabitants afford the most striking con 
trasts. At Madrid the births are one in 34, and at 
Berlin one in 28. The one of these proportions 
can no more, however, than the other, be appli 
cable to calculations regarding the population of 
the cities of Equinoctial America. Yet the dif 
ference between these proportions is so great, that 
it would alone, on an annual number of 6000 
births, augment or diminish to the extent of 36,000 
souls the population of (lie city of Mexico. The 
number of deaths or births is, perhaps, the best 
of all means for determining the number of the in 
habitants of a district, when the numbers which 
express the relations of the births and deaths to 
the whole population in a given country have been 
carefully ascertained; but these numbers, the re 
sult of a long induction, can never be applied to 
countries whose physical and moral situation are 
totally different. They denote the medium state 
of prosperity of a mass of population, of which the 
greatest part dwell in the country ; and we cannot, 
therefore, avail ourselves of these proportions to 
ascertain the number of inhabitants of a capital. 

Mexico is the most populous city of the new 
continent. It contains nearly 40,000 inhabitants 
fewer than Madrid ; and as it forms a great square, 
of which each side is nearly 2750 metres, or 
9021 feet, its population is spread over a great 
extent of ground. Its greatest length is nearly 
3900 metres (12,794 English feet) ; of Paris 8000 J 



126 



MEXICO. 



[metres (26,246 English feet.) The streets being 
very spacious, they in general appear rather de 
serted. They are so much the more so, as in a 
climate considered as cold by the inhabitants of 
the tropics, people expose themselves less to the 
free air than in the cities at the foot of the cordil- 
lera. Hence the latter (ciudades de lierra caliente] 
appear uniformly more populous than the cities of 
ihe temperate or cold regions (ciudades de lierra 
fria.) If Mexico contains more inhabitants than 
any of the cities of Great Britain and France, 
with the exception of London, Dublin, and Paris ; 
on the other hand, its population is much less than 
that of the great cities of the Levant and East 
Indies. Calcutta, Surat, Madras, Aleppo, and 
Damascus, contain all of them from 2 to 4 and 
even 600,000 inhabitants. 

The Count de Revillagigedo set on foot accu 
rate researches into the consumption of Mexico. 
The following table, drawn up in 1791, may be 
interesting to those who have a knowledge of the 
important operations of MM. Lavoisier and Ar- 
uould, relative to the consumption of Paris and all 
France. 

CONSUMPTION OF MEXICO. 

1. Eatables. 

Beeves 16,300 

Calves 450 

Sheep . 78,923 

Hogs 50,676 

Kids and rabbits .... 24,000 

Fowls 1,255,340 

Ducks 125,000 

Turkeys 205,000 

Pigeons 65,300 

Partridges 140,000 

2. Grain. 
Maize or Turkey wheat, cargas of 

three fancgas "... . 117,224 
Barley, cnrgas .... 40,219 

3. Liquid Measure. 

Wheat flour, cargas of 12 arrobas 130.000 

Pulque, the tormented juice of the agava, 

cargas 294,700 

Wine and vinegar, barrels of 4{ ar 
robas . . . . . 4,507 
Brandy, barrels .... 12,000 
Spanish oil, arrobas of 25 pounds . 5,585 
Supposing, with M. Puchet, the population of 
Paris to be four times greater than that of Mexico, 
we shall find that the consumption of beef is nearly 
proportional to the number of inhabitants of the 
two cities, butthat that of mutton and pork is infi 
nitely more at Mexico. The difference is as follows : 
I 





Consun 
Of Mexico. 


option 
Of Paris. 


Quadruple 
of the 
Consumption 
of Mexico. 


Beeves 

Sheep 
Hogs 


16,300 
273,000 
50,100 


70,000 
350,000 
35,000 


65,200 
1,116,000 
200,400 



M. Lavoisier found by his calculations that the 
inhabitants of Paris consumed annually in his time 
90,000,000 of pounds of animal food of all sorts, 
which amounts to 163 pounds (79/ 5 kilogrammes, 
or 175-1% poundsaverd.) per individual. In estimat 
ing the animal food yielded by the animals designated 
in the preceding table, according to the principles 
of Lavoisier, modified according to the localities, 
the consumption of Mexico in every sort of meat 
is 26,000,000 of pounds, or 189 pounds, or 204 
pounds averd. per individual. This difference is 
so much the more remarkable as the population of 
Mexico includes 33,000 Indians, who consume 
very little animal food. 

The consumption of wine has greatly increased 
since 1791, especially since the introduction of the 
Brownonian system in the practice of the Mexican 
physicians. The enthusiasm with which this sys 
tem was received in a country where asthenical or 
debilitating remedies had been employed to an ex 
cess for ages, produced, according to the testimony 
of all merchants of Vera Cruz, the most remarkable 
effect on the trade in luscious Spanish wines (nins 
liquoreujc.) These wines, however, are only 
drunk by the wealthy class of the inhabitants. 
The Indians, Mestizoes, Mulattoes, and even the 
greatest number of white Creoles, prefer the fer 
mented juice of the agave, called pulque, of which 
there is annually consumed the enormous quantity 
of 44,000,000 of bottles, containing 48 French 
cubic incites each, or58.lil cubic inches English. 
The immense population of Paris only consumed 
annually in the time of M. Lavisier 281,000 
niuids of wine, brandy, cycler, and beer, equal to 
80,928,000 bottles. 

The consumption of bread at Mexico is equal to 
that of the cities of Europe. This fact isso much 
the more remarkable, as at Caracas, at Cumana, 
and Carthagena de las Indias, and in all the cities 
of America situated under the torrid zone, but on 
a level with the ocean, or very little above it, the 
Creole inhabitants live on almost nothing but maize 
bread, and the jatropha manihot. If we suppose^ 
with M. Arnould, that 325 pounds of flour yield 
416 pounds of bread, we shall find that the 130,000 
loads of flour consumed at Mexico yield 49,900,000] 



MEXICO. 



127 



[pounds of bread, M!I ich amounts io 391 T 8 - pounds 
averd. per individual of every age. Estimating 
the habitual population of Paris at 547,000 inha 
bitants, and the consumption of bread at 206,788,000 
pounds, we shall find the consumption of each in 
dividual in Paris 377 pounds French, or 406 7 9 5 
poundsaverd. AtMexicothe consumption of maize 
is almost equal to that of wheat. The Turkish corn 
is the food most in request among the Indians. 
We may apply to it the denomination which 
Pliny gives to barley (the *f/ of Homer) antiqitis- 
simumfrumentum ; for the zea maize was the only 
farinaceous gramen cultivated by the Americans 
before the arrival of the Europeans. 

The market of Mexico is richly supplied with 
eatables, particularly with roots and I m its of every 
sort. It is a most interesting spectacle, which 
may be enjoyed every morning at sun-rise, to see 
these provisions, and a great quantity of flowers, 
brought in by Indians in boats, descending the 
canals of Istacalco and Chalco. The greater part 
of these roots is cultivated on the chinampas, called 
by the Europeans floating gardens. There are 
two sorts of them, of which the one is moveable 
and driven about by the winds, and the other fixed 
and attached to the shore. The first alone merit 
the denomination of floating gardens, but their 
number is daily diminishing. 

The ingenious invention of chinampas appears 
to go back to the end of the 14th century. It had 
its origin in the extraordinary situation of a people 
surrounded with enemies, and compelled to live 
in the midst of a lake little abounding in fish, who 
were forced to fall upon every means of procuring 
subsistence. It is even probable that Nature herself 
suggested to the Aztecs the first idea of floating gar 
dens. On the marshy banks of t he lakes of Xoch i- 
milco and Chalco, the agitated water in the time of 
the great rises carries away pieces of earth covered 
with herbs, and bound together by roots. These 
floating about for a long time as they arc driven by 
the wind, sometimes unite into small islands. A 
tribe of men, too weak to defend themselves on the 
continent, would take advantage of these portions 
of ground, which accident put within their reach, 
and of which no enemy disputed the property. 
The oldest chinampas were merely bits of ground 
joined together artificially, and dug and sown upon 
by the Aztecs. These floating islands are to be met 
with in all the zones. Humboldt saw them in the 
kingdom of Quito, on the river Guayaquil, of 
eight or nine metres (or 26 or 29 feet) in length, 
floating in the midst of the current, and bearing 
young shoots of bambusa^ pistia stratiotes, pon- 
tedcria, and a number of other vegetables, of 



which the roots are easily interlaced. He found 
also in Italy, in the small fago di aqua sotfa of 
Tivoli, near the hot baths of Agrippa, small islands 
formed of sulphur, carbonate of lime, and the 
leaves of the uha thermalis, which change their 
place with the smallest breath of wind. Floating 
gardens arc, as is well known, also to be met with 
in the rivers and canals of China, where an excessive 
population compels the inhabitants to have recourse 
to every shift for increasing the means of sub 
sistence. 

Simple lumps of earth, carried away from the 
banks, have given rise to the invention of chi- 
nanipas ; but the industry of the Aztec nation 
gradually carried this system of cultivation to 
perfection. The floating gardens, of which very 
many were found by the Spaniards, and of which 
many still exist in the lake of Chalco, were rafts 
formed of reeds (totord)&amp;gt; rushes, roots, and branches 
of brushwood. The Indians cover these light and 
well-connected materials with black mould, na 
turally impregnated with muriate of soda. The 
soil is gradually purified from this salt by washing 
it with the water of the lake ; and the ground 
becomes so much the more fertile as this lixivia- 
tion is annually repeated. This process succeeds 
even with the salt water of the lake of Tezcuco, 
because this water, by no means at the point of 
its saturation, is still capable of dissolving salt as 
it filtrates through the mould. The chinampas 
sometimes contain even the cottage of the Indian 
who acts as guard for a group of floating gardens. 
They are towed or pushed with long poles when 
wished to be removed from one side of the banks to 
the other. 

In proportion as the fresh-water lake has become 
more distant from the salt-water lake, the moveable 
chinampas have been fixed. We see this last class 
all along the canal De laViga, in the marshy ground 
between the lake of Chalco and the lake of Tez 
cuco. Every chinampa forms a parallelogram of 
JOO metres in length, and from five to six metres 
(or 328 by 16 or 19 feet) in breadth. Narrow dit 
ches, communicating symmetrically bet ween them, 
separate these squares. The mould fit for cultiva 
tion, purified from salt by frequent irrigations, rises 
nearly a metre, or 3.28 feet above the surface of the 
surrounding water. On these chinampas are culti 
vated beans, small peas, pimento (chile, capsicum), 
potatoes, artichokes, cauliflowers, and a great 
variety of other vegetables. -The edges of these 
squares are generally ornamented with flowers, 
and sometimes even with a hedge of rose bushes. 
The promenade in boats around the chinampas of 
Istacalco is one of the most agreeable that can be] 



128 



MEXICO. 



[enjoyed in the environs of Mexico. The vegeta 
tion is extremely vigorous on a soil continually 
refreshed with water. 

The valley of Tenochtitlan offers to the exami 
nation of naturalists two sources of mineral water, 
that of Nuestra Senora de Guadalupe, and that of 
the Pcfion de los Banos. These sources contain 
carbonic acid, sulphate of lime and soda, and mu 
riate of soda. Baths have been established there 
in a manner equally salutary and convenient. The 
Indians manufacture their salt near the Pcnon de 
los Bafios. They wash clayey lands full of muriate 
of soda, and concentrate water which has only 12 
or 13 to the 100 of salt. Their caldrons, which 
are very ill constructed, have only six square feet 
of surface, and from two to three inches of depth. 
No other combustible is employed but the mules 
and cow dung. The fire is so ill managed, that 
to produce twelve pounds of salt, which sells at 
35 sous, or Is. b\d. they consume 12 sous, or 
5|rf. worth of combustibles. This salt-pit existed 
in the time of Motezuma, and no change has taken 
place in the technical process, but the substitution 
of caldrons of beaten copper to the old earthen 
vats. 

The hill of Chapultepec was chosen by the 
young viceroy Galvez as the site of a villa (Chateau 
de Plaisance) for himself and his successors. The 
castle has been finished externally, but the apart 
ments are not yet furnished. This building cost 
the king nearly 1,500,000 livres, or 6,505/. ster 
ling. The court of Madrid disapproved of the 
expence, but, as usual, after it was laid out. The 
plan of this edifice is very singular. It is fortified on 
the side of the city of Mexico. We perceive salient 
walls and parapets adapted for cannon, though 
these parts have all the appearance of mere archi 
tectural ornaments. Towards the n. there are 
fosses and vast vaults capable of containing provi 
sions for several months. The common opinion at 
Mexico is, that the house of the viceroy at Cha 
pultepec is a disguised fortress. Count Bernardo 
de Galvez was accused of having conceived the 
project of rendering Nueva Espaila independent 
of the peninsula ; and it was supposed that the 
rock of Chapultepec was destined for an asylum 
and defence to him in case of attack from the Eu 
ropean troops. Men of respectability in the first 
situations are said to have entertained this suspicion 
against the young viceroy. It is the duty of a 
historian, however,- not to yield too easy an ac 
quiescence to accusations of so grave a nature. 
The Count de Galves belonged to a family that 
King Charles III. had suddenly raised to an extra 
ordinary degree of wealth and power. Young, 



amiable, and addicted to pleasures and magnifi 
cence, he had obtained from the munificence of 
his sovereign one of the first places to which an 
individual could be exalted ; and without more 
undeniable proofs of conviction, we cannot but 
consider it as highly unnatural that he should have 
endeavoured to break the ties which for three 
centuries had united the colonies to the mother 
country. The Count de Galves, notwithstanding- 
his conduct was well calculated to gain the favour 
of the populace of Mexico, and notwithstanding 
the influence of the Countess de Galvez, as beauti 
ful as she was generally beloved, would have 
experienced the late of every European viceroy 
who aims at independence. In a great revolu 
tionary commotion, it would never have been 
forgiven him that he was not born an Ame 
rican. 

The castle of Chapultepec should be sold for the 
advantage of the government. As in every coun 
try it is difficult to find individuals fond of pur 
chasing strong places, several of the ministers of 
the Real Hacienda have begun, by selling to the 
highest bidder the glass and sashes of (he windows. 
This vandalism, which passes by the name of 
economy, has already much contributed to dt ijrade 
an edifice on an elevation of 2325 metre*, or 7616 
feet, and which, in a climate so rude, is exposed 
to all the impetuosity of the winds. It would, 
perhap&amp;gt;, be prudent to preserve this castle as the 
only place in which the archives, bars of silver, 
and coin, could be placed, and the person of the 
viceroy could be in safety, in the first moments of 
a popular commotion. The commotions of the 
12th February 1608, 15th January 1621 and 1692, 
are still in remembrance at Mexico. In the last of 
these, the Indians, from want of maize, burned the 
palace of the viceroy Don Caspar de Sandoval, 
Count of Galves, who took refuge in the garden 
of the convent of St. Francis. But it \\as only in 
those times that the protection of the monks 
was equivalent to the security of a fortified 
castle. 

To terminate the description of the valley of 
Mexico, it remains for us to give a rapid hydro- 
graphical view of this country, so intersected with 
lakes and small rivers. This view, we flatter our 
selves, will be equally interesting to the naturalist 
and the civil engineer. We have already said, 
that the surface of the four principal lakes occu 
pies nearly a tenth of the valley, or 22 square 
leagues. The lake of Xochimilco (and Chalco) 
contains 6|, the lake of Tczcuco 10 T ^, San Chris- 
tobal 3 T 6 ^, and Zumpango 1^ square leagues (of 
25 to the equatorial degree.) The valley of Te-] 



MEXICO. 



129 



[nochtitlan, or Mexico, is a basin surrounded by a 
circular wall of porphyry mountains of great 
elevation. Tins basin, of which the bottom is ele 
vated 2277 metres, or 746 S feet, above the level of 
the sea, resembles, on a small scale, the vast basin 
of liohemia, and (if the comparison is not too bold) 
the valleys of the mountains of the moon, describ 
ed by MM. Herschel and Schroeter. All the humi 
dity furnished by the cor dill eras which surround 
the plain of Teuochtillau is collected in the val 
ley. No river issues out of it, if we except the 
small brook (arroya) of Tequisquiac, which, in a 
ravine of small breadth, traverses the n. chain of 
the mountains, to throw itself into the Rio de Tula, 
or Moteuczoma. 

The principal supplies of the lakes of the val 
ley of Tenochtitlan are, 1. The rivers of Papalotla, 
Tezcuco, Teotihuuean, and Tepeyacac (Guada- 
lupe), which pour their waters into the lake of 
Tezcuco; 2. The rivers of Paehuca and Guantitlan 
(Qnauhtitlar))) which flow into the lake of Zurn- 
pango. The latter of these rivers (the Rio de 
Guautitlan) has the longest course ; and its volume 
of water is more considerable than that of all the 
other supplies put together. 

The Mexican lakes, which are so many natural 
recipients, in which the torrents deposit the waters 
of the surrounding 1 mountains, rise by stages, in 
proportion to their distance from the centre of the 
valley, or the site of the capital. After the lake 
of Tezcuco, the city of Mexico is the least ele 
vated point of the whole valley. According to 
the very accurate survey of MM. Velasquez and 
Castera, the plaza mayor of Mexico, at the s. 
corner of the viceroy s palace, is one Mexican 
fora, (the Mexican vara being equal to O m .839), 
one foot and one inch higher than the mean level 
of the lake of Tezcuco, which again is four varas 
and eight inches lower than the lake of San 
Chnstobal, whereof the n. part is called the 
lake of Xaltocan. The elevation of the plaza 
mayor, therefore, above Tezcuco is 47.245 inches, 
and that of San Christobal 8.863 inches. In 
the aforesaid n. part, on two small islands, the 
villages of Xaltocan and Tonanitla are situated. 
The lake of San Christobal, properly so called, 
is separated from that of Xaltocan by a very 
ancient dike which leads to the villages of San 
Pablo and San Tomas de Chiconautla. The most 
n. lake of the valley of Mexico, Zumpango (Tzorn- 
pango), is 10 varas 1 foot 6 inches, or 29 feet 1 
inch 888 English, higher than the mean level of 
the lake of Tezcuco. A dike (la Calzada de la 
Cruz del Rey) divides the lake of Zumpango into 

VOL. III. 



two basins, of which the most w. bears the name of 
Laguna dc Zitlaltepcc, and the most e. the name 
of Laguna de Coyotepec. The lake of Chalco 
is at the s. extremity of the valley. Tt contains 
the pretty little village of Xico, founded on a 
small island ; and it is separated from the lake of 
Xochimilco by the Calzada de Sari Pedro de 
Tlahua, a narrow dike which runs from Tulia- 
gualco to San Francisco Tlaltengo. The level of 
the fresh-water lakes of Chalco and Xochimilco 
is only 1 raru 11 inches, or 3 feet 9 inches, higher 
than theplazQ mover of the capital. 1 1 urnboldt has 
given these details as thinking they might be inter 
esting to civil engineers wishing to form an exact 
idea of the great canal (desagite) of Huehuetoca. 

The difference of elevation of the four great 
reservoirs of water of the valley of Tenochtitlan 
was sensibly felt in the great inundations to which 
the city of Mexico for a long series of ages has 
been exposed. In all of them the sequence of the 
phenomena has been uniformly the same. The 
lake of Zumpango, swelled by the extraordinary 
increases of the Rio dc Guautitlan, and the in 
fluxes from Paehuca, flows over into the lake of 
San Christobal, with which the cienegas of Te- 
pejuelo and Tlapanahuiloya communicate. The 
lake of San Christobal bursts the dike which sepa 
rates it from the lake of Tezcuco. Lastly, the 
water of this last basin rises in level from the ac 
cumulated influx more than a metre, or 39.371 
inches, and traversing the saline grounds of San 
Lazaro, flows with impetuosity into the streets of 
Mexico. Such is the general progress of the 
inundations : they, proceed from the n. and the 
n. zv. The drain or canal called the Desague 
Real de Huehuetoca is destined to prevent any 
danger from them ; but it is certain, however, that 
from a coincidence of several circumstances, the 
inundations of the s. (avenidas del sur), on which, 
unfortunately, the desague has no iufluence, may 
be equally disastrous to the capital. The lakes of 
Chalco and Xochimilco would overflow, if in a 
strong eruption of the volcano Popocatepetl, this 
colossal mountain should suddenly be stripped of 
its snows. While H urn bold t was at Guayaquil, 
on the coast of the province of Quito, in 1802, 
the cone of Cotopaxi was heated to such a degree 
by the effect of the volcanic fire, that almost in 
one night it lost the enormous mass of snow with 
which it is covered. In the new continent erup 
tions and great earthquakes are often followed 
with heavy showers, which last for whole months. 
With what dangers would not the capital be 
threatened were these phenomena to take place in} 



130 



MEXICO. 



[the valley of Mexico, under a zone, where, in 
years by no means humid, the rain which falls 
amounts to 15 decimetres, or 59 inches. 

The inhabitants of Nueva Espana think that 
they can perceive something like a constant period 
in the number of years which intervene between 
the great inundations. Experience has proved 
that the extraordinary inundations in the valley of 
Mexico have followed nearly at intervals of 25 
years. Toaldo pretends to be able to deduce from 
a great number of observations, that the very rainy 
years, and consequently the great inundations, re 
turn every 19 years, according to the terms of the 
cycle of Saros. Since the arrival of the Spaniards 
the city has experienced five great inundations, 
viz. in 1553, under the viceroy Don Luis de Ve- 
lasco (el V r icjo), constable of Castile ; in 1580, 
under the viceroy Don Martin Enriquez de Ala- 
manza ; in 1604, under the viceroy Montesclaros ; 
in 1607, under the viceroy Don Luis de Velasco 
(el Segundo), Marquis de Salinas ; and in 1629, 
under the viceroy Marquis de Ceralvo. This last 
inundation is the only one which has taken place 
since the opening of the canal of Huehuetoca ; and 
we shall see hereafter what were tlie circumstances 
which produced it. Since the year 1629 there 
have still been, however, several very alarming 
swellings of the waters, but the city was preserved 
by the desague. These seven very rainy years 
were 1648, 1675, 1707, 1732, 1748, 1772, 1795. 
Comparing together the foregoing 11 epochas, we 
shall find for the period of the fatal recurrence the 
numbers of 27, 24, 3, 26, 19, 27, 32, 25, 16, 24, 
and 23 ; a series which undoubtedly denotes some 
what more regularity than what is observed at Lima 
in the return of the great earthquakes. 

The situation of the capital of Mexico is so 
much the more dangerous, that the difference of 
level between the surface of the lake of Tezcuco 
and the ground on which the houses are built is 
every year diminishing. This ground is a fixed 
plane, particularly since all the streets of Mexico 
were paved under the government of the Count de 
Revillagigedo ; but the bed of the lake of Tez 
cuco is progressively rising, from the mud brought 
down by the small torrents, which is deposited in 
the reservoirs into which they flow. To avoid a 
similar inconvenience, the Venetians turned from 
their lagunas the Brenta, the Piave, the Livenza, 
and other rivers, which formed deposits in them. 
If we could rely on the results of a survey exe 
cuted in the 16th century, we should no doubt 
find that the plaza mayor of Mexico was formerly 
more than 1 i decimetres, or 43/o f eet ) elevated above 



the level of the lake of Tezcuco, and that the 
mean level of the lake varies from year to year; 
If, on the one hand, the humidity of the atmo 
sphere and the sources have diminished in the 
mountains surrounding the valley, from the de 
struction of the forests ; on the other hand, the 
cultivation of the land has increased the deposi 
tions and the rapidity of the inundations. Gene 
ral Andreossi, in his excellent work on the Canal 
of Languedoc, has insisted a great deal on these 
causes, which are common to all climates. Wa 
ters which glide over declivities covered with 
sward, carry much less of the soil along with them 
than those which run over loose soil. Now the 
sward, whether formed from gramina, as in Eu* 
rope, or small alpine plants, as in Mexico, is only 
to be preserved in the shade of a forest. The 
shrubs and underwood oppose also powerful ob 
stacles to the melted snow which runs down the 
declivities of the mountains. When these decli 
vities are stripped of their vegetation, the streams 
are less opposed, and more easily unite with the 
torrents which swell the lakes in the neighbour 
hood of Mexico. 

It is natural enough, that in the order of hy* 
draulical operations undertaken to preserve the 
capital from the danger of inundation, the system 
of dikes preceded that of evacuating canals or 
drains. When the city of Tenochtitlan was in 
undated to such a degree in 1446, that none of the 
streets remained dry, Motezuma I. (Huehue Mo- 
teuczowa)) by advice of Nczahualcojotl, king of 
Tezcuco, ordered a dike to be constructed of more 
than 12,000 metres in length, and 20 in breadth, 
viz. 395,369 by 65.6 feet. This dike, partly 
constructed in the lake, consisted of a wall of stones 
and clay, supported on each side by a range of 
palisadoes, of which considerable remains are yet 
to be seen in the plains of San Lazaro. This dike 
of Motezuma I. was enlarged and repaired after 
the great inundation in 1498, occasioned by the 
imprudence of King Ahuitzotl. This prince, as 
we have already observed, ordered the abundant 
sources of Huitzilopochco to be conducted into the 
lake of Tezcuco. He forgot that the lake of 
Tezcuco, however destitute of water in time of 
drought, becomes so much the more dangerous in 
the rainy season, as the number of its supplies is 
increased. Ahuitzotl ordered Tzotzomatzin, citi 
zen of Coyohuacan, to be put to death, because he 
had courage enough to predict the danger to which 
the new aqueduct of Huitzilopochco would expose 
the capital. Shortly afterwards the young Mexi 
can king very narrowly escaped drowning in his] 



MEXICO. 



J31 



f palace. The water increased with such rapidity, 
that the prince was grievously wounded in the 
head, while saving himself, by a door which led 
from the lower apartments to the street. 

The Aztecs had thus constructed the dikes (cal- 
zadas) of Tlahua and Mexicaltzingo, and I Alba- 
radon, which extends from Iztapalapan to Tepe- 
yacac (Guadalupe), and of which the ruins at pre 
sent are still very useful to the city of Mexico. 
This system of dikes, which the Spaniards con 
tinued to follow till the commencement of the 17th 
century, afforded means of defence, which, if not 
quite secure, were at least nearly adequate, at a 
period when the inhabitants of Tenochtitlan, sail 
ing in canoes, were more indifferent to the effects of 
the more trifling inundations. The abundance of 
forests and plantations afforded them great facili 
ties for constructions on piles. The produce of 
the floating gardens (chinampas) was adequate to 
the wants of a frugal nation. A very small por 
tion of ground fit for cultivation was all that the 
people required. The overflow of the lake of 
Tezcuco was less alarming to men who lived in 
houses, many of which could be traversed by 
canoes. 

When the new cify, rebuilt by Hernan Cortes, 
experienced the first inundation in 1553, the vice 
roy Velasco I. caused the Albaradon de San La- 
zaro to be constructed. This work, executed after 
the model of the Indian dikes, suffered a great 
deal from the second inundation of 1580. In the 
third of 1604 it had to be wholly rebuilt. The 
viceroy Montesclaros then added, for the safety of 
the capital, the Presa d Oculma, and the three 
cahadas of Nuestra Sefiora de Guadalupe, San 
Christobal, and San Antonio Abad. 

These great constructions were scarcely finished, 
when, from a concurrence of extraordinary cir 
cumstances, the capital was again inundated in 
1607. Two inundations had never before fol 
lowed so closely upon one another ; and the fatal 
period of these calamities has never since been di 
vided by a lapse of more than 16 or 17 years. 
Tired of constructing dikes (alLaradones) which 
the water periodically destroyed, they discovered 
at last that it was time to abandon the old hydrau- 
lical system of the Indians, and to adopt that of 
can;ils of evacuation. This change appeared so 
much the more necessary, as the city inhabited 
by the Spaniards had no resemblance in the least 
to the capital of the Aztec empire. The lower 
part of the houses was now inhabited ; few streets 
could be passed through in boats ; and the incon 
veniences and real losses occasioned by the inun 



dations were consequently much greater than what 
they had been in the time of Motezuma. 

The extraordinary rise of the river Guautitlan 
and its tributary streams being looked upon as the 
principal cause of the inundations, the idea natu 
rally occurred of preventing this river from dis 
charging itself into the lake of Zurnpango, the 
mean level of the surface of which is 1\ metres, or 
2-j s feet, higher than the plaza mayor of Mexico. 
In a valley circularly surrounded by high moun 
tains, it was only possible to find a vent for the 
Rio de Guautitlan through a subterraneous gal 
lery, or an open canal through these very moun 
tains. In fact, in 1580, at the epoch of the great 
inundation, two intelligent men, the Licenciado 
Obregon, and the Maestro Arciniega, proposed to 
government to have a gallery pierced between the 
Cerro de Sincoque and the Lorna of Nochistongo. 
This was the point which more than any other was 
likely to fix the attention of those who had studied 
the configuration of the Mexican ground. It was 
nearest to the Rio de Guautitlan, justly considered 
the most dangerous enemy of the capital. No 
where the mountains surrounding the valley are 
less elevated, and present a smaller mass than to 
the n.n.w. of Huehuetoca, near the hills of No- 
ehistongo. One would say, on examining atten 
tively the marl soil, of which the horizontal strata 
fill a porphyritical defile, that the valley of Te 
nochtitlan formerly communicated at that place 
with the valley of Tula. 

In 1607, the Marquis de Salinas, viceroy, em 
ployed Enrico Martinez to carry through the arti 
ficial evacuation of the Mexican lakes. It is ge 
nerally believed in New Spain that this celebrated 
engineer, the author of the Desague de Huchue- 
tocd) was a Dutchman or a German. His name 
undoubtedly denotes that he was of foreign de 
scent ; but he appears, however, to have received 
his education in Spain. The king conferred on 
him the title of rosmographer ; and there is a trea 
tise of his on trigonometry, printed at Mexico, 
which is now become very scarce. Enrico Mar 
tinez, Alonso Martinez, Damian Davila, and Juan 
de Ysla, made an exact survey of the valley ? of 
which the accuracy was ascertained by the ope 
rations of the learned geometrician Don Joaquim 
Velasquez in 1774. The royal cosmographer, 
Enrico Martinez, presented two plans of canals, 
the one to evacuate the three lakes of Tezcuco, 
Zumpango, and San Christobal, and the other the 
lake of Zumpango alone; and, agreeably to both 
projects, the evacuation of the water was to take 
place through the subterraneous gallery of Nochis-~[ 
s 2 



MEXICO. 



[tongo, proposed in 1580 by Obregon and Arci- 
niega. But the distance of the lakes of Tezcuco 
from the mouth of the Rio de Guautitlan being 
nearly 32,000 metres, or 104,987 feet, the govern 
ment confined themselves to the canal of Zum- 
pango. This canal was so constructed as to re 
ceive at the same time the waters of the lake, and 
those of the river of Guautitlan ; and it is conse 
quently not true that the desagne projected by 
Martinez was negative in its principle, that is to 
say, that it merely prevented the Rio de Guautit 
lan from discharging itself into the lake of Zum- 
pango. The branch of the canal which con 
ducted the water from the lake to the gallery was 
filled up by depositions of mud, and the desague 
was only useful then for the Kio de Guautitlan, 
which was turned from its course ; so that when 
M. Mier recently undertook the direct evacuation 
of the lakes of San Christobal and Zumpango, it 
was hardly remembered at Mexico that 188 years 
before the same work had already been carried 
into execution with respect to the latter of these 
great basins. 

The famous subterraneous gallery of Nochis- 
tongo was commenced on the 28th November 
1607. The viceroy, in presence of the audienciaj 
applied the first pick-axe: 15,000 Indians were 
employed at this work, which was terminated with 
extraordinary celerity, because the work was car 
ried on in a number of pits at the same time. The 
unfortunate Indians were treated with the greatest 
severity. The use of the pick-axe and shovel was 
sufficient to pierce such loose and crumbling earth. 
After eleven months of continued labour, the gal 
lery C el soc.ubon) was completed. Its length was 
more than 6600 metres, or 21,653 feet, (1.48 com 
mon leagues, of 25 to the sexagesimal degree, 4443 
metres each); its breadth 3 m .5, or 11.482 feet; 
and its height 4 m .2, or 13.779 feet. In the 
month of December 1608, the viceroy and arch 
bishop of Mexico were invited by Martinez to re 
pair to Huehuetoca, to see the water flow from the 
lake of Zumpango and the Rio de Guautitlan 
through the gallery. It actually began to flow 
for the first time on the 17th September 1608. 
The Marquis de Salinas, the viceroy, according 
to Zepeda s account, entered more than 2000 
metres, or 6561 feet, on horseback into this sub 
terraneous passage. On the opposite side of the 
hill of Nochistongo is the Rio de Moctezuma (or 
Tula), which runs into the Rio de Panuco. From 
the n. extremity of the socabon, called the Boca 
de San Gregorio, Martinez carried on an open 
trench for a direct distance of 8600 metres, or 



28,214 feet, which conducted the water from the 
gallery to the small cascade (salto) of the Rio de 
Tula. From this cascade the water has yet to 
descend, according to Humboldt s measurement, 
before it reaches the gulf of Mexico, near the bar 
of Tampico, nearly 2153 metres, or 7056 feet, 
which gives for a length of 323,000 metres, or 
1,059,714 feet, a mean fall of 6| metres in the 
1000. 

A subterraneous passage serving for a canal of 
evacuation, of 6600 metres in length, and an aper 
ture of 14.7 square metres in section (correspond 
ing to 158 square feet), finished in less than a 
year, is a hydraulical operation which in our times, 
even in Europe, would draw the attention of en 
gineers. It is only, in fact, since the end of the 
17th century, from the example set by the illus 
trious Francis A ndreossi in the canal of Langue- 
doc, that these subterraneous apertures have be 
come common. The canal which joins the 
Thames with the Severn, passes near Sapperton, 
for a length of more than 4000 metres, or 13,123 
feet, through a chain of very elevated mountains. 
The great subterraneous canal of Bridge water. 
which, near Worsley, in the neighbourhood of 
Manchester, serves for the carriage of coals, has 
an extent, including its different ramifications, of 
19,200 metres, or "62,991 feet, (or 4 -^ common 
leagues.) The canal of Picardy, which is at pre 
sent going on, ought, according to the first plan, 
to have a subterraneous navigable passage of 
13,700 metres, or 45,300 feet, in length ; seven 
metres, or 26.246 feet, in breadth : and eight metres, 
or 26. 965 feet, in height. 

Scarcely had a part of the water of the valley of 
Mexico began to flow towards the Atlantic ocean, 
when Enrico Martinez was reproached with 
having dug a gallery neither broad nor durable, 
nor deep enough to admit the water of the great 
swellings. The chief engineer (Maestro del De 
sague) replied, that he had presented several 
plans, but that the government had chosen the 
remedy of most prompt execution. In fact, the 
filtrations and erosions occasioned by the alternate 
states of humidity and aridity caused the loose 
earth frequently to crumble down. They were 
soon compelled to support the roof, which was 
ouly composed of alternate strata of marl and a 
still clay called tepttatc. They made use at first 
of wood, by throwing planks across, which rested 
on pillars ; but as resinous wood was not very 
plentiful in that part of the valley, Martinez sub 
stituted masonry in its place. This masonry, if 
we judge of it from the remains discovered in the! 



MEXICO. 



133 



[obra del consuladoy was very well executed ; but 
it was conducted on an erroneous principle. The 
engineer, in place of fortifying the gallery from 
top to bottom with a complete vault of an ellip 
tical form (as is done in mines whenever a gallery 
is cut through loose sand), merely constructed 
arches, which had no sufficient foundation to rest 
on. The water, to which too great a fall was 
given, gradually undermined the lateral walls, and 
deposited an enormous quantity of earth and 
gravel HI the water-course of the gallery, because 
no means were taken to filtrate it, as might have 
been effected by making it previously pass, for 
example, through reticulations of petate, executed 
by the Indians with filaments of the shoots of palm 
trees. To obviate these inconveniences, Martinez 
constructed in the gallery at intervals a species of 
small sluices, which, in opening rapidly, were to 
clear the passage. This means, however, proved 
insufficient, and the gallery was stopt up by the 
perpetual falling in of earth. 

From the year 1608 the Mexican engineers be 
gan to dispute whether it was proper to enlarge 
the socabon of Nochistongo, or to finish the wall 
ing, or to make an uncovered aperture by taking 
off the upper part of the vault, or to commence a 
new gallery farther down, capable of also receiv 
ing, besides the waters of the Rio de Guautitlan, 
and the lake of Zumpango, those of the lake of 
Tezcuco. The archbishop Don Garcia Guerra, a 
Dominican, then viceroy, ordered new surveys to 
be made in 1611 by Alonso de Arias, superinten- 
dant of the royal arsenal (annero mayor), and in 
spector of fortifications (maestro mayor de fortifi- 
cacioncs), a man of probity, who then enjoyed 
great reputation. Arias seemed to approve of the 
operations of Martinez, but the viceroy could not 
fix on any definitive resolution. The court of 
Madrid, wearied out with these disputes of the en 
gineers, sent to Mexico in 1614 Adrian Boot, a 
Dutchman, whose knowledge of hydraulic archi 
tecture is extolled in the memoirs of those times 
preserved in the archives of the viceroyalty. This 
stranger recommended to Philip 111. by his am 
bassador at the court of France, held forth again 
in favour of the Indian system ; and he advised 
the construction of grecit dikes and well protected 
mounds of earth around the capital. He was un 
able, however, to bring about the entire relinquish - 
rnent of the gallery of JNochistongo till the year 
1623. A new viceroy, the Marquis de Guelves, 
had recently arrived at Mexico ; and he had con 
sequently never witnessed the inundations pro 
duced by the overflow of the river of Guautitlan. 
He had the temerity, however, to order Martinez 



to stop up the subterraneous passage, and make 
the water of Zumpango and San Christobal return 
to the lake of Tezcuco, that he might see if the 
danger was, in fact, so great as it had been repre 
sented to him. This last lake swelled in an ex 
traordinary manner ; and the orders were recalled. 
Martinez recommenced his operations in the gal 
lery, which he continued till the 20th June (though, 
according to some manuscript memoirs, the 20th 
September) 1629, when an event occurred, the 
true causes of which have ever remained secret. 

The rains had been very abundant ; and the 
engineer stopt up the subterraneous passage. The 
city of Mexico was in the morning inundated to 
the height of a metre, or 3 feet. The plaza 
mayor. La Plaza del Volador, and the suburb of 
Tlatelolco, alone remained dry. Boats went up 
and down the other streets. Martinez was com 
mitted to prison. It was pretended that he had 
shut up the gallery to give the incredulous a 
manifest and negative proof of the utility of his 
work; but the engineer declared, that seeing the 
mass of water was too considerable to be received 
into his narrow gallery, he preferred exposing the 
capital to the temporary danger of an inundation, 
to seeing destroyed in one day, by the impetuosity 
of the water, the labours of so many years. Con 
trary to every expectation, Mexico remained in 
undated for five years, from 1629 to 1634. (Se 
veral memoirs, however, state that the inundation 
only lasted till 1631, but that it broke out afresh 
towards the end of the year 1633.) Be this as it 
may, the streets were passed in boats, as had been 
done before the conquest in the old Tenochtitlan. 
Wooden bridges were constructed along the sides 
of the houses for the convenience of foot passen 
gers. 

In this interval four different projects were pre 
sented and discussed by the Marquis cle Ceralvo, 
the viceroy. An inhabitant of Valladolid, Simon 
Meudez, affirmed in a memoir, that the ground of 
the valley of Tenochtitlan rose considerably on 
the n. w. side towards Huehuetoca and the hill 
of Nochistongo; that the point where Martinez 
had opened the chain of mountains which circu 
larly shuts in the valley corresponds to the mean 
level of the most elevated lake (Zumpango), and 
not to the level of the lowest (Tezcuco) ; and that 
the ground of the valley falls considerably to the 
n. of the village of Carpio, e. from the lakrs of 
Zumpango and San Christobal. Mendez pro 
posed to draw off the water of the lake of Tezcuco 
by a gallery which should pass between Xaltocan 
and Santa Lucia, and open into the brook (arroyo) 
of Tequisquiac, which, as has been already ob-j 



134 



MEXICO. 



[served, falls into the Rio de Moctezutna or Tula. 
Mendez began this desaguc, projected at the lowest 
point; and four pits of ventilation (lumbreras) 
were already completed, when the government, 
perpetually irresolute and vacillating, abandoned 
the undertaking as being too long and too expen 
sive. Another desiccation of the valley was pro 
jected in 1630 by Antonio Roman and Juan Al 
varez de Toledo, at an intermediate point, by the 
lake of San Christ obal, the waters of which were 
proposed to be conducted to the ravine (barranca) 
of Huiputztla, n. of the village of San Mateo, and 
four leagues w. from the small town of Pachuca. 
The viceroy and audiencia paid as little attention 
to this project as to another of the mayor of Ocul- 
ma, Christobal dePadilla, who, having discovered 
three perpendicular caverns, or natural gulf s (bo- 
guerones), even in the interior of the small town of 
Oculma, wished to avail himself of these holes for 
drawing off the water of the lakes. The small 
river of Teotihuacan is lost in these boqtieroncs. 
Padilla proposed to turn also the water of the lake 
of Tezcuco into them, by bringing it to Oculrna 
through the farm of Tezquititlan. 

This idea of availing themselves of the natural 
caverns formed in the strata of porous amygdaloid 
gave rise to an analogous and equally gigantic pro 
ject, in the head of Francisco Calderon the Jesuit. 
This monk pretended that at the bottom of the lake 
of Tezcuco, near the Peiiol de los Banos, there 
was a hole (sumidero^ which, on being enlarged, 
would swallow up all the water. He endeavoured 
to support this assertion by the testimony of the 
most intelligent Indians, and by old Indian maps. 
The viceroy commissioned the prelates of all the 
religious orders to examine this project. The 
monks and Jesuit kept sounding in vain for three 
months, from September till December 1635 ; but 
no sumidero was ever found, though, even yet, 
many Indians believe as firmly in its existence as 
Father Calderon. Whatever geological opinion 
may be formed of the volcanic or neptunian origin 
of the porous amygdaloid (blasiger Mandelstein) 
of the valley of Mexico, it is very improbable that 
this problematical rock contains hollows of dimen 
sion enough to receive the water of the lake of 
Tezcuco, which even in time of drought ought to 
be estimated at more than 251,700,000 cubic 
metres. It is only in secondary strata of gypsum, 
as in Thuringia, where we can sometimes venture 
to conduct inconsiderable masses of water into na 
tural caverns (gypsschlotten)^ where galleries of 
discharge opened from the interior of a mine of 
coppery schistus are allowed to terminate, without 
any concern about the ulterior direction taken by 

2 



the waters which impede the metallic operations. 
But how is it possible to employ this local measure 
in the case of a great hydraulical operation ? 

During the inundation of Mexico, which lasted 
five successive years, the wretchedness of the lower 
orders was singularly increased. Commerce was 
at a stand, many houses tumbled down, and others 
were rendered uninhabitable. In these unfor 
tunate times the Archbishop Francisco Manzo y 
Zuniga distinguished himself by his beneficence. 
He went about daily in his canoe distributing 
bread among the poor. The court of Madrid 
gave orders a second time to transfer the city 
into the plains between Tacuba and Tacubaya ; 
but the magistracy (cabildo) represented that the 
value of the edifices (fincas) which, in 1607, 
amounted to 150,000,000 of livres, now amounted 
to more than 200,000,000, or 8,334,000/. sterling. 
In the midst of these calamities the viceroy ordered 
the image of the Holy Virgin of Guadalupe to be 
brought to Mexico. The waters, as we have be 
fore observed, retired in 1634, when from very 
strong and very frequent earthquakes the ground 
of the valley opened, a phenomenon which was 
imputed in no small degree to the protecting in 
fluence of the Virgin. 

The Marquis de Ceralvo, viceroy, set the en 
gineer Martinez at liberty. He constructed the 
calzada (dike) of San Christobal, such nearly as 
we now see it. Sluices (compertuas) admit the 
communication of the lake of San Christobal with 
the lake of Tezcuco, of which the level is generally 
from 30 to 32 decimetres, or from 118 to 125 
inches, lower. Martinez had already begun, in 
1609, to convert a small part of the subterraneous 
gallery of Nochistongo into an open trench. After 
the inundation in 1634, he was ordered to abandon 
this work as too tedious and expensive, and to 
finish the desague by enlarging his old gallery. 
The produce of a particular impost on the con 
sumption of commodities (derccho de sisas) was 
destined by the Marquis de Salinas for the ex- 
pences of the hydraulical operations of Martinez. 
The Marquis de Cadereyta increased the revenues 
of the desague by a new imposition of 25 piastres 
on the importation of every pipe of Spanish wine. 
These duties still subsist, though but a small part 
of them is applied to the desague. In the begin 
ning of the 18th century the court destined the half 
of the excise on wines to keep up the great fortifi 
cations of the castle of San Juan d LJlua. Since 
1779 the chest of the hydraulical operations of the 
valley of Mexico does not draw more than five 
francs of the duties levied on each barrel of wine 
from Europe imported at Vera Cruz.] 



MEXICO. 



135 



[The operations of the desague were carried on 
with very little energy from 1634 to 1637, when 
the Marquis de Villena (Duke d Escalona), vice 
roy, gave the charge of it to Father Luis Flores, 
commissary general of the order of St. Francis. 
The activity of this monk is much extolled, under 
whose administration the system of desiccation was 
changed for the third time. It was definitively 
resolved to abandon the gallery (socabon), to take 
off the top of the vault, and to make an immense 
cut through the mountain (tqjo abierto), of which 
the old subterraneous passage was merely to be the 
water-course. 

The monks of St. Francis contrived to retain 
the direction of hydraulical operations. It was so 
much the easier for them to do this, as at that 
epocha, (viz. from 9th June 1641, to I3th Decem 
ber 1673), the viceroy alty was almost consecu 
tively in the hands of Palafox, a bishop of Puebla, 
Torres, a bishop of Yucatan, a Count de Bailos, 
who ended his brilliant career by becoming a bare 
footed Carmelite, and Enriquezde Ribera, a monk 
of St. Augustin, archbishop of Mexico. Wearied 
with the monastical ignorance and delay, a 
lawyer, the fiscal Martin de Solis, obtained from 
the court of Madrid, in 1675, the administration 
of the desague. He undertook to finish the cut 
through the chain of the mountains in two months ; 
and his undertaking succeeded so well, that 80 
years were hardly sufficient to repair the mischief 
which he did in a few days. The fiscal, by ad 
vice of the engineer Francisco Posuelo de Espinosa, 
caused more earth to be thrown at one time into 
the water-course than the shock of the water could 
carry along. The passage was stopt up. In 1760, 
remains of what had fallen in by the imprudence 
of Solis were still perceptible. The Count de 
Monclova, viceroy, very justly thought that the 
tardiness of the monks of St. Francis was still pre 
ferable to the rash activity of the jurisconsult. 
Father Fr. Manuel Cabrera was reinstated in 
1687 in his place of superintenclant (superintend 
ent e de la real obra del desague de Huehuetoca). 
He took his revenge of the fiscal, by publishing a 
book which bears the strange title of " Truth 
cleared up and impostures put to flight, by which 
a powerful and envenomed pen endeavoured to 
prove, in an absurd report, that the work of the 
desague was completed in 1675." ( Verdad acfa- 
rada y desvanecidas imposturas, con que lo ardiente 
y envencnado de una pluma poderosa en esta Nuexa 
Esprina, en tin diclawen ma! instmido^ quisb per- 
suadir averse acubado y perfccctonao el ano de 
1675, lafabrica del Heal Desague de Mexico.) 

The subterraneous passage had been opened and 



walled in a few years. It required two centuries 
to complete the open cut in a loose earth, and in 
sections of from SO to 100 metres, or from 262 to 
328 feet in breadth, and from 40 to 50, or from 
131 to 164 feet, in perpendicular depth. The 
work was neglected in years of drought ; but it 
was renewed with extraordinary energy for a few 
months after any great swelling or any overflow of 
the river of Guautitlan. The inundation with 
which the capital was threatened in 1747 induced 
the Count de Guemes to think of the desague. 
But a new delay took place till 1762, when after 
a very rainy winter there were strong appearances 
of inundation. There were still at the n. extre 
mity of the subterraneous opening of Martinez 
2310 Mexican naras, viz. 1938 metres, or 6356 
feet, which had never been converted into an open 
trench (lajo abierlo.) This gallery being too nar 
row, it frequently happened that the waters of the 
valley had not a free passage towards the Salto de 
Tula. 

At length, in 1767, under the administration of 
a Flemish viceroy, the Marquis de Croix, the body 
of merchants of Mexico, forming the tribunal of 
the consulado of the capital, undertook to finish 
the desague, provided they were allowed to levy 
the duties of sisa and the duty on wine, as an in 
demnification for their advances. The work was 
estimated by the engineers at 6,000,000 of francs, 
or 250,020/. sterling. The consulado executed it 
at an expence of 4,000,000 of francs, or 166,680/. 
sterling; but in place of completing it in five 
years (as had been stipulated), and in place of 
giving a breadth of eight metres, or 26| feet, to 
the water-course, the canal was only completed in 
1789 of the old breadth of the gallery of Martinez. 
Since that period they have been incessantly en 
deavouring to improve the work by enlarging the 
cut, and especially by rendering the slope more 
gentle. However, the canal is yet far from being 
in such a state that fallings in are no more to be 
apprehended, which are so much the more dan 
gerous as lateral erosions increase in the proportion 
of the obstacles which impede the course of the 
water. 

On studying in the archives of Mexico the his 
tory of the hydraulical operations of Nochistongo, 
we perceive a continual irresolution on the part of 
the governors, and a fluctuation of ideas, calculated 
to increase the danger instead of removing it. \Ve 
find visits made by the viceroy, accompanied by 
the audiencia and canons ; papers drawn up by 
the fiscal and other lawyers ; advices given by the 
monks of St. Francis ; an active impetuosity every 
15 or 20 years, when the lakes threatened an ovei- j 



136 



MEXICO. 



[flow ; and a tardiness and culpable indifference 
whenever the danger was past. Twenty-five mil 
lions of livres, or 1,041,750^. sterling, were ex 
pended, because the} never hnd courage to follow 
I he same .plan, and because they kept hesitating 
for two centuries between the Indian system of 
dikes and that of canals, bet ween the subterraneous 
gallery, (socabon), and the open cut through the 
mountain (tajo abierto.) The gallery of Martinez 
A\as suffered to be choked up, because a large 
and deeper one was wished ; and the cut (tajo) of 
Nochistongo was neglected to be finished, while 
they were disputing about the project of a canal of 
Tezcuco, which was never executed. 

The desague in its actual state is undoubtedly 
one of the most gigantic hydraulical operations 
ever executed by man. We look upon it with a 
species of admiration, particularly when we con 
sider the nature of the ground, and the enormous 
breadth, depth, and length of the aperture. If 
this cut were filled with water to the depth of 10 
metres, or 3^?.8 feet, the largest vessels of war could 
pass through the range of mountains which bound 
the plain of Mexico to the n. e. The admiration 
which this work inspires is mingled, however, with 
the most afflicting ideas. We call to mind at the 
sight of the cut of Nochistongo the number of In 
dians who perished there, either from the igno 
rance of the engineers, or the excess of the fatigues 
to which they were exposed in ages of barbarity 
and cruelty. We examine if such slow and costly 
means were necessary to carry off from a valley 
inclosed in on all sides so inconsiderable a mass of 
water ; and we regret that so much collective 
strength was not employed in some greater and 
more useful object ; in opening, for example, not a 
canal, but a passage through some isthmus which 
impedes navigation. 

The project of Henry Martinez was wisely con 
ceived, and executed with astonishing rapidity. 
The nature of the ground and the form of the val 
ley necessarily prescribed such a subterraneous 
opening. The problem would have been resolved 
in a complete and durable manner, 1. If the gal 
lery had been commenced in a lower point, that is 
to say, corresponding to the level of the inferior 
lake; and, 2. If this gallery had been pierced in 
an elliptical form, and wholly protected by a solid 
wall equally elliptically vaulted. The subterra 
neous passage executed by Martinez contained 
only 15 square metres, or 161 square feet, in section, 
as we have already observed. To judge of the di 
mensions necessary for a gallery of this nature, we 
must know exactly the mass of water carried along 
by the river of Guautitlan and the lake of Zum- 



pango at their greatest rise. Humboldt could find 
no estimation in the memoirs drawn up by Zepeda, 
Cabrera, Velasquez, and by M. Castera. But 
from the researches which he himself made on the 
spot, in the part of the cut of the mountain (elcorte 
o tajt&amp;gt;) called La Obra del Consulado, it appeared 
to him that at the period of the ordinary rains the 
waters afford a sect ion of from eight to ten square 
metres, or from 86 to 107| square feet, and that 
this quantity increases in the extraordinary swell 
ings of the river Guautitlan to 30 or 40 square 
metres, or from 322| to 430f square feet. The 
Indians assured him, that in thisla.st case, the water 
course which forms the bottom of the tajo is filled 
to such a degree, that the ruins of the old vault of 
Martinez are completely concealed under water. 
Had the engineers found great difficulties in the 
execution of an elliptical gallery of more than from 
four to five metres, or from 13 to 16 feet, in breadth, 
it would have been better to have supported the 
vault by a pillar in the centre, or to have opened 
two galleries at once, than to have made an open 
trench. These trenches are only advantageous 
when the hills are of a small elevation and small 
breadth, and when they contain strata less subject 
to falling down. To pass a volume of water of a 
section in general of eight metres, or 6 square feet, 
and sometimes from 15 to 20 square metres, or 
from 161 to 215 square feet, it has been judged 
expedient to open a trench, of which the section 
for considerable distances is from J800 to 3000 
square metres, or from 19,365 to 32,275 square feet. 
In its present state the canal of derivation, 
(desague) of Huehuetoca, according to the mea 
surements of M. Velasquez, in his " Informe y 
exposition de fas operaciones hechas para exami- 
nar la possibilidad del desague general de la la- 
guna de Mexico y otros fines a el conduct entes, 
1774, (manuscript memoir, folio 5.)," contains, 

From the sluice of Vertideros to Mex. varas. Metres. 

the bridge of Huehuetoca - 4870 or 4087 
From the bridge of Huehuetoca 

to the sluice of Santa Maria 2660 2232 

From the Compuerta de Santa 

Maria to the sluice of Valderas 1400 1 175 
From the Compuerta de Valderas 

to La Boveda Real -.* - 3290 2761 
From La Boveda Real to the re 
mains of the old subterraneous 

gallery called Techo Basso 650 545 

From Techo Basso to the gallery 

of the viceroys 1270 1066 

Carryover - 14,140 l] 5 86(i 



MEXICO 



137 



[Mex.varas. Metres. 

Brought over - 14,140 11,866 
From the Canon de los Vircyes to 

La Bocca de San Gregorio 610 512 

From the Bocca de San Gregorio 

to the demolished sluice - 1400 1175 

From La Presa Demolida to the 

cascade bridge - 7950 6671 

From La Puente del Salto to the 

cascade itself (Salto del Rio de 

Tula) .... 430 361 



Length of the canal from 

Vertideros to the Salto 24,530 or 20,585 

equal to 67,535 feet. 

In this length of 41 common leagues, the chain 
of the hills of Nochistongo (lo the e, of the Cerro 
de Sincoque), constituting a fourth part of it, has 
been cut to an extraordinary depth. At the point 
where the ridge is highest near the old well of Don 
Juan Garcia, for more than a length of 800 
metres, or 2624 feet, the cut in the mountains is 
from 45 to 60 metres, or from 147 to 196 feet, in 
perpendicular depth. From the one side to the 
other, the breadth at top is from 85 to 1 10 metres, 
or from 278 to 360 feet. To have a clearer idea 
of the enormous breadth of this trench in (he Obra 
del Consulado, we have only to recollect that the 
breadth of the Seine at Paris is at Port Bonaparte 
102 metres, (334 English feet), at Pont-Royal 136 
metres, (446 feet), and at the Pont d Austerlitz, 
near the botanical garden, 175 metres, (574 feet). 
The depth of the above cut is from 30 to 50 metres, 
or from 98 to 13 1 feet, for a length of more than 3500 
metres, or ll,482i eet. The water-course is gene 
rally only from three to four metres, or from 9.84 
to 13.1 feet, in breadth ; hut in a great part of the 
desague the breadth of the cut is by no means in 
proportion to its depth, so (hat (he sides in place 
of having a slope of 40 or 50 are much too rapid, 
and are perpetually falling in. It is in (he Obra 
del Consulado where we .principally see the enor 
mous accumulations of movcable earth which na 
ture has deposited on the porphyries of the valley 
of Mexico. Humboldt reckoned, in descending 
the stair of (he viceroys, 25 strata of hardened clay, 
with as many alternate strata of marl, containing 
fibrous calcareous balls of a cellular surface. It 
was in digging the trench of the desague that he 
discovered some elephant bones, mentioned in his 
" Recueit des Observations de Zoologie et (tAnalo- 
mie comparee." 

On both sides of the cut we see considerable 
hills formed of the rubbish, which are gradually 
beginning to be covered with vegetation. The 

111. 



extraction of the rubbish having been an infinitely 
laborious and tedious operation, the method of 
Enrico Martinez was at last resorted to. They 
raised the level of the water by small sluices, so 
that the force of the current carried along the 
rubbish thrown into the water-course. During 
this operation, from 20 to 30 Indians have some 
times perished at a time. Cords were fastened 
round them, by which they were kept suspended 
in the current for the sake of collecting the rubbish 
into the middle of it ; and it frequently happened 
that the impetuosity of the stream dashed them 
against detached masses of rock, which crushed 
them to death. 

We have already observed that from the year 
1643, the branch of Martinez s canal, directed to 
wards the lake of Zumpango, had filled up, and 
that by that means (to use the expression of (he 
Mexican engineers of the present day) the desague 
had become simply negative ; that is to say, it pre 
vented the river of Guautitlan to discharge itself 
into the lake. At the period of the great rises 
the disadvantages resulting from this state ot things 
were sensibly felt in the city of Mexico. The Rio 
de Guautitlan, in overflowing, poured part of its 
water into the basin of Zurnpango, which, swelled 
by the additional confluents of San Mateo and 
Pachuca, formed a junction with the lake of San 
Christobal. It would have been very expensive 
to enlarge the bed of the Rio de Guautitlan, to cut 
its sinuosities, and rectify its course; and even 
this remedy would not have wholly removed the 
danger of inundation, The very wise resolution 
was therefore adopted, at the end of the last cen 
tury, under the direction of Don Cosine cle Mier 
y Trespalacios, superintendant-general of the de 
sague, of opening two canals to conduct the water 
from (he lakes of Zumpango and San Christobal 
to the cut in the mountain at IVochistongo. The 
first of these canals was begun in 1796, and the 
second in 1798. The one is 8900 metres, or 
29,228 feet, and the other 13,000 metres, or 
4^,650 feet, in length. The canal of San Chris 
tobal joins that of Zumpango to the s. e. of Flue- 
huetoca, at 5000 metres, or !6,404 feet, distance 
from its entry into the desague of Martinez. These 
two works cost more than 1,000.000 oflivres, or 
4!,670/. sterling. They are water-courses, i.n 
which the level of the water is from eight (o 12 
metres, or from 26 (o 39 feet, lower than the 
neighbouring ground ; and they have the same 
delects on a small scale with the great trench of 
Nochistongo. Their slopes are much too rapid ; 
in several places they are almost perpendicular. 
Hence the loose earth falls so frequently in, that it") 



MEXICO. 



f requires from 16,000 fo 20,000 francs, equal to 
from 666/. to 833/. sterling, annually to keep 
these two canals of M. Mier in a proper condition. 
When the viceroys go to inspect (hacer la visita) 
the desague (a two days journey, which formerly 
brought them in a present of 3000 double piastres, 
or 656/. sterling), they embarked near their palace 
from the s. bank of the lake of San Christobal, and 
went even farther than Huelmetoca by water, a 
distance of seven common leagues. The above 
Palacio de los Vireyes^ from which there is a 
magnificent view of the lake ofTezcuco, and the 
volcano of Popocatepec, covered with eternal 
snow, bears more resemblance to a great farm 
house than to a palace. 

It appears from a manuscript memoir of Don 
Ignacio Castcra, present inspector (maestro mayor) 
of hydraulical operations in the valley of Mexico, 
that the desague cost, including the repairs of the 
dikes (albaradoncs), between 1607 and 1789, the 
sum of 5,547,670 double piastres. If we add to 
this enormous sum from 6 to 700,000 piastres ex 
pended in the 15 following years, we shall find 
that the whole of these operations (the cut through 
the mountains of Nochistongo, the dikes, and the 
two canals from the upper lakes) have not cost 
less than 31,000,000 of livres, or 1,291,770k ster 
ling. The estimate of the ex pence of the canal 
Du Midi, of which the length is 238,648 metres, 
or 782,966 feet, (notwithstanding the construction 
of 62 locks, and the magnificent reservoir of St. 
Ferreol) was only 4,897,000 francs, or 204,057/. 
sterling; but it has cost from 1686 to J791 the 
sum of 22,999,000 of francs, or 95S,368/. ster 
ling, to keep this canal in order, (Andreossi, 
Histoire du Canal du Midi., p. 289.) 

Resuming what we have been stating relative to 
the hydraulical operations carried on in the plains 
of Mexico, we see that the safety of the capital 
actually depends, 1. On the stone dikes which 
prevent the water of the lake of Zumpango from 
flowing over into the lake of San Christobal, and 
San Christobal from flowing into the lake of Tez- 
cuco; 2. On the dikes and sluices of Tlahuac and 
Mexicaltzingo, which prevent the lakes of Chalco 
and Xochimilco from overflowing ; 3. On thede 
sague of Enrico Martinez, by which the Rio de 
Guautitlan makes its way through the mountains 
into the valley of Tula ; and, 4. On the two 
canals of M. Mier, by which the two lakes of 
Zumpango and San Christobal may be thrown 
dry at pleasure. 

However, all these multiplied means do not 
secure the capital against inundations proceeding 
from the n. and n. w. Notwithstanding all the 



expence which has been laid out, the city will 
continue exposed to very great risks till a canal 
shall be immediately opened from the lake of Tez- 
cuco. The waters of this lake may rise, without 
those of San Christobal bursting the dike which 
confines them. The great inundation of Mexico 
under the reign of Ahuitzotl was solely occasioned 
by frequent rains, and the overflowing of the most 
s. lakes, Chalco and Xochimilco. The water 
rose to five or six metres, or 16 and 19 feet, above 
the level of the streets. In 1763, and the begin 
ning of 1764, the capital was from a similar cause 
in the greatest danger. Inundated in every quar 
ter, it formed an island for several months, with 
out a single drop from the Rio de Guautitlan en 
tering the lake of Tezcuco. This overflow was 
merely occasioned by small confluents from the 
e. w. and s. Water was every where seen to 
spring up, undoubtedly from the hydrostatical 
pression which it experienced in filtration in the 
surrounding mountains. On the 6th of Septem 
ber 1772, there fell so sudden and abundant a 
shower in the valley of Mexico, that it had all the 
appearance of a water spout, (manga de agua.) 
Fortunately, however, this phenomenon took place 
only in the n. and n. w. part of the valley. The 
canal of Huehuetoca was then productive of the 
most beneficial effects, though a great portion of 
ground between San Christobal, Ecatepec, San 
Mateo, Santa Ines, and Guautitlan, were inun 
dated to such a degree that many edifices became 
entire ruins. If this deluge had burst above the 
basin of the lake of Tezcuco, the capital would 
have been exposed to the most imminent danger. 
These circumstances, and several others which we 
have already adverted to, sufficiently prove hovr 
indispensable a duty it becomes for the govern 
ment to take in hand the draining the lakes which 
are nearest to the city of Mexico. This necessity 
is daily increasing, because the bottoms of the ba 
sins of Tezcuco and Chalco are continually be 
coming more elevated, from the depositions which 
they receive. 

In fact, while Humboldt was at Huehuetoca in 
the month of January 1804, the viceroy Iturri- 
garay gave orders for the construction of the canal 
ofTezcuco, formerly projected by Martinez, and 
more recently surveyed by Velasquez. This canal, 
the estimate of the expence of which amounts to 
3,000,000 of livres tournois, or 125,010/. sterling, 
is to commence at the n. w. extremity of the lake 
ofTezcuco, in a point situated at a distance of 
4593 metres, or 15,067 feet, s. 36 e. from the first, 
sluice of the Calzadade San Christobal. It is to pass, 
first, through the great arid plain containing the] 



MEXICO. 



139 



[insulated mountains of Las Cruces de Ecatepec 
and Cliiconautla, and it will then take the direc 
tion of the farm of Santa liies towards the canal of 
Huelmetoca; the former of those summits, ac 
cording to the geodesical measurements of M. Ve 
lasquez, being 404, and the latter 378 Mexican 
varas (339 and 317 metres) above the mean level 
of the lake of Tezcuco. Its total length to the 
sluice of Vertideros will be 37,978 Mexican 
varas, (viz. 3!, 901 metres, or 104,660 feet) ; but 
what will render the execution of this plan the 
most expensive, is the necessity of deepening the 
course of the old desague all the way from Verti 
deros to beyond the Boveda Real ; the first of 
these two points being 9" .078 above, and the 
second 9 m .181, (viz. 357.108 inches, and 361.464 
inches), lower than the mean level of the lake of 
Tezcuco. To complete the description of this 
great hydraulical undertaking, we shall here insert 
the principal results of M. Velazquez s survey. 
These results, on correcting the error of the re 
fraction, and reducing the apparent to the true 
level, coincide well enough with those obtained by 
Enrico Martinez and Arias in the commencement 
of the 17th century ; but they prove the erroneous- 
ness of the surveys executed in 1764 by Don 
lldefonso Yniesta, according to which the drain 
ing of the lake of Tezcuco appeared a much more 
difficult problem to resolve than it is in realty. 
"We shall designate by + the points which are 
more elevated, and by the points which are less 
elevated than the mean level of the water of Tez 
cuco, in 1773 and 1774, or the signal placed 
near its bank, at the distance of 5475 Mexican 
varas, s. 36 e. from the first sluice of the Calzada 
de San Christobal. 

The Channel Of the Rio Varas. Palmes. Dcdos. Granos. 

deGuautitlan near the 

sluice of Vertideros -f 10 . 3 . 2.3 

The channel of the de 
sague under the port 
of Huchuetoca - + 8.0.2.1 

Id. near the sluice of 

Santa Maria ; - b -f 4.3.8.3 

Id. below the sluice of 

Valderas - - -f 2 . 1 . 11 . 2 

The channel of the de 
sague below the Bo 
veda Real Np " 10.3. 9.3 

Jd. below the Boveda de 

TechoBaxo - 15 . . 6 . 1 

Id. below the Bocca de 

SanGrcgorio - 23 . 1 . 11 . 2 

Id. above the Salto del 
Rio - - 90 , 1 9,0 



Varas. Palmos. Eeclos. Oranos. 



The channel of the de 
sague below the Salto 
del Rio - - 107 . 2 . 9.0 
It is to be observed, that the vara is divided into 
four palmos, 48 dedos, and 192 granos ; that a 
toise is equal to 2.32258 Mexican varas, and that 
a Mexican vara is .839169 metres, according to 
the experiments made on a vara preserved in the 
Casa del Cabildo of Mexico since the time of King 
Philip II. 

Thus then a toise being equivalent to 2.32258 
Mexican varas, a vara being equal to .839169 
of a metre, 2.32258 varas correspond to 1.949 
metres 6.394 English feet 1 toise. 

But, to return to the plan of the canal, the dis 
tance from the aforesaid points, Verfederos to be 
yond the Boveda Real, is almost 10,200 metres 
(33,464 feet English.) To avoid deepening the 
bed of the present desague for a still more consi 
derable length, it is proposed to give to the new 
canal a fall of only O m . 2 in 1000 metres. The 
plan of the engineer Martinez -was rejected in 1607, 
purely because it was supposed that a current 
ought to have a fall of half a metre in the hundred. 
Alonso de Arias then proved on the authority of 
Vitruvius (L. VIII. C. 7.), that to convey the 
water of the lake of Tezcuco into the Rio de Tula 
a prodigious depth would be requisite for the new 
canal, and that even at the foot of the cascade 
near the Hacienda del Salto, the level of its water 
would be 200 metres, or 656 feet, below the river. 
Martinez could not stand against the power of 
prejudices and the authority of the ancients! 

When we take into consideration the expence 
of the excavations required in the Rio del De 
sague, from the sluice of Vertideros or that of Val 
deras to the Boveda Real, we are tempted to be 
lieve that it would be, perhaps, easier to secure 
the capital from the dangers with which it is still 
threatened by the lake of Tezcuco, by recurring 
to the project attempted to be carried into execu 
tion by Simon Mcndez during the great inunda 
tion from 1629 to 1634. M. Velasquez examined 
this project in 1774. After survey ing the ground, 
that geometrician affirmed that 28 pits of ventila 
tion, and a subterraneous gallery of 13,000 metres, 
or 42,650 feet, in length, for bringing the water 
ofTezcnco across the mountain of Citfaltepec tp- 
wards the river of Tequixquiac, could be sooner 
finished, and at less expence, than the enlarging 
the bed of the desague, deepening it for a course 
of more than 9000 metres, or 29,527 feet, and 
cutting a canal from the lake of Tezcuco to the 
sluice of Vertideros near Huehuetoca. Humboldt 
was present at the consultations which took place] 
T 2 



140 



MEXICO. 



fin 1801, before deciding that the water of Tez- 
cuco should pass through the old cut of Nocbis- 
fongo. The advantages and disadvantages of 
Mendez s project were never discussed in these 
conferences. 

It is to be hoped that in digging 1 the new canal 
of Tczcuco more attention will be paid to the si 
tuation of the Indians than has hitherto been done, 
even so late as 1796 and 1798, when the courses 
of Zumpango and San Chrislobal were executed. 
The Indians entertain the most bitter hatred against 
the desague of Huehuetoca. A hydraulical opera 
tion is looked upon by them in the light of a 
public calamity, not, only because a great num 
ber of individuals have perished by unfortunate 
accidents in Martinez s operations, but especially 
because they were compelled to labour to the ne 
glect of their own domestic affairs, so that they fell 
into the greatest indigence while the desiccation 
was going on. Many thousands of Indian labour 
ers have been almost constantly occupied in the 
desague for two centuries ; and it may be consi 
dered as a principal cause of the poverty of the 
Indians in the valley of Mexico. The great hu 
midity to which they were exposed in the trench 
of Nochistongo gave rise to the most fatal maladies 
among them. Only a very few years ago the 
Indians were cruelly bound with ropes, and forced 
to work like galley slaves, even when sick, till they 
expired on the spot. From an abuse of law, and 
especially from an abuse of the principles intro 
duced since the organization of intendancies, the 
work at the desague of Huehuetoca is looked upon 
as an extraordinary corvee. It is a personal ser 
vice exigible from the Indian, a remain of the 
mita, which we should not expect in a country 
where the working of the mines is perfectly volun 
tary, and where the Indian enjoys more personal 
liberty than in the n. e. part of Europe. The In 
dian is paid at the desague at the rate of two reals 
of plata, or 25 sous per day (Is. 0{rf.) In 
Martinez s time, in the 17th century, the Indians 
were only paid at the rate of five reals or three 
francs per week (2.9. 6ef.), but they also re 
ceived a certain quantity of maize for their main 
tenance. 

Amongst other proofs of the light in which these 
hydraulical operations were considered, there are 
numerous testimonies contained in the Informe de 
Zepeda. In every passage of it we read, " that 
the desague has diminished the population and 
prosperity of the Indians, and that such or such a 
hydraulical project dare not be carried into execu 
tion, because the engineers have no longer so great 
a number of labourers at their disposal as in the 

2 



time of the viceroy Don Luis de Velaseo II." 
It is consoling, however, to observe, as we have 
elsewhere endeavoured to explain, that this pro 
gressive depopulation has only taken place in the 
central part of the old Anahuac, and ought there 
fore by no means to be considered general. 

In all the hydraulical operations of the valley of 
Mexico, water has been always regarded as an 
enemy, against which it was necessary to be de 
fended either by dikes or drains. We have already 
proved that this mode of proceeding, especially 
the European method of artificial desiccation, has 
destroyed the germ of fertility in a great part ot 
the plain of Tenochtitlan. Efflorescences of car 
bonate of soda (tequesquite) have increased in pro 
portion as the masses of running water have dimi 
nished. Fine savannas have gradually assumed 
the appearance of arid steppes. For great spaces 
the soil of the valley appears merely a crust of 
hardened clay (tepefate), destitute of vegetation, 
and cracked by contact with the air. It would 
have been easy, however, to profit by the natural 
advantages of the ground, in applying the same 
canals for the drawing of water from the lakes for 
watering of the arid plains, and for interior naviga 
tion. Large basins of water ranged as it were in 
stages above one another facilitate the execution 
of canals of irrigation. To the s. e. of Huehue 
toca are three sluices, called Los Vertideros, which 
are opened when the Rio de Guautitlan is wished 
to be discharged into the lake of Zumpango, and 
the Rio del Desague to be thrown dry for the sake 
of cleaning or deepening the course. The channel 
of the old mouth of the Rio de Guautitlan, that 
which existed in 1607, having become gradually 
obliterated, a new canal lias been cut from Ver 
tideros to the lake of Zumpango. In place of 
continually drawing the water from this lake, and 
from San Chrislobal, out of the valley towards 
the Atlantic ocean, in the interval of 18 or 20 
years, during which no extraordinary rise takes 
place, the water of the desague might have been 
distributed to the great advantage of agriculture in 
the lower parts of the valley. Reservoirs of water 
might have been constructed for seasons of drought. 
It was thought preferable, however, blindly to fol 
low the order issued from Madrid, which bears, 
" that not a drop of water ought to enter into the 
lake of Tezcuco from the lake of San Christobal, 
unless once a year, when the sluices (Las Compncr- 
tasde la Calzada) are opened for the sake offish- 
ing in the basin of San Christobal." This fishing 
is a grand rural festival for the inhabitants of the 
capital. The Indians construct huts on the banks 
of the lake of San Christobal, which is thrown] 



MEXICO. 



141 



[almost dry during the fishing. This bears some 
resemblance to the fishing which Herodotus re 
lates the Egyptians carried on twice a year in 
the lake Moeris, on opening the sluices of irri 
gation. 

The trade of the Indians of Tezcuco languishes 
for whole months from the want of water in the 
salt lake which separates them from the capital ; 
and districts of ground lie below the mean level of 
the water of Guautitlan and of the n. lakes; and 
yet no idea has ever been entertained for ages of 
supplying the wants of agriculture and interior 
navigation. From a remote period there was a 
small canal (sanja) from the lake of Tezcuco to 
the lake of San Christobal. A lock of four 
metres, or 13 feet, of fall would have admitted 
canoes from the capital to the latter of these lakes ; 
and the canals of M. Mier would have even con 
ducted them to the village of Huehuetoca. In this 
manner a communication would have been esta 
blished from the s. bank of the lake of Chalco to 
the n. bounds of the ralley, for an extent of more 
than 80,000 metres, or 262,468 feet. Men of the 
best information, animated with the noblest pa 
triotic zeal, have had the courage to propose these 
measures, (M. Velasquez, for example, at the end 
of his Informe sobre el Desague, MS.) ; but the 
government, by rejecting the best conceived pro 
jects for such a length of time, seems to be resolved 
to consider the water of the Mexican lakes merely 
as a destructive element, from which the environs 
of the capital must be freed, and to which no other 
course ought to be permitted than that towards the 
Atlantic ocean. ^-, 

Now that the canal of Tezcuco, by order of the 
viceroy Don Josef de Iturrigary, is to be opened, 
there willremain no obstacle to a free navigation 
through the large and beautiful valley of Tenoch- 
titlan. Corn and the other productions of the 
districts of Tula and Guautitlan will come by water 
to the capital. The carriage of a mule load, 
estimated at 300 pounds weight, costs from Hue 
huetoca to Mexico five reals, or 35. 4e?. It is com 
puted that when the navigation will be set on foot, 
the freight of an Indian canoe of 15,000 pounds 
burden will not be more than four or five piastres, 
or M. Is. Wd. sterling; so that the carriage of 
300 pounds (which make a cargo) will only cost 
nine sous, or 4|&amp;lt;/. Mexico, for example, will get 
lime at six or seven piastres, or I/. 10s. Id. the 
cartload (carretada), while the present price is 
from 10 to 12 piastres, or from 2/. 3s. 9d. to 2/. 
12s. Gd. 

Hut the most beneficial effect of a navigable 



canal from Tin co to Hnelmetoca will be expe 
rienced in the commerce of the interior of Nueva 
E&amp;gt;pana, known by the name of Comercio de 
Tierra Adentro, which goes in a straight line from 
the capilal to Durango, Chihuhua, and Sante Fe, 
in New Mexico. Huehuetoca may hereafter be 
come the emporium of this important trade, in 
which from 50 to 60,000 beasts of burdcMi (re.qv.as) 
are constantly employed. The muleteers (arric- 
ros) of New Biscay and Santa Fe fear nothing so 
much in the whole road of 500 leagues as the 
journey from Huehuetoca to Mexico. The roads 
in the n. w. part of the valley, where the basaltic 
amygdaloid is covered with a large stratum of clay, 
are almost impassable in the rainy season. Many 
mules perish in them. Those which stand out 
cannot recover from their fatigues in the environs 
of the capital, where there is no good pasturage 
and no large commons (exidos), which Huehue 
toca would easily supply. It is only by remain 
ing some length of time in countries where all 
commerce is carried on by caravans, either of ca 
mels or mules, that we can correctly appreciate the 
influence of the objects under discussion on the 
prosperisy and comfort of the inhabitants. 

The lakes situated in the s. part of the valley of 
Tenochtitlan throw off from their surface mias- 
rnata of sulphuretted hydrogen, which become 
sensible in the streets of Mexico every time the s. 
wind blows. This wind is therefore considered 
in the country as extremely unhealthy. The Aztecs 
in their hieroglyphical writing represented it by a 
death s head. The lake of Xochimilco is partly 
filled with plants of the family of the junci and cy pc- 
roides, which vegetate atasmall depth under a bed 
of stagnating water. It has been recently proposed 
to the government to cut a navigable canal in a 
straight line from the small town of Chalco to 
Mexico, a canal which would be shorter by a 
third than the present one ; and it has at the same 
time been projected to drain the basins of the lakes 
of Xochimilco and Chalco, and sell the ground, 
which from having been for centuries washed with 
fresh water is uncommonly fertile. The centre of 
the lake of Chalco being somewhat deeper than the 
lake of Tezcuco, its water will never be completely 
drawn off. Agriculture and the salubrity of the 
air will be equally improved by the execution of 
M. Castera s. project ; for the s. extremity of the 
valley possesses in general the soil best adapted for 
cultivation. The carbonate and muriate of soda 
are less abundant, from the continual filiations oc 
casioned by the numerous rills which descend from 
the Cerro d Axusco, the Ciuarda, and the volca-] 



142 



MEXICO. 



[noes. It must not, however, be forgotten that the 
draining of the two lakes will have a tendency to 
increase still farther the dryness of the atmosphere 
in a valley where the hygrometer of Deluc fre 
quently descends to 15. This evil is inevitable, 
if no attempt is made to connect these hydraulical 
operations with some general system ; the multi 
plying at the same time canals of irrigation, form 
ing reservoirs of water for times of draught, and 
constructing sluices for the sake of counteracting 
the different pressures of the inequality of levels, 
and for receiving and withholding the increases of 
the rivers. These reservoirs of water distributed 
at suitable elevations might be employed at the 
same time in cleaning and working periodically 
the streets of the capital. 

In the epocha of a nascent civilization, gigantic 
projects are much more seductive than more sim 
ple ideas of easier execution. Thus, in place of 
establishing a system of small canals for the in 
terior navigation of the valley, the minds of the 
inhabitants have been bewildered since the time of 
the viceroy Count llevillagigcdo with vague spe 
culations on the possibility of a communication by 
"water between the capital and the port of Tam- 
pico. Seeing the water of the lakes descend by 
the mountains of Nochistongo into the Rio de 
Tula (called also Rio de Moctezuma), and by the 
Rio de Pauuco into the gulf of Mexico, they en 
tertain the hope of opening the same route to the 
commerce of Vera Cruz. Goods to the value of 
more than 100,000,000 of livres, or 4,I67,000/. 
sterling, are annually transported on mules from 
the Atlantic coast over the interior table-land, 
while the flour, hides, and metals descend from 
the central table-land to Vera Cruz. The capital 
is the emporium of this immense commerce. The 
road, which, if no canal is attempted, is to be 
carried from the coast to Perote, will cost several 
millious of piastres. Hitherto the air of the port 
of Tampico has appeared not so prejudicial to the 
health of Europeans and the inhabitants of the cold 
regions of Mexico as the climate of Ver&amp;lt;i Cruz. 
Although the bar of Tampico prevents the entry 
of vessels into the port d rawing more than from 
45 to 60 decimetres, or from 14| feet to 19 feet 8 
inches, water, it would still be preferable to the 
dangerous anchorage among the shallows of Vera 
Cruz. From tfiesc circumstances a navigation from 
the capital to Tampico would be desirable, what 
ever ex pence might be requisite for the execution 
of so bold an undertaking. 

But it is not the cxpence which is to be feared 
in a country where a private individual, the Count 



de la Valenciana, dug in a single mine, near Qua- 
naxuato, three pits at an expence of 8,500,000 of 
francs, or 354, 195/. sterling. Nor can \ve deny 
the possibility of carrying a canal into execution 
from the valley of Tenochtitlan to Tampico. In 
the present state of hydraulical architecture, boats 
may be made to pass over elevated chains of moun 
tains, wherever nature offers points of separation 
which communicate with two principal recipients. 
Many of these points have been indicated by 
General Andreossi in the Vosges and other parts 
of France (Andreossi sur Ic Canal du Midi). M. 
de Piony made a calculation of the time that a 
boat would take to pass the Alps, if by means of 
the lakes situated near the hospital of mount Cenis 
a communication were established by water be 
tween Lans-le-bourg and the valley of Suze. This 
illustrious engineer proved by his calculation how 
much, in that particular case, land carriage was 
to be preferred to the tediousness of locks. The 
inclined planes, invented by Reynolds, and car 
ried to perfection by Fulton, and the locks of MM. 
Huddleston and Betancourt, two conceptions 
equally applicable to the system of small canals, 
have greatly multiplied the means of navigation in 
mountainous countries. But however great the 
economy of water and time at which we can arrive, 
there is a certain maximum of height, in the pre 
dominant point, beyond which water is no longer 
preferable to land carriage. The water of the 
lake of Tezcuco, e. from the capital of Mexico, 
is more than 2276 metres, or 7465 feet, elevated 
above the level of the sea, near the port of Tam 
pico! Two hundred locks would be requisite to 
carry boats to so enormous a height. If on the 
Mexican canal the levels were to be distributed, 
as in the canal du Midi, the highest point of which 
(at Naurouse) has only a perpendicular elevation 
of 189 metres, or 620 feet, the number of locks 
would amount to 330 or 340. We know nothing 
of the bed of the Rio de Moctezuma beyond the 
valley of Tula (the ancient Tollan) ; and we are 
ignorant of its partial fall from the vicinity of 
Zimapan and the Doctor. It is observed, how 
ever, that in the great rivers of S. America ca 
noes ascend without locks for distances of 180 
leagues, against the current, either by towing or 
rowing, to elevations of 300 metres, or 984 feet ; 
but notwithstanding this analogy, and that of the 
great works executed in Europe, we can hardly 
. persuade ourselves that a navigable canal from the 
plain of Auahuac to the Atlantic coast is a hydrau 
lical work, the execution of which is anywise ad 
visable.] 



MEXICO. 



143 



"[The following are the remarkable cities and 
towns of the intcndancy of Mexico. 

Mexico, the capital of the kingdom of New 
Spain, height 2277 metres, or 7470 feet, population 
137,000; i , 

Tezcuco, Zacatula, 

Tacubaja, Lerma, 

Cuyoacan, Tolaca, 

Tacuba, Pachuca, 

Cuernavaca, Cadereita, 

Chilpansingo, San Juan del Rio, 

Tasco, Queretaro. 

Acapulco, 

The most important mines of this intendancy, 
considering them only in the relation of their pre 
sent wealth , are : 

La Veta Biscaina de Real del Monte, near 
Pachuca; Zimapan, El Doctor, and Tehulilote- 
pec, near Tasco. 

CHAP. II. 

Recent mediation between Spain and her colonies, 

being concise particulars of the secret sittings 

of the Cortes on that subject. 

IT is already known that the commissioners ap 
pointed to go out to Spanish America to mediate 
between them and the mother country, have re 
turned to England without proceeding to fulfil the 
objects of their intended mission. The reason was 
the obstinate refusal of the Cortes to give them the 
powers which were necessary to success; for they 
would not consent to include Mexico in the com 
mission, or permit them to go thither at all. It 
had been considered to be in vain to proceed to 
the execution of the trust under these circum 
stances ; and the measure was abandoned. Such 
is still the conduct of the Cortes ; and we lament 
to say they came to this decision after the arrival 
of the Duke de 1 Infantado at Cadiz. But that a 
more correct opinion may be formed of this me 
diation ; and that a more specific idea may be had 
of the grounds on which England has entered on 
this business, we have collected the following con 
cise particulars of the secret sittings in the Cortes, 
in which the mediation was discussed. 

On the proposals made by the British govern 
ment for the ground-work of their interference, be 
ing laid before the Cortes, a committee was by 
them chosen to take cognizance of the affair, and 
report thereon. The persons named were Messrs. 
Morales Gallego, Gutierrez de la Huerta, Navarro, 
Cea, Alcour, Mexia, and Jauregui. The four 
first Europeans, and the other three Americans. 
The votes of the committee were equal ; that is, 
three were of opinion that the mediation ought to 



be accepted, and three that it ought (o be rejected, 
the remaining vote, which was that of Cea, being 
withheld, and not given on either side. 

On the I Oth of July 1812, secret sittings were 
held in the Cortes on this question, when the report 
of the committee was read, after which Senor 
Villa Gomez proposed the reading of the opinion 
of the regency. Senor Morales Galiego answered, 
that the opinion of the regency was expressed in 
the answers of the ministers of foreign relations to 
the notes of the English ambassador, and that he 
proposed the reading of the whole correspondence 
that had passed between both parties since the af 
fair was first agitated. 

Senor Asnarez was of opinion, that the council 
of state ought to be consulted on this affair, to 
which Senor Arguelles objected, by saying, that 
the council of state being recently installed, was 
not in any manner informed thereon, as it had 
been in agitation for more than a year, adding, 
that notwithstanding the regency, in conformity 
to the constitution, might listen to the opinion of 
the council of state, the Cortes were not under any 
such obligation, much less, when the members 
thereof (Cortes) were better informed on the affair, 
from having had it before them since its commence 
ment. The president then observed, that as it was 
then too late to read the whole of the aforesaid cor 
respondence, it might be done next day in the sit 
tings which were to commence at 12 o clock pre 
cisely. 

Sitting of the llth July 1812. 

In the secret sittings of this day, which lasted 
from 12 till two and a quarter p. m. the greatest 
part of the said notes from the English ambas 
sador, and the answers of the minister of foreign 
relations, were read. 

Sitting of the \2th. 

The sitting of this day commenced at 1 1 o clock, 
and the reading of the remaining part of the said 
correspondence was concluded ; which done, a 
profound silence ensued for some time in the 
Cortes, which was broken by Senor Arguelles 
(European), who observed, that in an affair of such 
importance to the nation, he had resolved to give 
his opinion in writing, when he read a paper con 
taining the same, the purport of which was, to 
shew the state of the revolution in America, the 
conduct which had been observed by the Spanish 
government, in employing pacific measures and 
conciliatory means to regain the ill-affected pro 
vinces ; the conduct observed by the English go 
vernment in receiving the rebels, and in holding 
correspondence with them ; and lastly, he argued 
thut the nature of the revolution in New Spain was] 



144 



MEXICO. 



[entirely different from (hose of the other points of 
America ; after which statements, he concluded, 
that English mediation ought not to be extended 
to the said kingdom of Mexico. 

Senor Mexia (American) retorted by observing, 
that the causes of the revolutions in America, in their 
beginning, had been a wish for the removal of the 
authorities which governed therein despotically, and 
were inclined to deliver them up to the French ; 
tor which reason the inhabitants considered it ne 
cessary to establish local governments under the 
dependence of Ferdinand VII. which just and ne 
cessary measure of precaution on the part of the 
Americans alarmed the Spanish government, who, 
considering it as an act of rebellion, in concert 
with the mercantile junta of Cadiz, declared war 
against Caracas; which violence, together with 
other acts of a similar nature, had progressively 
continued to exasperate the minds of the Ameri 
cans, driving at length some sections to the ex 
treme of declaring their independence ; and that 
the Spanish government, as far as it had been able, 
Lad used nothing but force against America, even 
resorting to the unpolitical measure of availing 
themselves of the Portuguese against Buenos 
Ayres ; that in New Spain the acts of violence 
used by the military chiefs against the revolu 
tionary parties were notorious ; that their com 
plaints were yet unheard ; and that they had been 
assassinated in the very act of parleying under a 
flag of truce. In short, he supported with most 
solid reasons the opinion of the Americans of the 
committee, in which state of the argument the pre 
sident closed the sitting. 

Sitting of the 13(h. 

At 12 this day the secret sitting commenced, 
when Senor Villa Gomez (European) rose and ob 
served, that New Spain was not a dissentient pro 
vince, even in the opinion of the English ; because 
Captain Flenuning had exhorted some of the pro 
vinces of S. America to follow the example of 
Mexico in sending their deputies to the Cortes.. 
Senor Vegas (European) read a sound discourse, 
in which he retorts against the report of the Euro 
pean members of the committee, as well as the al 
legations of Senor Arguelles, concluding by de 
manding that the opinion of the three American 
members should be followed. (Reference is here 
made to a certain singular correspondence which 
Captain Flemming addressed to the government of 
Chile, in which, in the name of his government, 
he opposes the establishment of the new govern 
ments in those regions ; which officious interference 
has been the cause of so much animosity to the 
English. The date of this memorable correspond 



ence is 27th July, 2d August, and 3d October, 
1811.) 

Senor Gutiernez de la Huerta (European) en 
deavoured to sustain the opinion he had given as a 
member of the committee, in a heated and decla 
matory style. Amongst other things he said, that 
in an English club it had been asserted, that the 
felicity of the English nation depended on the in 
dependence of Spanish America. He treated the 
views of the English in the mediation in a most 
mysterious manner, giving to understand that this 
nation was interested in the disturbances of Ame 
rica. Senor Ribera (European) answered him 
with great warmth, and clearly demonstrated 
the futility of his arguments. The sitting then 
ended. 

Sitting of the l&amp;th. 

This secret sitting commenced by the reading of 
an address of Vigodet, governor of Monte Video, 
in which he observed, that notwithstanding his re 
peated remonstrances, the Spanish government did 
not aid him with the necessary succours, and that 
if 4000 men at least were not sent out to him, he 
could not answer for the holding out of the for 
tress, which it would be necessary either to deliver 
up to the Portuguese, or to the insurgents. In 
consequence of which, Senor Mexia (American) 
observed, that the passage just read proved the 
certainty of what he had already stated in the 
Cortes ; that is, that a great number of European 
troops were necessary to pacify the different sec 
tions of America ; that it was not aij ephemeral 
or partial movement, but a general and well-orga 
nized rising on the part of the natives ; and that as 
it was impossible for the peninsula to send s^ich 
forces in the present situation of things, there re 
sulted the absolute necessity of acceding to the 
proposed mediation on the part of the British. 

Senor Ramos Arispe (American) answered and 
denied that part of Senor Arguelles speech, in 
which he asserted, that since the mediation was 
first agitated in the Cortes, the regency had ab 
stained from taking active and hostile measures to 
subject the provinces of America ; adding, that 
the Cortes had not hindered the regency from em 
ploying the means in its power to preserve the 
union of the American provinces; that this au 
thority had never been considered as belonging to 
the Cortes, but to the executive power ; and 
finally, that the Cortes, by virtue of a proposition 
made by Senor Del Monte, and approved, had 
urged the regency to send troops to quell the re 
volutions. The said Senor Ramos Arispe then 
proceeded to shew the necessity of English media 
tion in the kingdom of Mexico, founding his argu-} 



MEXICO. 



145 



[ment on the fact of the constituted authorities in 
that country having openly refused to treat with 
the insurgents, violating in this manner every prin 
ciple of reason, equity, and prudence; that up 
o the present time, neither the Cortes, the re 
gency, nor any one else, had sufficient knowledge 
of the causes and motives of the revolutions of 
America ; and that it was not contrary to the de 
corum of the Spanish nation to treat with the in 
surgents, in order to accord with them, and settle 
matters, in like manner as Charles III. had capi 
tulated with the insurgents of Madrid, and as the 
Cortes themselves had treated with the people of 
Cadiz on the 25th October 1811, when the latter, 
in opposition to the sovereignly of the nation and 
the inviolability of a deputy of the Cortes, de 
manded the head of Senor Yaliente, contrary to 
every sentiment of justice. 

Senor Golfin (European) remarked, that there 
was a deviation from the subject in question, for 
the point in agitation was, whether the Cortes 
ought, or ought not, to take cognizance of the 
matter ? El Senor Conde de Torreno (European) 
endeavoured to support that part of the discourse 
of Senor Arguelles which had been answered by 
Senor Ramos de Arispe, by saying, that the views 
of the English in pretending the mediation for 
Mexico were too well known ; that the notes of the 
English ambassador manifested that in fact there 
was a wish to acknowledge the independence of 
the American provinces, and make of them states 
federated with the peninsula, which was not only 
contrary to the constitution, but also to the treaty 
made with England, who had contracted to sup 
port the integrity of the Spanish monarchy. The 
sitting then ended. 

Sitting of the lath. 

In the secret sitting of this day, Senor Alcocer 
(American) rose and said, that the mediation affair 
exclusively belonged to the Cortes, in conformity 
to several articles of the constitution, which he 
quoted ; that of consequence it was there that it 
ought to be discussed, whether or not the same 
was to be extended to Mexico? He proved, by 
the most solid arguments, that it was not only ad 
visable, but even absolutely necessary, to adopt 
the proposed plan of mediation ; that without it 
there remained not even the most distant hope of 
tranquillizing those provinces; and that besides 
the Spanish government was exposed to incur the 
displeasure of the British, which might be at 
tended with the most fatal consequences ; that 
every possible measure ought to be adopted to 
spare the eflusion of blood ; that the means of re 
conciliation ought to be preferred to force and ri- 
VOL. in. 



gour, even when the latter measures had the ap 
pearance of better answering the end proposed ; 
that, in short, Spain was not able to oppose to the 
insurgents a force capable of reducing them, be 
cause the insurrection every day became greater 
and more general, as well in numbers as from the 
increasing discipline of the troops which sustain 
the cause; ending his discourse by addressing him 
self to the feelings of the Cortes, in favour of the 
American provinces. 

Senor Garcia Herreros (European) observed, 
that he was surprised to hear the American depu 
ties speak so strongly in favour of the bandittis of 
New Spain, and that they should forget those who 
remained there faithful to the Spanish govern 
ment ; that the blood of the Europeans and other 
faithful subjects spilt by the insurgents, ought to 
be more interesting to the Cortes than that of the 
latter. He asserted, at the same time, that the in 
surrection had considerably increased in conse 
quence of the means of rigour not having been 
sufficiently resorted to ; but that with regard to 
the proposed mediation, the views of the English 
were sinister, as they had been proved in the last 
sitting by El Senor Torreno ; that every thing 
possibly might be settled by means of a commer 
cial treaty with the English, the only object they 
had in view; that in the last note of the English 
ambassador he observed, that the latter ungene 
rously reproached Spain with the succours which 
the British had expended, rather for their own in 
terest, in order to sustain the war against the com 
mon enemy of Europe ; and that Spain would 
still, at all times, be grateful for these services, 
and would recompence them with liberality, even 
more than the ambition of the English could ex 
pect. The sitting then closed. 

Sitting of the 16th. 

In the secret sitting of this day, El Senor Mo 
rales (European) observed, that the question of 
mediation belonged exclusively to the regency, 
and not to the Cortes. Senor Perez (American) 
read a long speech, contradicting what had been 
alleged by the American deputies. He confessed 
that the insurgents in New Spain had a form of 
government, or junta; but in order to turn the 
same into ridicule, he read a decree which, he 
said, was issued by the same junta, giving power 
to a curate to dispense in a case of a marriage. 
He added, that the insurgents had been heard, 
which he proved by a private letter from Mexico, 
mentioning, that the bishop of La Puebla had sent 
two curates to treat with Rayon, and that they 
had returned without having been able to do any 
thing; tlrat it was false that pacific measures had] 
u 



MEXICO. 



[not been adopted towards the insurgents ; for the 
said bishop had published a pastoral letter, in 
which he offered pardon to all those who should 
ri imi) to the obedience of the mother country. 
He ended by ol&amp;gt;serving, that he was of opinion 
that the mediation of the English ought not to be 
accepted ; that what the Cortes had to do was to 
strengthen the regency by placing at its head a 
royal personage, and that, in the mean time, all 
possible troops ought to be sent out in order to 
act offensively and defensively against the insur 
gents. 

Senor Jauregui (American) read a discourse, in 
which he asserted, that since he had heard the opi 
nion of the minister of foreign relations, in a meet 
ing of the committee to Avhich he was called, no 
doubt had been left on his mind of the necessity of 
the mediation in the kingdom of Mexico, not only 
because the government was unacquainted with the 
forces the insurgents had there collected, and the 
progress they were likely to make hereafter, but 
because it was of importance to the whole nation 
to have their allies impressed with favourable sen 
timents, and not to give them any cause of com 
plaint, as this might be injurious to the general 
cause. 

Senor Lespergues (American) read a discourse 
proving the necessity of the mediation. 

Finally, Senor Felice (American) also read an 
eloquent discourse in favour of the mediation. 

The question being then declared to be suffi 
ciently discussed, a small altercation took place re 
specting which of the two reports ought to be pro 
posed for voting, when it was resolved, that the 
vote was first to be taken on the report of the three 
European members of the committee, which ap 
proved the refusal of the regency to adopt the 
mediation. 

The question being then put to the vote, it re 
sulted that this proposal was approved by 101 
votes against 46. Of the first, two only were 
Americans, viz. Senor Perez and Senor Maniau, 
both from New Spain ; the rest were all Euro 
peans ; of the minority, six were Europeans, and 
the remaining 40 all Americans. Thus terminated 
the famous mediation affair, which would appear 
to seal the independence of Spanish America. 

Amongst all the disturbances which have shaken 
the power of Spain in her Transatlantic possessions, 
that of Mexico is the most interesting, as well 
from its importance in being the head seat of the 
deputed government, as from the deeply stained 
traces of bloodshed which have, even at this 
early period, marked its career. It were impossi 
ble to give au adequate idea of the causes which 

2 



have led to these revolutions, without an impar 
tial retrospect of events relating alike to S. Ame 
rica and to the mother country. Similar causes 
of discontent appear to have operated in Mexico, 
Caracas, and Buenos Ayres, in short in the whole 
S. American possessions ; but the effects have ne 
cessarily varied according to circumstances, which 
will, in their proper places, be treated of with a 
minuter attention. The former part, therefore, of 
the facts we are about to communicate, may be 
considered as attaching, in a great measure, to the 
whole of the Spanish colonies, whilst the latter 
contain specific accounts of the revolution of 
Mexico alone. 

CHAP. 111. 

Account of the present revolution. 

THE population of the Spanish colonies may be 
considered as divided into five classes ; 1st, Spa 
niards born in Old Spain ; 2dly, The descendants 
of Europeans, without any mixture of African or 
Indian blood, called Creoles ; Sdly, The different 
races of Mulattoes and Mestizoes, or the issue of 
the crossings of the European, Indian, and African 
blood ; 4thly, The Indians or Aborigines ; 5thly, 
The imported African slaves. The first two classes, 
from their political importance, chiefly deserve 
our attention. 

What the old Spaniards are, when transplanted 
to their American colonies, or what peculiar turn 
their national character takes in that particular 
situation, would not be a difficult point for conjec 
ture, even if we were deprived of facts and obser- 
servations. Prejudices are strong in proportion to 
their range, and evidently derive activity from the 
numbers which adopt them. Family prejudices 
are more tenacious than those of individuals, and 
national prejudices exceed both, in violence and 
duration. Those, especially, which are grounded 
on pretensions to superiority over a particular set 
or nation, are so early imbibed by all classes of the 
state, so indissolubly blended with every individual 
feeling, that their conjoint or national effects are 
astonishing, even when culture lias scarcely left any 
visible traces of them in the common intercourse 
of life. 

We may conceive what the national prejudices 
of the Spaniards, with respect to their colonies, 
now are, from the manner in which their ancestors 
took possession of them, and the authority which 
the descendants of those conquerors have enjoyed 
there during four centuries. The Spanish adven 
turers who flocked to America, immediately after 
the discovory of those countries, considered them 
in the light of a wilderness occupied merely by four] 



M E X I C O. 



147 



(and two footed game, of which they might dis 
pose at their pleasure. The avowed and infinite 
cruelties which they committed without the least 
feeling of remorse, would demonstrate, if other 
proofs were wanting, the general opinion which 
prevailed for some time among them, of the irra 
tionality of the Indians. 

It will be easily conceived that the overbearing 
pride of the first conquerors, swelled with the 
destruction or submission of the Indians, was trans 
mitted in full force to the adventurers whom the 
thirst of gold, and the desire of living freely at an 
immense distance from the seat of government, 
allured to those fertile regions. Those whose 
haughty and turbulent character was scarcely to 
be curbed by the authority of a powerful sovereign, 
must have exerted a dreadful sway over the con 
quered Indians. Every Spaniard thought himself 
a sovereign from the moment that he set his foot 
on the shores of America ; and the kings of Spain 
would have soon lost their newly acquired domi 
nions, but for the uncontroulable pride of the ad ven 
turers, which operated as a check on their mutual 
ambition. 

The first generation of Creoles, though born 
upon the soil of America, naturally considered 
themselves as true Spaniards, since they could 
boast no other title to the superiority which they 
claimed over the natives ; and it is probable that 
many years elapsed before any degree of national 
interest was felt by those new natives of the 
American continent. But when they began to 
multiply, and the ties of parentage between them 
and the European Spaniards were successively 
weakened ; when, in the course of centuries, the 
natural connections which arise from a native soil, 
made the Creoles consider themselves as a people, 
seeds of jealousy against th,e mother country sprung 
up, the growtli of which nothing could check but 
a system of equity and moderation, seldom, if 
ever, observed by any government with respect to 
colonies or conquered countries : by none less than 
the despotic and tyrannical court of Madrid. 

The government of the Spanish colonies was 
entirely confided to the hands of viceroys and 
.captains-general, who had under them several 
military governors and intendants ; the admins- 
iiation of justice being committed to the audiencias 
or tribunals, which resided in the capitals, and 
were presided over by the respective viceroys and 
captains-general. The people, though nominally 
represented by the cabildos, or town corporations, 
had, in fact, no check upon the authority of their 
governors. The members of the audiencias were 
old Spaniards, and partook of the haughty spirit 



which considered the Creoles as inferior to their 
own countrymen. With respect to the town 
corporations, nothing could be more insignificant. 
The seats were, tor the most part, filled Tip by the 
court of Spain ; several \\ere the property of 
particular families, and all of them were considered 
as empty honours, with which the timid ambition 
of some wealthy Creoles might be amused. 

The viceroy was, in fact, as absolute as the 
monarch whom he represented ; and, although by 
law responsible for his conduct to the council of 
Indies resident at Madrid, on the expiration of 
his commission, the same laws declared that the 
viceroy was to be obeyed as the king in person. 
It would be needless to expatiate upon the futility 
of such responsibily. The hope of redress is but 
a feeble consolation for actual oppression, even 
when the redresser is at hand. Let those, then, who 
are not blind to every abuse of power, and know 
how easily it is made the instrument of oppression 
when not checked by some effective restraint, 
consider what sort of government the Spanish 
colonists must have enjoyed, under nine European 
Spaniards, who had nothing to dread but an 
examination of their conduct at 2000 leagues dis 
tance from the theatre of their injustice. 

The consequences of this system were sufficiently 
apparent. Prosperity and its foundation, security, 
were only to be found in interest and favour. The 
crowds of flatterers who thronged the palace of the 
Spanish monarch fell infinitely short of those which 
surrounded the viceroy of Mexico. His secretary 
was generally the favourite, the mediator through 
whom petitions reached the idol ; and the grants 
descended to those who could enforce them with 
the most suitable offerings. Dreadful as the cor 
ruption of the late court of Madrid was, it must 
have appeared pure and exemplary when compar 
ed with the venality of the viceroyal courts of 
Spanish America. That honourable exceptions 
are to be found among the Spanish viceroys, we 
are far from bringing into question ; but how 
cruelly must that people be oppressed, whose 
moments of happiness are to be counted by excep 
tions ! 

Oppression can never bear equally upon all 
classes, and especially when the community is 
divided into casts, as in Spanish America. With 
out speaking of those which are constitutionally 
degraded, as the Indians and Mestizoes, we shall 
merely point out the effect which the unlimited 
powers of the Spanish governors naturally pro 
duced on that numerous and powerful class, the 
Spanish Creoles. We shall not enter into a sepa 
rate discussion about the state of opinion among 1 
u 2 



148 



MEXICO. 



[the Indians, for this poor degraded race have none 
at all. But we do not pretend to say that this stale 
of mental degradation renders them insignificant 
in the present contest. On the contrary, we reckon 
them a most powerful tool. Their number, in 
Spanish America, is about 7,000,000, which forms 
more than one half the population of the country. 
Enjoying very little or no property, they are ready 
to follow any leaders who will conduct them to war 
against the Spaniards. 

Those who are thoroughly acquainted with the 
character and circumstances of the two rival parties, 
the old Spaniards and Creoles, in Spanish America, 
will rather feel inclined to wonder at the extraor 
dinary forbearance of the latter, than at the war 
which they are now waging against the former. 
Let it be considered that the number of Spaniards 
in the colonies, bears no proportion to the Creole 
population ; that these Creoles, being the descen 
dants of Spanish merchants, enjoy considerable 
wealth, and an education far superior to that of 
which their fathers could boast ; while, on the 
other hand, very few of their rivals have the least 
title, from birth, education, or any other circum 
stance, to that superiority which they claim. 
Exclusively of those who are employed in the 
higher situations of government, the Spaniards 
who resort to the colonies to acquire a fortune, 
are, with few exceptions, a low, plodding set of 
people, who would never have risen from the hum 
blest situations had they remained in the peninsula, 
and who generally commence their operations in 
America in the same way. Biscay, Asturias, 
Galicia, and Catalonia, have constantly sent out 
swarms of adventurers, among whom, those who 
expected to begin their career behind a counter 
in one of the shops of Vcra Cruz or Mexico, 
thought too highly of themselves to associate with 
the rest of their companions. But the means of 
making a fortune are so easy in Spanish America, 
for those who object to no sort of occupation, that 
there is hardly one of these adventurers who, in 
the course of a few years, is not enabled to vie in 
riches with the old families of the country. At 
first they limit their pride to that superiority which 
Spaniards of all ranks claim in the colonies, and 
to the privilege of hidafguia or nobility, which is 
to be found even among Spanish beggars : but no 
sooner have they acquired property, than a part of 
it is destined to purchase honours at the court of 
Madrid. The wealthy drudge enjoys them behind 
his counter ; and nothing is more common than 
to see people of this description, in their tawdry 
uniforms of captains or colonels, with a badge of 
one of the orders of Spain on their breasts, sitting 



in their shops, and occasionally helping their 
clerks to dispatch the customers who come for a 
yard of cloth or calico. 

While the proud pretensions of this gross un 
educated party, supported by the Spaniards in 
power, naturally excite dissatisfaction in the Creole 
gentry, the oppressive measures which they pro 
mote against the interest of the land, cannot fail to 
produce hatred, and an eager thirst for revenge. 
The Spanish merchants of America consider them 
selves exclusively entitled to the profits of trade, 
trade, not grounded upon the mutual advantages 
of buyer and seller, but rather an oppressive mono 
poly, by which they oblige a whole population to 
take whatever they import from the mother country, 
extorting the most extravagant prices, by all the 
means which a market that excludes competition 
can afford. 

The Spanish merchants were not, however, the 
only monopolists in the colonies. The govern 
ment which supported them was the first to derive 
a paltry profit from shackling the industry of the 
Americans. The well known simile of the savage, 
who cut down the tree in order to pluck its fruit, 
(used by Montesquieu to exemplify the effects of 
despotism), was literally applicable to the Spanish 
colonial system. A Spanish colonist could not 
enjoy the advantages so lavishly bestowed on those 
beautiful countries. The eyes of a suspicious 
and oppressive government were constantly watch 
ing the progress of his industry. To sow or 
plant, he was not to consult the nature of the soil, 
but the government. V ines and olives, the two 
great blessings of temperate countries, were for 
bidden to grow in his fields, by proclamation. 
Some individuals had planted vineyards in Mexico. 
Whether the viceroy winked at this infraction of 
the colonial regulations, or was ignorant of it, we 
cannot say ; the Spanish merchants, however, 
who were quicker sighted, gave the alarm to their 
correspondents at Cadiz. Complaint was instantly 
made to the court of Madrid, whence an order 
issued for vooting up the vines, in pursuance of 
the right enjoyed by the Cadiz merchants of 
administering to the wants of the American people 
at their own discretion. 

Jt would be endless to enumerate the grievances 
which the colonies suffered, from the combined 
action of tyranny and monopoly. Mr. Walton s 
account of this system of exclusion on the part of 
Old Spain, appears more than sufficient to account 
for the state of habitual discontent, to which the 
Creoles were imperceptibly brought, not less by 
this palpable injustice, than by the civilization 
which the natural progress of human societies must] 



MEXICO. 



149 



[always increase, in spite of ibe trammels imposed 
by the blindest of governments. 

While the Creoles conceived that their security 
against the Indians, the Negro slaves, and the 
mixed casts, depended on the union of the whole 
European race, the Spaniards could oppress them 
with impunity. From this principle, Humboldt. 
very satisfactorily accounts for the passive state of 
the Spanish colonies, during the succession-war in 
Spain. But the Indians have been so completely 
subdued, and the Creole population has so much 
increased since that period, that the same tran 
quillity and passiveness could not be looked for, 
when the late shock of the Spanish throne awakened 
them to the hopes of bettering their condition. 

There was a period, when the whole mass of 
native population entertained such an opinion of 
the knowledge and power of the mother country, 
that they would have shut their eyes, in reverential 
awe, to whatever injustice she might commit ; but 
the political events of our own times have destroy 
ed all traces of this powerful illusion. The Ameri 
can war, in which Spain engaged with the most 
unaccountable degree of folly, could not but excite 
the attention of the Spanish Creoles. They must 
have compared their own situation with that of 
their neiglsbours, and perceived how much more 
galling were their own grievances, than those which 
produced the successful resistance of the English 
colonies. They must have reflected on the incon 
sistency and injustice of the Spanish government, 
who with one hand was helping English subjects 
to throw oft their allegiance, and with the other 
binding its own in the most intolerable chains ever 
devised by oppression. About that period, the 
works of the French philosophers found their way 
into Spanish America, in despite of the terrors of 
the inquisition. This circumstance, which was 
scarcely noticed at the time, proved momentous in 
the highest degree, and amidst silence and obscurity, 
operated with fearful effect in undermining the fa 
bric of despotism. 

Heading is one of those pleasures which a certain 
degree of ease and comfort will never fail to gene 
rate among all sorts of people. The higher classes 
in the Spanish colonies had long arrived at that 
state, in consequence of their wealth, and books 
were an article not a little in request among them. 
Books, of course, were always put in the assort 
ment of those cargoes of trash of all kinds, which 
were constantly sent out from Spain to the colonies. 
The glass beads which the first adventurers bartered 
for gold with the simple tribes of Indians, were 
real treasures in comparison of the literary filth 



which the Spaniards exported to the colonies, with 
the certainty of selling it at the most extravagant 
price. 

With the inconsistency peculiar to despotic 
governments, universities had been established at 
Mexico and Lima, to which even professors of 
mathematics were appointed. Thus, while they 
exalted the thirst for knowledge, they foolishly 
expected that the American youth would be ? till 
contented to seek it in those ponds of ignorance 
which had been prescribed to them. 

The consequences of such a system may be 
easily guessed. No sooner had (he works of the 
French philosophers found their way into the 
colonies, than they were read with an avidity 
beyond expression. The facility with which their 
general principles are seized, the common-place 
knowledge with which they enable young people 
to shine in conversation, the contempt and hatred 
which they breathe against what they denominate 
oppression, occasioned them to be looked on as 
invaluable treasures. The danger which attended 
their perusal, naturally enhanced the interest which 
they excited. There arc instances of people who 
retired from all sorts of business into the country, 
to devote themselves wholly to the study of the 
French political and moral writers. 

We, who have witnessed the effect of (heir 
doctrines in this free and happy country, during 
the ferment of the French revolution, when they 
threatened to overthrow the majestic fabric of our 
constitution, may easily conceive how they must 
have operated where every civil institution tends 
to countenance the bold assertions of those artful 
apostles cf anarchy and atheism. 

It would be difficult, without these premises, to 
account for the contrast which Humboldt observed 
between the people of the interior provinces of 
Mexico, and the enlightened classes of the capital. 
This part of his work deserves the attention of our 
readers, as it will be a clue to the knowledge of 
(he character and principles of the present distur 
bances, of which we now hasten to give a passing 
sketch. 

" The words European and Spaniard (says Hum 
boldt) arc become synonymous in Mexico and Peru. 
The inhabitants of the remote provinces have there 
fore a difficulty in conceiving, that there caji be Euro 
peans who do not speak their language ; and they 
consider this ignorance as a mark of low extraction, 
because every where around them, all, except the 
very lowest class of the people, speak Spanish. Bet 
ter acquainted with the history of the sixteenth cen 
tury, than with that of our own times, they imagine] 



150 



MEXICO. 



[that Spain continues to possess a decided prepon 
derance over the rest of Europe. To them, the 
peninsula appears the very centre of European 
civilization : It is otherwise with the Americans 
of the capital. Those of them who are acquainted 
with French or English literature, fall easily into 
a contrary extreme, and have a still more unfa 
vourable opinion of the mother country than the 
French had, at a time when communication was 
less frequent between Spain and the rest of Europe. 
They prefer strangers from other countries to the 
Spaniards ; and they flatter themselves with the 
idea, that intellectual cultivation has made more 
rapid progress in the colonies, than inthepeninsula." 
The public opinion being thus divided with 
respect to the mother country, it is evident that if 
the first class lost their enthusiasm for Spain, they 
might easily be led into rebellion by that more 
enlightened part of the community, who dispised 
and hated her government. 

The news of the invasion of the French, together 
with that of the captivity of the king, and the 
resignations of Bayonne, produced a kind of stupor, 
which pervaded the whole population of Spanish 
America ; but this was soon followed by a general 
enthusiasm in favour of the mother country. The 
prevailing sentiments were abhorrence of the French, 
and desire to support the Spaniards against their 
tyranny and injustice. If we wanted arguments 
to contirm the correctness of Humboldt s descrip 
tion, we should find a very strong one in the 
confidence with which the Americans looked for 
a speedy and successful issue to the Spanish cause. 
If there were any who doubted of that success, 
they were to be found among the higher classes, 
and even among the Spanish authorities. Those 
who, according to Humboldt, considered Spain 
just as if only a day had passed since the battle of 
Pavia, hourly expected to hear of the patriotic 
armies having reached Paris, and of Buonaparte 
being a prisoner at Madrid. 

Few examples can be found of such an attach 
ment, between what might be called two nations, 
as that which was evinced by the American popu 
lation towards the mother country. The opinion 
in favour of supporting Spain was so general and 
decided, that not a single voice was heard from 
the discontented Creoles, who had been long 
meditating a revolution. Had the Spanish govern- 
mented acted wisely, the French invasion would 
have strengthened the ties of union between Spain 
and her colonies; and what force had at first 
established, friendship, gratitude, and compassion 
would have sanctioned and confirmed for centuries. 



The news of the general insurrection of Spain 
reached Mexico on the 29th July 1808. The 
enthusiasm Avhich it had produced was still in full 
force, when the arrival of two deputies from the 
junta of Seville was announced, who were come to 
claim the sovereign command of Spanish America 
for that corporation, which had assumed the title 
of Supreme Gubernative Junta of Spain and the 
Indies. Such was the general disposition in favour 
of the peninsula, that it appears probable, from 
existing documents, that the Mexicans would have 
acceded to the demands of the junta, if, during 
the deliberation of a meeting of the public autho 
rities, which the viceroy had convened, dispatches 
had not arrived from London, in which the deputies 
of the junta of Asturias announced their installation, 
and warned the Mexicans expressly against the pre 
tension of the Andalusian junta. We may easily 
conceive how this declared rivalship must have af 
fected the opinion which the Mexicans had formed 
of the spirit of the Spanish revolution. 

The resignations of the royal family produced 
no diminution of American loyalty. The accla 
mations of " Ferdinand VII." were as sincere as 
they were general : but the blind submission which 
the old Spaniards demanded for whoever called 
himself his representative in the peninsula, was not 
so readily accorded. In Mexico the cabildo, or 
town corporation, had suggested the propriety of 
forming a junta which should govern that kingdom 
in the name of the captive sovereign. The viceroy 
appeared inclined to the measure, and the old 
Spaniards were in consequence determined to depose 
him. Had this chief made use of his power, and 
ordered to the capital the troops which, to the 
number of 1200, were stationed between Mexico 
and Vera Cruz, the country would probably have 
been spared the horrors which are now laying it 
waste. But the viceroy had no fixed plan : he 
was old, and wanted vigour : he was besides afraid 
of exciting suspicions against his loyalty, and had 
even proposed to resign his authority. 

This weakness was soon perceived by the Spa 
niards. One of the wealthiest merchants among 
them, a personal enemy of the viceroy, was placed 
at the head of the conspiracy. The officers who 
were to command the guard on the appointed day 
were bribed ; and this perscJh, followed by about 
200 Spaniards taken from the shops of Mexico, 
entered the palace of the viceroy at midnight, 
without resistance, and seizing him and his lady, 
committed the latter to a nunnery, and the former 
to the prison of the inquisition. 

Itheaudiencia, or supreme court of justice, had] 



MEXICO. 



151 



[secretly supported this measure, and the imprison 
ment of the viceroy was announced to the public, 
together with the circumstance of their having 
taken upon themselves to nominate a new viceroy. 
Though no disturbance followed thisact of violence, 
the Creoles were by no means pleased or satisfied 
with it: not that they had any particular fondness 
for the deposed viceroy, but because the power 
which the Spaniards were assuming was now 
become intolerable to them. 

When the news of this event reached the penin 
sula, the central junta was still in the full enjoy 
ment of that tranquil slumber at Seville, during 
which the French, trembling for their safety, and 
hopeless of succour, on account of the Austrian war, 
found leisure to recover their spirits, and recruit 
their armies. On hearing that the viceroy of 
Mexico had been brought a prisoner to Spain upon 
suspicion of treachery, the joy of the junta was 
unbounded. It never occurred to them to examine 
the grounds of accusation ; nor did they once 
condescend to reflect how greatly the ties of sub 
ordination must be relaxed, when a handful of 
persons, under no legitimate authority, could force 
the seat of government, and seize the chief magis 
trate with impunity. The junta was weak, and of 
course suspicious : a denunciation therefore, in any 
shape, was welcome to them. 

Meanwhile advices of the ferment, which was 
rapidly spreading through the colonies, arrived by 
every packet. The declarations of their attach 
ment had been sincere ; but some time had now 
elapsed, and as the first impressions of sympathy 
grew fainter, the colonists began to reflect upon 
their situation, and to grow weary of the protracted 
hopes of that amelioration which had been promised 
to them in the most positive terms. The central 
junta conceived that the repetition of these pro 
mises would be sufficient to lull them again into 
apathy ; and a pompous proclamation was issued, 
in which the colonies were declared equal to the 
mother country, and the Spanish Americans 
.told, in direct terms, that " they belonged to 
nobody ; and that they were masters of their own 
fate." 

What this fate would have been, had the cause 
of Spain been crowned with the early successes 
which Avas anticipated, it is needless now to con 
jecture. In justice, however, to the Americans, 
we must say, that from the sentiments which they 
constantly manifested with regard to Spain, there 
is every reason to conclude that they would have 
continued faithful to her, if the unhappy course 
of events in the peninsula, and the more unhappy 
system of the central government, had not obliged 



them to take those steps which have progressively 
conducted them to a state of open rebellion. 

Two years had elapsed since the Spanish Ame 
ricans had heard of the victories of Baylen, Valen 
cia, &amp;c. and of the unprincipled invader of their 
mother country being driven to collect his scattered 
forces behind the Ebro. A supreme government 
had been created, and every blessing was hoped 
from the political principles which its members had 
ostensibly adopted. But while the distance of the 
scene raised the expectations of the Spanisli Ame 
ricans to the highest pitch, and they were daily 
expecting to hear of the restoration of Ferdinand 
VII. news arrived that Buonaparte was master of 
Madrid ; that the central junta had with difficulty 
escaped to Andalusia ; that several generals had 
been massacred by their troops on a suspicion of 
disaffection ; that others, among whom was Morla, 
had openly betrayed their country ; and that the 
public opinion had scarcely any one in whom it 
could venture to repose the slightest confidence. 
Though the disappointment of the Americans must 
have been proportioned to the exaltation of their 
hopes, not a symptom of commotion appeared 
through the whole extent of the Spanish colonies. 
Supplies were regularly dispatched to the mother 
country; subscriptions raised among all classes of 
people ; and it seemed as if their loyalty had 
increased with the misfortunes of their European 
brethren. These misfortunes were attributed to 
treason, and the opinion of the Spanish superiority 
remained unshaken. 

The Austrian war restored them to the plenitude 
of their first hopes, and the news of the victory of 
Talavera came in time to confirm them. But, alas ! 
this was but a passing gleam of sunshine a long 
period of gloom rapidly followed : the Spanish 
armies completely defeated ; the juntas of Seville 
and Valencia protesting against the central govern 
ment ; the brave Romana publishing a manifesto, 
in which the power of the supreme government 
was declared illegal ! All this regularly dispatched, 
and carefully spread through the colonies by the 
discontented parties of the peninsula, naturally 
weakened their confidence, and gave the first shock 
to their enthusiasm. 

The decisive blow was now impending. The 
French had dispersed the whole Spanish army at 
Ocana, and nothing could stop them in their way 
to Andalusia. The boasted works of Sierra Morena 
were found to be a deception on the people, and 
the French entered Seville without the loss of a 
man, while the members of the central junta, dis 
persed and insulted in their flight, could scarcely 
escape the popular fury. These men, publicly] 



J52 



MEXICO. 



f"pro9laimed as traitors, assembled in the isle of 
Leon, and still trembling at the death with which 
they had been threatened, hastened to deposit their 
powers in the hands of a regency, chosen by them 
selves. 

A government thus formed was little calculated 
tore-establish the confidence of the colonies: so 
conscious, indeed, were the members of their weak 
ness, that they did not dare to communicate their 
installation to them, before they had been counte 
nanced by a manifesto of the merchants of Cadiz ; 
a species of support which, while it ensured them 
the attachment of the Spanish factors in the colo 
nies, was certain to produce the contempt and ab 
horrence of the rest of the people. 

The Spaniards themselves must have foreseen 
the consequences of these events. Caracas was 
the first province where the news arrived, and the 
first also to effect a revolution. A month after, the 
information reached Buenos Ayres, and a similar 
event took place. The fermentation now began 
to spread through the s. continent : the alarm of 
the old Spaniards was general, but instead of in 
spiring them with a spirit of moderation, it seemed 
to embitter their animosities against the natives. 
The governor of the province of Socorro, in the 
kingdom of Santa Fe", ordered the military to fire 
on the unarmed people, who had assembled to pe 
tition him. An immense multitude flocked from 
the neighbouring country to revenge this act of 
cruelty ; the governor took refuge in a convent, 
where he was surrounded and taken. Another in 
sult from an European had a similar effect in the 
capital of Santa Fe. Quito became a scene of 
carnage. Carthagena formed a junta, which de 
prived the governor of his command. Lima was 
threatened with an insurrection ; and every thing 
announced that a general explosion was at hand. 

That these commotions were the effect of some 
general causes, and not of partial intrigues, is evi 
dent from the simultaneous movements in provinces 
which have scarcely any communication, such as 
those of Caracas and Buenos Ayres. These two pro 
vinces knew nothing of each other s revolution till 
some months after it was effected. Had both been 
the consequence of the same plan, the leaders 
would not have failed to cheer the public expecta 
tion with the hopes at least of having partners in 
their enterprise. 

But although, wherever the insurrection broke 
out, the mass of the Creole population had eagerly 
declared in its favour, they were far from intend 
ing a total separation from the mother country. 
The motives alleged at the same moment in the 
most distant provinces, bear an extraordinary si 



milarity, and shew that they were the genuine ex 
pression of the public opinion. " The supreme 
government of the peninsula (they said) has been 
declared infamous and treacherous : the members 
of it are even accused by the people of Spain, of 
having betrayed the country into the hands of the 
enemy. Can we then trust to the suspicious off 
spring of such a corrupted stock? Shall we wait 
till they choose to make their peace with Buona 
parte, by betraying us into his hands ? It was 
owing to our decided determination that the orders 
sent from Bayonne by the French ruler were not 
put into execution by our European governors. 
They were then ready to submit to his treachery. 
They will scarcely be less so now, when they have 
lost all hopes of succeeding in the peninsula. But 
setting all this aside, how can the ephemeral go 
vernments of Spain pretend to rule us, when they 
are manifestly incompetent to direct the people 
among whom they dwell ! If they represent Ferdi 
nand vli. let them exercise their power over those 
who have elected them we will do the same in 
our own country we will create a government in 
the name of our beloved sovereign, and that we will 
obey. Our brethren of the peninsula shall have 
our aid, our friendship, and our good wishes." 

Such is the tenor of all the early proclamations 
of the insurgents of Spanish America. We do not 
pretend to say that they contained the genuine 
sentiments of the leaders ; but they evidently were 
a correct statement of the prevailing sentiments of 
the people. The difference of opinion which 
divided the Creoles with respect to the mother 
country, and which we have noticed from Hum- 
boldt, was certainly the cause of this forbearance 
in the chiefs of the revolution. They hated the 
Spanish government, and were for the most part 
ardent and enthusiastic admirers of the metaphy 
sical principles of liberty, which they had imbibed 
from the French publications ; but they were 
obliged to yield to the more general opinion of 
their countrymen, who were heartily attached to 
Ferdinand VII. and had a great regard for Spain, 
which the misconduct of her revolutionary govern 
ments had only weakened, after two years of per 
petual disappointment. Instead of fostering this 
excellent disposition, the Spanish government 
listened only to the dictates of wounded pride, 
and adopted every measure that was calculated to 
alienate the well disposed, and strengthen the party 
of their inveterate enemies. 

The first step of the regency, upon hearing of 
the occurrence of Caracas, was to declare their 
proceedings rebellious, and to blockade their ports. 
The declaration itself was conceived in the most] 



MEXICO. 



153 



[violent and outrageous terms ; the governors of 
the surrounding districts were ordered to stop all 
communication with the insurgent provinces, and 
to intercept their supplies. The effect of that un 
feeling and insulting decree was to increase the 
contempt of a government, which, while it was 
obliged to court the protection of a handful of 
merchants in the peninsula, was thundering ven 
geance against 2,000,000 of people, who had the 
Atlantic between them and their pretended mas 
ters. In fact, the regency was the mere tool of the 
Cadiz merchants, and the orders the dictates of 
their alarmed avarice. A singular fact, which we 
have it in our power to state, made this sufficiently 
evident in the eyes of the Spanish Americans. 

So strong was the persuasion of the enlightened 
part of the Spanish people, that the news of the 
dispersion of the central junta would excite com 
motions in America, that the regency, in spite of 
its short-sighted policy, found it necessary to do 
something in favour of the colonies, which might 
reconcile them to their government, and preserve 
their union with Spain. The measure of granting 
them a free trade was proposed by the minister of 
the Indies, and ardently seconded by his under 
secretary, a man distinguished in the revolution of 
Spain for his zeal and patriotism. This was a 
few days after the installation of the regency, when 
the new government, though timid and irresolute, 
had not entirely submitted to the yoke of the mer 
cantile junta of Cadiz. The measure was put in 
practice after the pitiful intriguing manner of the 
old court. The ordcj; was signed by the minister 
and secretly printed ; precautions were then taken 
to send it with the same secrecy to the colonies, 
that when the merchants came to the knowledge of 
it, it might be too late to repeal it. The whole 
transaction, however, transpired ; and the rage of 
the mercantile junta kntw no bounds. The re 
gents were intimidated, and submitted to the dis 
grace of charging their minister and his under 
secretary with having forged the order. Both of 
them were arrested ; a counter order was issued, 
and the two prisoners were then set at liberty, with 
out any farther inquiry. 

But the most lamentable part of the American 
revolution was now at hand. The kingdom of 
Mexico had enjoyed an apparent tranquillity since 
the conspiracy of the Spaniards against the vice 
roy. The central junta had given the civil com 
mand of that kingdom to the archbishop, who, 
though an European by birth, was beloved by the 
Creoles for his moderation. The Spanish govern 
ment had happily stumbled on one good measure; 
VOL. in. 



the rest, however, were calculated to increase the 
disaffection. 

The viceroy had been deposed merely because 
he appeared favourable to the plan of erecting a 
junta for the government of Mexico, when Spain 
was without a supreme power. The Spaniards of 
the capital, who had defeated this plan, were al 
ready become unpopular from the intoxication of 
success; when intelligence arrived that the central 
junta had lavished on them its highest honours. 
The state of the Creoles became intolerable, when 
in addition to the insults which they had borne, 
their friend the archbishop was removed from the 
command ; and the high court of justice, whom 
they considered as their most violent enemies, 
made temporary governors of the kingdom, until 
the arrival of the viceroy Venegas, nominated by 
the new regency of Cadiz. 

Although the regular forces of Mexico had 
checked the spirit of insurrection, those who know 
the state of civilization at which that kingdom has 
arrived, and which puts it, according to Hum- 
boldt, at the head of the Spanish colonies in every 
respect, will easily suppose that discontented and 
enterprising individuals could not be wanting, 
who would watch every opportunity of shaking off 
the Spanish yoke. In fact, several of this descrip 
tion were to be found among the military and 
clergy, and even among the monks of New Spain. 
The most conspicuous was a country vicar of the 
name of Hidalgo, who enjoyed a valuable living in 
Dolores, a considerable town in the province of 
Valladolid Mechoacun. Hidalgo was a man of 
no vulgar talents, and of a knowledge far superior 
to that of the clergy of New Spain ; this, as was 
commonly the case, had excited suspicions of his 
orthodoxy. We find that he had been accused to 
the inquisition, but had the good fortune or the art 
to remove their jealousy. He had thoroughly 
gained the affections of the Indians, whom he had 
taken great pains to enlighten. Several manufac 
tories had risen by his care, and he had even esta 
blished a foundry of cannon, alleging the immense 
advantage which might accrue to the crown from 
it, there being some rich copper mines in the neigh* 
bourhood of his parish. 

When the viceroy was deposed by the Spaniards 
of Mexico, the troops constantly stationed, in times 
of war, between that capital and Vera Cruz, to 
prevent any attempt which our cruisers might 
make on that coast, were ordered into the interior. 
The regiment of cavalry De la Reyna was sent to 
San Miguel el Grande, a populous town in the 
vicinity of Dolores. Three captains of the] 



M E X I C O. 



[names of Allende, Aldama, and Abnsolo, \\lio 
served in (hat regiment, were natives of the place, 
and friends of the vicar Hidalgo, whom they 
readily joined. Their activity was extraordinary 
in disseminating discontent, and pourt raying", with 
the darkest colours, whatever tended to alienate 
the minds of the natives, in the actual circumstances 
of Spain. 

Allende was sent to Qtieretaro, one of tlie most 
considerable towns in the kingdom of Mexico, 
where he recruited a great number of partisans. 
The Spaniards perceived that something was in 
agitation among the Creoles, and their suspicions 
fell upon the mayor or corregidorof the town. In 
formation was sent to some of the acuerdo, or cor 
poration, which was, at that time, split into two 
parties. Those who received it concealed it from 
the rest, and privately advised the Spaniards of 
Queretaro 1o act, witli respect to the corregidor, 
as those of the capital had with the viceroy. The 
corregidor was accordingly seized and sent to 
Mexico. This second instance of insubordination, 
and contempt of the law, this trampling upon all 
authority in the person of a magistrate who proved 
to be innocent of the crime imputed to him, fur 
nished a new pretence to the chiefs of the insurrec 
tion for instigating the Creoles against that handful 
of Spaniards who considered themselves superior 
to all established authority. 

Venegas was now arrived at Vera Cruz, and the 
report of his bringing new honours for the enemies 
of the late viceroy, Yturrigaray, inflamed the 
whole Creole population. Hidalgo and his as 
sociates, indignant at this fresh outrage, and dread 
ing the discovery of their plan, determined to 
hasten its execution. On the 17th of September 
1810, the vicar assembled the Indians to a sermon, 
the drift of which was to point out the tyranny of 
the Europeans, the state to which the treachery of 
the Spaniards had brought the peninsula, and the 
danger of being delivered up to the French or the 
English, who would assuredly extirpate the holy 
catholic religion. 

Nothing could more strongly affect the minds of 
the poor Indians, who have ever submitted to be 
implicitly governed at the nod of a priest. Hidalgo 
ended his discourse with calling his Indians to 
arms ; and to arms they flew with incredible fury. 
Allende appeared at the side of Hidalgo, and they 
led the mob to the town of St. Miguel el Grande, 
where the houses of the Spaniards were pillaged. 
No sooner was the insurrection at Dolores known, 
than the mass of the inhabitants of the extensive 
kingdom of Mcchoacan acknowledged the autho 



rity of Hidalgo. Tlsree regiments of veterans 
joined his standard, the towns of Salamanca and 
Valladolid fell into his hands. Wherever he ap 
peared, crowds of Indians flocked to his army. 
The wealthy town of Guanaxuato, in the vicinity 
of which lay the richest mine of Mexico, supplied 
him with 5,000,000 of dollars. The insurgents 
possessed every thing but discipline and good 
leaders. 

Meanwhile Venegas, who had now taken pos 
session of his command at Mexico, was not want 
ing to himself. He secured the town of Quere 
taro, which may be considered as the key to 
Mexico. He awed into submission the Creoles of 
the capital by forming a camp with his troops 
without the walls. The governors of St. Luis 
Potosi and Guadalaxara armed the militia of the 
country ; and even the wealthy Creoles of the 
principal towns supported the cause of the Spa 
niards, in order to avoid suspicion. 

The insurgents, instead of falling immediately 
upon Mexico, marched to Valladolid, which they 
entered on the 20th of October, amidst the shouts 
of the Indian and Creole population. The greatest 
marks of honour were bestowed upon Hidalgo by 
the corporations of the town, and ], 500,000 
of dollars were emptied into his military chest from 
the royal treasury. Two regiments of veteran 
cavalry joined him at this place. The province 
of Guadalaxara and the city of Zacatecas were 
also at his devotion. His army being now ex 
tremely large, he flattered himself that the viceroy 
would not hazard an action, and that the capital 
contained such a number of disaffected, as would 
oblige him to surrender it as soon as the insur 
gents came insight. In this belief he marched to 
Toluca, while the troops of the viceroy fell back 
on Lerma. 

While Hidalgo was advancing towards Mexico, 
another corps pushed through Ajusco to Cuerna- 
vaca, to take possession of the neighbouring part 
of the coast of the Pacific ocean. The main body 
of the vice-royal troops had gone too far to the n. 
and nothing was known of it in the capital. 

Mexico was in imminent danger. The po 
pulace and a considerable part of the higher 
classes hated the Spaniards. Venegas had but a 
handful of men on whom he could rely. In this 
critical moment he resorted to an expedient which, 
however ridiculous it may appear in the eyes of 
many, was assuredly the only thing that saved him. 
He applied to the archbishop and the inquisition for 
a sentence of excommunication against Hidalgo, 
and all his troops and abettors. The Mexicans] 



MEXICO. 



155 



[were struck with terror ; and the whole town re 
mained quiet, as if every inhabitant had been put in 
shackles. 

But the dreadful sentence made no impression 
in the insurgent camp, where Hidalgo succeeded 
in persuading his Indians that the excommunica 
tion would fall upon the archbishop. The army 
had now advanced to the mount of Las Cruzes, 
a few miles from Mexico, where a division of the 
Spanish troops defended the pass. The insur 
gents dispersed them without difficulty, and pre 
sented themselves before the capital. But Hidalgo 
wanted decision. He summoned the town when 
he should have stormed it. The summons was 
answered with contempt, and the next morning 
his troops were seen retiring without any further 
effort. 

Hidalgo *s natural moderation and horror of 
bloodshed were reported to be the causes of this 
apparent timidity. It is well known that he alle 
viated the evils of war as much as possible, and 
that he sometimes ordered the artillery to fire upon 
his troops, when In: had no other means to prevent 
pillage and devastation. His summons to the 
viceroy is said to have been very moderate; for he 
declared that his only desire was to see a junta 
established for the government of the kingdom ; 
and that it was his intention to send immediatesup- 
plies of money to the peninsula. That Hidalgo s 
proposals were calculated to conciliate the public 
opinion, we are at liberty to conjecture from the 
care which the viceroy employed to conceal them 
from the inhabitants of Mexico. The true cause 
of Hildalgo s retreat, however, was the informa 
tion he received of the advantages which the 
main corps of the vice-royal troops had gained in 
his rear. General Callejas,who commanded then, 
had taken the town of Dolores, where the revolu 
tion began, and massacred all the inhabitants. 
Hidalgo wanted skill to secure his retreat and 
watch the movements of the Spaniards ; and he 
was now obliged to fall back in confusion. Calle- 
jas met the insurgents at Aculco, and completely 
defeated them. lie then directed his march to 
Guanaxualo, which he entered on the 25th of No 
vember, taking a dreadful revenge on the inha 
bitants. Another corps of Spaniards, under Ge 
neral Cruz, entered the town of Irapurato, repeat 
ing the same cruelties and horrors. 

The catastrophe of H idalgo was now at hand. 
He had just reached the provincias hiternas with 
a considerable body of forces, which still followed 
his fortunes, when the governor of that part of the 
kingdom offered him his alliance. Hidalgo and 
his companions trusted to his faith, and incau 



tiously presented themselves for a conference, 
when they were seized, and immediately put to 
death, as if the Spaniards were afraid of having 
them rescued out of their hands. 

The insurrection, however, was far from being 
terminated by the death of its authors. The whole 
Creole and Indian population had now risen and 
formed detached corps in every part of the king 
dom. The system of guerillas has been adopted 
by the Mexican insurgents, who improve every 
hour in boldness and dexterity. There are even 
large organized corps commanded by more skilful 
leaders than Hidalgo. One liayon, a lawyer, had 
established an insurgent government at Zitaquaro. 
When that town was in danger of falling into the 
viceroy s hands, Rayon and his partisans made 
good their escape, and joined another numerous 
band of insurgents under the priest Morelos. This 
chief has lately obtained considerable advantages; 
and we find by accounts as late as the 7th of April 
(181 2,) that he is master of the whole coast to the s. 
and that his comrade, Sanchez, with 30,000 men, 
preserves his authority in the plains of Ptiebla, 
and throughout the mountainous districts of Ore. 
zava. 

We also find that the city of Orezava itself is 
in the hands of the insurgents, and that Vera 
Cruz is in alarm, its communication by Xalapa 
having been entirely cut off. But it would be an 
endless task to trace the actual state of the country 
from the confused and partial accounts of the 
viceroy, the only official information which is al 
lowed to reach Europe. Suffice it to say, that, 
according to the last letters from Mexico, all the 
roads from the interior were occupied within a few 
days march of the capital, the fate of which de 
pended on the resistance of an inconsiderable body 
of troops, which, as its losses could not be sup 
plied, must finally perish by the effects of its own 
victories. Trade was at a stand ; and the mines 
were totally abandoned, with the exception of one 
which an insurgent chief had been working for 
eight or 10 months, and with the produce of which 
he had been able to support his army. Several 
persons of the first rank had quitted the city, and 
gone over to the insurgents ; from which it Avas 
naturally concluded that the chances of ultimate 
success began to appear in their favour. 

CHAP. IV. 

Distances from Mexico to Acapulco. 
IT will be useful, for a minute acquaintance with 
the country, to add the distances which the na 
tives, particularly the muleteers, who travel as 
it were in caravans to the great fair of Acapulco,] 
x 2 



156 



MEXICO. 



^.reckon from one village to another. The true 
distance from the capital to the port being known, 
and supposing a third more for windings in a road 
both straight and of easy access, we shall find the 
value of the leagues in use in these countries. This 
datum is interesting for geographers, who in re 
mote regions must avail themselves of simple iti 
neraries. It is evident that I lie people shorten the 
leagues as the road becomes more difficult. How 
ever, under equal circumstances, we may have 
some confidence in the judgments formed by the 
muleteers of comparative distances ; they may not 
know whether their beasts of burden go 2 or 
3000 metres, or 6561 or 9842 feet English, in the 
space of an hour, but they learn from long habit 
if one distance be the third or fourth or the double 
of another. 

The Mexican muleteers estimate the road from 
Acapulco to Mexico at 110 leagues. They reckon 
from Acapulco to the Passo d Aguacatillo, four 
leagues; El Litnon, three leagues; Los dos 
Aroyos, five ; Alto de Camaron, four ; La Gua- 
rita de los dos Caminos, three ; La Moxonera, 
one-half; Quaxiniquilapa, two and a half; Aca- 
guisotla, four ; Masatlan, four ; Chilpansingo, 
four ; Sampango, three ; Sapilote, four ; Venta 
Vicja, four; Mescala, four; Estola, five ; Palula, 
one and a half; La Tranca del Conexo, one 
and a half; Cuagolotal, one ; Tuspa, or Pueblo 
Nuevo, four; Los Amates, three; Tepetlalapa, 
five; Punte de Istla, four; Alpuyeco, six; 
Xuchitepeque, two ; Cuernavaca, two; S.Maria, 
three-fourths; Guchilaque, two and a half; 
Sacapisca, two; La Cruz del Marques, two; 
El Garda, two ; Axusco, two ; San Augustin 
de las Cuevas, three ; Mexico, four. In this 
itinerary the numbers indicate how many leagues 
one place is distant from the one which imme 
diately precedes it. Other itineraries, which are 
distributed to travellers who come by the S. sea, 
estimate the total distance at 104 or 106 leagues. 



Now, according to Humboldt s observations, it is 
in a straight line 151,766 toises. Adding a quarter 
for windings, we shall have 189,708 toises, or 1725 
toises, or 1 1,040 feet, for the league of the country. 

CHAP. V. 
General considerations on the extent and physical 

aspect of the kingdom of Nucva Espana. 
IN bestowing a rapid glance on the extent and 
population of the Spanish possessions in the two 
Americas, we must generalize our ideas, and con 
sider each colony in its relations with the neigh 
bouring colonies and with the mother country, if 
we would obtain accurate results, and assign to 



the country described the place to which it is en 
titled from its territorial wealth. 

The Spanish possessions of the new continent 
occupy the immense extent of territory comprised 
between lat. 41 43 s. and lat. 37 48 n. This 
space of 79 degrees equals not only the length of all 
Africa, but it even much surpasses the breadth of 
the Russian empire, which includes about 167 de- 
drees of longitude, under a parallel of which the 
degrees are not more than half the degrees of the 
equator. 

The most s. point of the new continent inhabited 
by the Spaniards is fort Maullin, near the small 
village of Carelmapu, on the co.ist of Chile, op 
posite to the n. extremity of the island of Chiloe. 
A road is opening from Valdivia to this fort of Maul 
lin ; a bold but useful undertaking, as a stormy 
sea prevents navigators for a great part of the year 
from landing on so dangerous a coast. On the s. 
and 5. e. of fort Maullin, in the gulfs of Ancud 
and Reloncavi, by which we reach the great lakes 
of Nahuelhapi and Todos los Santos, there are no 
Spanish establishments; but we meet with them in 
the islands near the e. coast of Chiloe, even in lat. 
43 34 s. where the island Caylin (opposite the 
lofty summit of the Corcobado) is inhabited bj 
several families of Spanish origin. 

The most n. point of the Spanish colonies is the 
mission of San Francisco, on the coast of New 
California, seven leagues to the n. w. of Santa 
Cruz. The Spanish language is thus spread over 
an extent of more than 1900 leagues in length. 
Under the wise administration of Count Florida 
Blanca, a regular communication of posts was 
established from Paraguay to then. w. coast of N. 
America ; and a monk in the mission of the Gua- 
ranis Indians can maintain a correspondence with 
another missionary inhabiting New Mexico, or 
the countries in the neighbourhood of cape Men- 
docin, without their letters ever passing at any 
great distance from the continent of Spanish 
America. 

The dominions of the king of Spain in America 
exceed in extent the vast regions possessed by the 
Russian empire or Great Britain in Asia. 

The Spanish possessions in America arc divided 
into nine great governments, which may be re 
garded as independent of one another. Of these 
nine governments, five, viz. the viceroyalties of 
Peru and of New Granada, capitanias generales of 
Guatemala, of Portorico, and of Caracas, are 
wholly comprised in the torrid /one ; the four 
other divisions, viz. the viceroyalties of Mexico 
and Buenos Ayres, the atpitanias generates of 
Chile and Havannah, including the Floridas, are] 



MEXICO. 



157 



("composed of countries of which a great part is 
situated without the tropics, that is to say, in the 
temperate zone. We shall afterwards see that this 
position alone does not determine the nature of the 
productions of these fine regions. The union of 
several physical causes, such as the great height 
of the Cordilleras t their enormous masses, the 
number of plains, elevated more than from 2 to 
3000 metres, or from 6561 to 9842 tcet, above 
the level of the ocean, give to a part of the equi 
noctial regions a temperature adapted to the culti 
vation of the wheat and fruit trees of Europe. 
The geographical latitude has small influence on 
the fertility of a country, where, on the ridge and 
declivity of the mountains, nature exhibits a 
union of every climate. 

Among the colonies subject to the king of Spain, 
Mexico occupies at present the first rank, both on 
account of its territorial wealth, and on account 
of its favourable position for commerce with Eu 
rope and Asia. We speak here merely of the po 
litical value of the country, considering it in its 
actual state of civilization, which is very superior 
to that of the other Spanish possessions. Many 
branches of agriculture have undoubtedly attained 
a higher degree of perfection in the province of 
Caraas than in New Spain. The fewer mines a 
colony has, the more the industry of the inhabi 
tants is turned towards the productions of the ve 
getable kingdom. The fertility of the soil is 
greater in the provinces ofCumana, of New Bar 
celona, and Venezuela ; and it is greater on the 
banks of the Lower Orinoco, and in the n. part of 
New Granada, than in the kingdom of Mexico, 
of which several regions are barren, destitute of 
water, and incapable of vegetation. But on 
considering the greatness of the population of 
Mexico, the number of considerable cities in the 
proximity of one another, the enormous value of 
the metallic produce, and its influence on the com 
merce of Europe and Asia ; in short, on examin 
ing the imperfect state of cultivation observable in 
the rest of Spanish America we are tempted to 
justify the preference which the court of Madrid 
has long manifested for Mexico above its other co 
lonies. 

The denomination of New Spain designates, in 
general, the vast extent of country over which the 
viceroy of Mexico exercises his power. Using 
the word in this sense, we are to consider as . 
and s. limits the parallels of the 38th and 10th 
degrees of latitude. But the captain-general of 
Guatemala, considered as administrator, depends 
very little on the viceroy of New Spain. The 
kingdom of Guatemala contains, according to its 



political division, the governments of Costa Kiov 
and of Nicaragua. It is conterminous with the 
kingdom of New Granada, to which Daricn and 
the isthmus of Panama belong. Whenever in this 
pnrt of the work we use the denominations of 
New Spain and Mexico, we exclude the captaniu- 
general of Guatemala, a country extremely fertile, 
well peopled, compared with the rest of the Spa 
nish possessions, and so much the better cultivated 
as the soil, convulsed by volcanoes, contains almost 
no metallic mines. We consider the intemlancies 
of Merida and Oaxaca as the most s. and at the 
same time the most e. parts of New Spain. The 
confines which separate Mexico from the kingdom 
of Guatemala are washed by the great ocean to the 
e. of the port of Tehuantepec, near I/a Barra de 
Tonnla. They terminate on the shore of the At 
lantic, near the bay of Honduras. 

We are tempted to compare together the extent 
and population of Mexico, and that of two em 
pires with which this fine colony is in relations 
of unity and rivalry. Spain is five times smaller 
than Mexico. Should no unforeseen misfortune 
occur, we may reckon that in less than a century 
the population of New Spain will equal that of 
the mother country. The United States of N. 
America since the cession of Louisiana, and since 
they recognise no other boundary than the Rio 
Bravo del Norte, contain 240,000 square leagues. 
Their population is not much greater than that of 
Mexico, as we shall afterwards see on examining 
carefully the population and the area of New 
Spain. 

If the political force of two states depended 
solely on the space which they occupy on the 
globe, and on the number of their inhabitants ; if 
the nature of the soil, the configuration of the 
coast ; and if the climate, the energy of the nation, 
and above all the degree of perfection of its social 
institutions, were not the principal elements of this 
grand dynamical calculation, the kingdom of 
New Spain might, at present, be placet! in opposi 
tion to the confederation of the American republics. 
Both labour under the inconvenience of an un 
equally distributed population ; but that of the 
United States, though in a soil and climate less fa 
voured by nature, augments with an infinitely 
greater rapidity. Neither does it comprehend, 
like the Mexican population, nearly 2,500,000 of 
aborigines. These Indians, degraded by the des 
potism of the ancient Aztec sovereigns, and by 
the vexations of the first conquerors, though pro 
tected by the Spanish laws, wise and humane in 
general, enjoy very little, however, of this pro 
tection, from the great distance of the supreme] 



158 



MEXICO. 



[authority. The kingdom of New Spain has one 
decided advantage over the United States. The 
number of slaves there, either Africans or of mixed 
race, is almost nothing; an advantage which 
the European colonists have only begun rightly 
to appreciate since the tragical events of the re 
volution of St. Domingo. So true it is, that 
the fear of physical evils acts more powerfully 
than moral considerations on the true interests of 
society, or the principles of philanthropy and of 
justice, so often the theme of the parliament, the 
constituent assembly, and the works of the philo 
sophers. 

The number of African slaves in the United 
States amounts to more than 1,000,000, and con 
stitute a sixth part of the whole population. The 
s. states, whose influence is increased since the ac 
quisition of Louisiana, very inconsiderately in 
crease the annual importation of these Negroes. 
it has not yet been in the power of congress, nor in 
that of the chief of the confederation, the present 
president, or even the former, to oppose this aug 
mentation, and to spare by that means much distress 
to the generations to come. 

In taking a general view of the whole surface of 
Mexico, we see that one-half is situated under the 
burning sky of the tropics, and the other belongs 
to the temperate zone. The latter contains 60,000 
square leagues, and comprehends the provincias 
internas, both those which are under the imme 
diate administration of the viceroy of Mexico (for 
example, the new kingdom of Leon, and the pro 
vince of New Santander), and those governed by 
a particular commandant-general. The influence 
of this commandant extends over the intendancies 
of Durango and Sonora, and the provinces of Co- 
hahuila, Texas, and New Mexico, regions thinly 
inhabited, which go all under the designation of 
proiincias internets de la commandancia general^ to 
distinguish them from the provincias internas del 
cireynato. 

Ihe K. provinces of Sonora and New Santander 
stretch as far n. as 38, and part of the s. intendan 
cies of Guadalnxara, Zacatecas, and S. Luis de 
Potosi, lie s. of the tropic of Cancer. "VVe know, 
however, that the physical climate of a country 
does not altogether depend on its distance from the 
pole, but also on its elevation above the level of 
the sea, proximity to the ocean, configuration, and 
a great number of other local circumstances. 
Hence, of the 50,000 square leagues situated in 
the torrid zone, more than three-fifths enjoy rather 
a cold or temperate than a burning climate. The 
whole interior of the viceroyalty of Mexico, espe 
cially the interior of the countries comprised under 



the ancient denominations of Anahuac and Mecho* 
acan, probably even all New Biscay, form an im 
mense plain elevated 2000 or 2500 metres, or 6561 
and 8201 feet, above the level of the neighbouring 

SCHJS. 

There is scarcely a point on the globe where the 
mountains exhibit so extraordinary a construction 
as in New Spain. In Europe, Switzerland, Sa 
voy, and the Tyrol, are considered very elevated 
countries ; but this opinion is merely founded on 
the aspect of the groups of a great number of sum 
mits perpetually covered with snow, and disposed 
in parallel chains to the great central chain. Thus 
the summits of the Alps rise to 3900 and even 
4700 metres, or J 2,794 and 15,419 feet, while the 
neighbouring plains in the canton of Berne arc 
not more than from 1312 and 19c8 feet in height. 
The former of these numbers (1312), a very mo 
derate elevation, may be considered as that of the 
most part of plains of any considerable extent in 
Suabia, Bavaria, and New Silesia, near the sources 
of the Wartha and Piliza. In Spain, the two- 
Castilles are elevated more than 580 metres, or 
1902 feet. The highest level in France is Au- 
vergne, on which the Mont d Or, the Cantal, and 
the Puy de Dome repose. The elevation of this 
level, according to the observations of M. de Buch &amp;gt; 
is 720 metres, or 2360 feet. These examples serve 
to prove that in general the elevated surfaces of 
Europe which exhibit the aspect of plains, are sel 
dom more than from 400 to 800 metres, or from 
1312 to 2624 feet, higher than the level of the 
ocean. 

In Africa, perhaps, near the sources of the Nile, 
and in Asia, under Int. 34 and 37 n. there aro 
plains analogous to those of Mexico ; but the tra 
vellers who have visited Asia have left us com 
pletely igiiorant of the elevation of Thibet. The 
elevation of the great desert of Gobi, to the n. w. 
of China, exceeds, according to Father Duhalde, 
1400 metres, or 5511 feet. Colonel Gordon as 
sured M. Labillardiere,that from the cape of Good 
Hope to lat. 21 s. the soil of Africa rose gradu 
ally to 2000 metres, or 6561 feet, of elevation. 
(Labillardiere^ L i. p. 89.) This fact, as new as 
it is curious, has not been confirmed by other na 
turalists. 

The chain of mountains which form the vast 
plain of Mexico is the same with what, under the 
name of the Andes, runs through all S.America; but 
the construction, we may say the skeleton (char- 
penle) of this chain, varies to the s. and n. of the 
equator. In the s, hemisphere, the cordillera is 
every where torn and interrupted by crevices like 
open furrows, not filled \\ith heterogenous sub-] 



MEXICO. 



159 



[stances. If there are plains elevated from 2700 to 
3000 met res, or from 10,629 to 11,811 feet, as in 
the kingdom of Quito, and farther ;/. in the pro 
vince of Los Pastos, they are not to be compared 
in extent with those of New Spain, and are rather 
to be considered as longitudinal valleys bounded 
by two branches of the great Cordillera of the An 
des ; while in Mexico it is the very ridge of the 
mountains which forms the plain, and it is the di 
rection of the plain which designates, as it were, 
that of the whole chain. In Peru, the most ele 
vated summits constitute the crest of (he Andes ; 
but in Mexico these same summits, less colossal it 
is true, but still from 4900 to 5400 metres, or from 
16,075 to 17,715 feet, in height, are either dis 
persed on the plain, or ranged in lines which bear 
no relation of parallelism with the direction of the 
Cordillera. Peru and the kingdom of New Gra 
nada contain transversal valleys, of which the per 
pendicular depth is sometimes 1400 metres, or 
4854 feet. The existence of these valleys prevents 
the inhabitants from travelling except on horse 
back, a-foof, or carried on the shoulders of In 
dians (called cargadores) ; but in the kingdom of 
New Spain carriages roll on to Santa Fe in the 
province of New Mexico, for a length of more 
than 1000 kilometres, or 500 leagues. On the 
whole of this road there were few difficulties for 
art to surmount. 

The table-land of Mexico is in general so little 
interrupted by valleys, and its declivity is so gen 
tle, that as far as the city of Durango in New 
Biscay, 140 leagues from Mexico, the surface is 
continually elevated from 1700 to 2700 metres, or 
from 5576 to 8856 feet, above the level of the 
neighbouring ocean. This is equal to the height 
of mount Cenis, St.Gothard, or the great St. Ber 
nard. Humboldt, that he might examine this geo 
logical phenomenon with the attention which it 
deserved, executed five barometrical surveys: 
The first was across the kingdom of New Spain, 
from the S. sea to the Mexican gulf, from Aca- 
pulco to Mexico, and from Mexico to Vera Cruz. 
The second survey extended from Mexico by 
Tula,*.Queretaro, and Salamanca, to Guanaxuato. 
The third comprehended the intendancy of Valla- 
dolid, from Guanaxuato to the volcano of Jorullo 
at Pascuaro. The fourth extended from Valla- 
dolid to Toluca, and from thence to Mexico. 
Lastly, the fifth included the environs of Moran 
and Actopan. The number of points of which lie 
determined the height, either barometrically or 
trigonometrically, amounts to 208 ; and they arc 
all distributed over a surface comprehended be 
tween lat. 16 50 and 2l0 ??, and long. 102 8 



and 98 28 a&amp;gt;. from Paris. Beyond these limits 
but one place was accurately ascertained, and that 
is the city of Durango, elevated, according to a 
deduction from a mean barometrical altitude, 2000 
metres, or 6561 feet, above the level of the sea. 
Thus the table-land of Mexico preserves its extra 
ordinary elevation much farther n. than the tropic 
of Cancer. 

These measurements of heights, with the astro 
nomical observations which Humboldt made on 
the same extent of ground, enabled him to con 
struct the physical maps which accompany his 
work. They contain a series of vertical sections. 
In the statistics of the kingdom of New Spain, we 
must confine ourselves to plans likely to attract in 
terest from views of political economy. The phy 
siognomy of a country, grouping of mountains, 
extent of plains, elevation which determines its 
temperature ; in short, whatever constitutes the 
construction of the globe, has the most essential 
influence on the progress of population and wel 
fare of the inhabitants. It influences the state of 
agriculture, which must vary with the difference 
of climate, the means of internal commerce, the 
communications which depend on the nature of 
the territory, and the military defence, on which 
the external security of the colony depends. In 
these relations alone extensive geological views carl 
interest the statesman, when he calculates the force 
and territorial wealth of a nation. 

In S. America, the cordillera of the Andes ex 
hibits at immense heights plains completely level. 
Such is the plain of 2565 metres, or 8413 feet, ele 
vation, on which the city of Santa Fe de Bogota is 
built. Wheat, potatoes, and chenopodlum guinea, 
are there carefully cultivated. Such is also the 
plain of Caxamarca in Peru, the ancient residence 
of the unfortunate Atahualpa, of 2750 metres, or 
9021 feet, elevation. The great plains of Anti- 
sana, in the middle of which rises the part of the 
volcano which penetrates the region of perpetual 
snow, are 4100 metres, or 13,451 feet, higher than 
the level of the ocean. These plains exceed in 
length the summit of the Pic of Teneriffe by 389 
metres, or 1541 feet; and yet they are so level, 
that at the aspect of their natal soil, those who in 
habit these countries have no suspicion of the ex 
traordinary situation in which Nature has placed 
them. But all the plains of New Granada, Quito, 
or Peru, do not exceed 40 square leagues. Of 
difficult access, and separate from one another by 
profound valleys, they arc very unfavourable for 
the transport of goods and internal commerce. 
Crowning insulated summits, they form as it were 
small islands in the middle of the aerial ocean. 1 
I 



160 



MEXICO. 



[Those who inhabit these frozen plains remain con 
centrated there, and dread to descend into the 
neighbouring regions, where a suffocating heat 
prevails, prejudicial to the primitive inhabitants of 
the higher Andes. 

In Mexico, however, the soil assumes a different 
aspect. Plains of a great extent, but of a surface 
no less uniform, are so approximated to one an 
other, that they form but a single plain on the 
lengthened ridge of the cordillera ; such is the 
plain -which runs from lat. 18 lo 40 n. Its 
length is equal to the distance from Lyons to the 
tropic of Cancer, which traverses the great African 
desert. This extraordinary plain appears to de 
cline insensibly towards the n. No measurement, 
as we have already remarked, was ever made in 
New Spain beyond the city of Durango ; but tra 
vellers observe, that the ground lowers visibly to 
wards New Mexico, and towards the sources of 
the Rio Colorado. The three sections accom 
panying Humboldt s essay, show at a glance the 
difficulty which the extraordinary configuration 
of the country opposes to the transport of produc 
tions from the interior to the commercial cities of 
the coast. 

In travelling from the capital of Mexico to the 
great mines of Guanaxuato, we remain at first for 
10 leagues in the valley of Tenochtitlan, elevated 
2277 metres, or 7468 feet, above the level of the 
sea. The level of this beautiful valley is so uni 
form, that the village of Gueguetoque, situated at 
the foot of the mountain of Sincoque, is only 10 
metres, or 328 feet, higher than Mexico. The 
hill of Barientos is merely a promontory which 
stretches into the valley. From Gueguetoque we 
ascend near Botas to Puerto de los Reyes, and 
from thence descend into the valley of Tula, which 
is 1 15 metres, or 376 feet, lower than the valley of 
Tenochtitlan, and across which the great canal of 
evacuation of the lakes San Christoval and Zum- 
pango passes to the Rio de Moctezuma and the 
gulf of Mexico. To arrive at the bottom of the 
valley of Tula, in the great plain of Queretaro, we 
must pass the mountain of Calpulalpan, which is 
only J379 metres, or 4522 feet, above the level of 
the sea, and is consequently less elevated than the 
city of Quito, though it appears the highest point 
of the whole road from Mexico to Chihuahua. 
To the n. of this mountainous country the vast 
plains of S. Juan del Rio, Queretaro, and Zelaya 
begin, plains covered with villages and consider 
able cities. Their mean height equals Puy de 
J)6me in Auvergne, and they are near 30 leagues 
in length, extending to the foot of the metalliferous 
mountains of Guanaxuato. Those who have tra 



velled into New Mexico assert, that the rest of the 
way consists of immense plains, appearing like so 
many basins of old dried-up lakes, following one 
another, and only separated by hills which hardly 
rise 200 or 250 metres (656 or 820 feet) at most 
above the bottom of these basins. The four plains 
surrounding the valley of Mexico are as follows, 
viz. the first, which comprehends the valley of 
Toluca, 2600 metres, or 8529 feet ; the second, 
or the valley of Tenochtitlan, 2274 metres, or 
7459 feet; the third, or the valley of Actopan, 
1966 metres, or 6447 feet; and the fourth, the 
valley of Istla, 981 metres, or 3247 feet, of eleva 
tion. These four basins differ as much in their 
climate as in their elevation above the level of the 
sea ; each exhibits a different cultivation : the 
first, and least elevated, is adapted for the cultiva 
tion of sugar; the second, cotton; the third, for 
European grain ; and the fourth, for agava plan 
tations, which may be considered as the vineyards 
of the Aztec Indians. 

The barometrical survey which Humboldt exe 
cuted from Mexico to Guanaxuato proves how 
much the configuration of the soil is favourable in 
New Spain for the transport of goods, naviga 
tion, and even the construction of cunals. It is 
different in the transversal sections from the Atlan 
tic to the S. sea. These sections show the difficul 
ties opposed by nature to the communication be 
tween the interior of the kingdom and the coast. 
They every where exhibit an enormous difference 
of level and temperature, while from Mexico to 
New Biscay the plain preserves an equal eleva 
tion, and consequently a climate rather cold than 
temperate. From the capital of Mexico to Vera 
Cruz, the descent is shorter and more rapid than 
from the same point to Acapulco. We might al 
most say, that the country has a better military 
defence from nature against the people of Europe 
than against the attack of an Asiatic enemy ; but 
the constancy of the trade-winds, and the great 
current of rotation which never ceases between the 
tropics, almost annihilate every political influence 
which China, Japan, or Asiatic Russia, in the suc 
cession of ages might wish to exercise over the 
new continent. 

Taking our direction from the capital of Mexico- 
towards the e. in the road to Vera Cruz, we must 
advance 60 marine leagues before arriving at a 
valley, of which the bottom is less than 1000 me 
tres, or 3280 feet, higher than the level of the sea, 
and in which, consequently, oaks cease to grow. 
In the Acapulco road, descending from Mexico 
towards the S. sea, we arrive at the same tempe 
rate regions in less than 17 leagues. The e. de-] 



MEXICO. 



161 



["elivity of the Cordillera is so rapid, that when once 
we begin to descend from the great central plain, 
we continue the descent till we arrive at the e. 
coast. 

The w. coast is furrowed by four very remark 
able longitudinal valleys, so regularly disposed, 
that those which are nearest the ocean are even 
deeper than those more remote from it. Casting 
our eyes on the section drawn up by Humboldt 
from exact measurements, we shall observe, that 
from the plain of Tenochtitlan the traveller first 
descends into the valley of Istla, then into that of 
Mascala, then into that of Papagayo, and lastly 
into the valley of Percgrino. The bottom of these 
four basins rise 981, 514, 170, and 158 metres 
(3217, 1685, 557, and 518 feet) above the level of 
the ocean. The deepest are also the narrowest. 
A curve drawn over the mountains which separate 
these valleys, over the Pic of the Marquis (the old 
camp of Cortes), the summits of Tasco, Chilpan- 
singo, and Posquelitos, would preserve an equally 
regular progress. We might even be tempted to 
believe that this regularity is conformable to the 
type generally followed by nature in the construc 
tion of mountains ; but the aspect of the Andes of 
S. America will soon destroy these systematic de 
lusions. Many geological considerations prove to 
us, that at the formation of mountains, causes ap 
parently very trivial have determined the accu 
mulation of matter in colossal summits, sometimes 
towards the centre, and sometimes on the edges of 
the Cordilleras. 

Thus the Asiatic road differs very much from 
the European. For the space of 72.5 leagues, 
the distance in a straight line from Mexico to Aca- 
pulco, we continually ascend and descend, and ar 
rive every instant from a cold climate in regions 
excessively hot. Yet the road of Acapulco may 
be made fit for carriages. On the contrary, of the 
84.5 leagues from the capital to the port of Vera 
Cruz, one-fourth belongs to the great plain of Ana- 
huac. The rest of the road is a laborious and 
continued descent, particularly from the small for 
tress of Perote to the city of Xalapa, and from this 
site, one of the most beautiful and picturesque in 
the known world, to La Rinconada. It is the 
difficulty of this descent which raises the carriage 
of flour from Mexico to Vera Cruz, and prevents 
it to this day from competing in Europe with the 
flour of Philadelphia. There is actually at pre 
sent constructing a superb causeway along this e. 
descent of the Cordillera. This work, due to the 
great and praiseworthy activity of the merchants 
of Vera Cruz, will have the most decided influence 
on the prosperity of the inhabitants of the whole 

VOL. III. 



kingdom of New Spain. The places of thou 
sands of mules will be supplied by carriages fit to 
transport merchandises from sea to sea, which will 
connect, as it were, the Asiatic commerce of 
Acapulco with the European commerce of Vera 
Cruz. 

We have already stated that in the Mexican 
provinces situated in the torrid zone, a space of 
23,000 square leagues enjoys a cold, rather than a 
temperate climate. All this great extent of coun 
try is traversed by the Cordillera of Mexico, a 
chain of colossal mountains which may be con 
sidered as a prolongation of the Andes of Peru. 
Notwithstanding their lowness in Choco, and the 
province of Darien, the Andes traverse the isthmus 
of Panama, and recover a considerable height in 
the kingdom of Guatemala. Sometimes their crest 
approaches the Pacific ocean, at other times it oc 
cupies the centre of the country, and sometimes it 
approaches the gulf of Mexico. In the kingdom 
of Guatemala, for example, this crest, jagged with 
volcanic cones, runs along the w. coast From the 
lake of Nicaragua towards the bay of Tehuan- 
tepee; but in the province of Oaxaca, between 
the sources of the rivers Chimalapa and Guasacu- 
alco, it occupies the centre of the Mexican isth 
mus. From lat. 18| to the 21, in the intendan- 
cies of La Puebla and Mexico, from Misteca to 
the mines of Zimapan, the cordillera stretches from 
s. to n. and approaches the e. coast. 

In this part of the great plain of Anahuac, be 
tween the capital of Mexico, and the small cities 
of Xalapa and Cordoba, a group of mountains 
appears which rivals the most elevated summits of 
the new continent. It is enough to name four of 
these colossi, whose heights were unknown be 
fore Humboldt s expedition ; Popocatepetl, 5400 
metres, or 17,716 feet ; Iztaccihuatl, or the White 
Woman, 4768 metres, or 15,700 feet; Citlalte 
petl, or the Pic d Orizaba, 5295 metres, or 17,371 
feet ; and Nauhcampatepetl, or the Cofre de Pe- 
rotc, 4089 metres, or 13,314 feet. This group 
of volcanic mountains bears a strong analogy with 
that of the kingdom of Quito. If the height at 
tributed to mount St. Elie be exact, we may admit 
that it is only under the 19 and 60 of lat. that 
mountains in the n. hemisphere reach the enor 
mous elevation of 5400 metres above the level of 
the ocean. 

Farther to the n. of the parallel of 19, near the 
celebrated mines of Zimapan and the Doctor, 
situated in the intendancy of Mexico, the cordillem 
takes the name of Sierra Madre ; and then leaving 
the e. part of the kingdom it runs to the n. w. to 
wards the cities of San M iguel cl Grande and Gua-~] 



MEXICO. 



[naxuato. To the n. of this last city, considered 
as the Potosi of Mexico, the Sierra Madre becomes 
of an extraordinary breadth. It divides imme 
diately into three branches, of which the most e. 
runs in the direction of Charcas and the Real de 
Catorce, and loses itself in the new kingdom of 
Leon. The w. branch occupies a part of the in- 
tendancy of Guadalaxara. After passing Balanos 
it sinks rapidly, and stretches by Culiacan and 
Arispe, in the intendancy of Sonora, to the banks 
of the Rio Gila. However, it acquires again a 
considerable degree of height under the 30 of lat. 
in Tarahumara, near the gulf of California, where 
it forms the mountains De la Primeria Alta, cele 
brated for the gold washed down from them. The 
third branch of the Sierra Madre, which may be 
considered as the central chain of the Mexican 
Andes, occupies the whole extent of the intendancy 
of Zacatecas. We may follow it through Du- 
rango and the Parral in New Biscay, to the Sierra 
delos Mimbres (situated to the w. of the Rio 
Grande del Norte). From thence it traverses New 
Mexico, and joins the Crane mountains (Mori- 
tagnes de la Grue) and the Sierra Verde. This 
mountainous country, situated under the 40 of 
lat. was examined in 1777 by Fathers Escalante 
and Font. The Rio Gila rises here, of which the 
sources are near those of the Rio del Norte. It is 
the crest of this central branch of the Sierra Madre 
which divides the waters between the Pacific and 
Atlantic ocean. It was a continuation of this 
branch which Fidler and the intrepid Mackenzie 
examined under the 50 and 55 of w. lat. 

We have thus sketched a view of the Cordilleras 
of New Spain. We have remarked that the coasts 
alone of this vast kingdom possess a warm climate 
adapted for the productions of the West Indies. 
The intendancy of Vera Cruz, with the exception 
of the plain which extends from Perote to the 
Pic d Orizaba, Yucatan, the coast of Oaxaca, the 
maritime provinces of New Santander and Texas, 
the new kingdom of Leon, the province of Coha- 
huila, the uncultivated country called Bolson de 
Mapimi, the coast of California, the w. part of 
Sonora, Cinaloa, and New Galicia, the s. re 
gions of the intendancies of Valladolid, Mexico, 
and La Puebla, are low grounds intersected with 
very inconsiderable hills. The mean temperature 
of these plains, of those at least situated within the 
tropics, and whose elevation above the level of 
the sea does not exceed 300 metres, or 984 feet, is 
from 25 to 26 of the centigrade thermometer, or 
77 of Fahrenheit s ; that is to say, from 8 to 9 
of the centigrade, or from J4 to 16 of Fahrenheit, 
greater than the mean heat of Naples. 



These fertile regions, which the natives call 
tierras calientes, produce in abundance sugar, 
indigo, cotton, and bananas. But when Euro 
peans, not seasoned to the climate, remain in these 
countries for any time, particularly in populous 
cities, they become the abode of the yellow fever, 
known by the name of black vomiting, or vomito 
prieto. The port of Acapulco, and the valleys of 
Papagayo and Peregrine, are among the hottest 
and unhealthiest places of the earth. On the e. 
coast of New Spain, the great heats are occasion 
ally interrupted by strata of cold air, brought by 
the winds from Hudson s bay towards the parallels 
of the Havannah and Vera Cruz. These impetu 
ous winds blow from October to March ; they are 
announced by the extraordinary manner in which 
they disturb the regular recurrence of the small 
atmospherical tides, or horary variations of the 
barometer ; (see this phenomenon explained in the 
first volume of Humboldt s Travels, Physique 
Generate, p. 92, 94) ; and they frequently cool 
the air to such a degree, that at Havannah the 
centigrade thermometer descends to 0, or 32 of 
Fahrenheit, and at Vera Cruz to 16, or 60 of 
Fahrenheit ; a prodigious fall for countries in the 
torrid zone. 

On the declivity of the cordillera^ at the eleva 
tion of 1200 or 1500 metres, or from 3936 to 4920 
feet, there reigns perpetually a soft spring tempe 
rature, which never varies more than four or five 
degrees (seven or nine of Fahrenheit). The ex 
tremes of heat and cold are there equally unknown. 
The natives give to this region the name of tierras 
templadas, in which the mean heat of the whole 
year is from 20 to 21, or from 68 to 70 of Fah 
renheit. Such is the fine climate of Xalapa, Tasco, 
and Chilpansingo, three cities celebrated tor their 
great salubrity, and the abundance of fruit trees 
which grow in their neighbourhood. Unfortu 
nately, this mean height of 1300 metres, or 4264 
feet, is the height to which the clouds ascend above 
the plains adjoining to the sea ; from which cir 
cumstance these temperate regions, situated on the 
declivity (for example, the environs of the city 
of Xa(apa), are frequently enveloped in thick 
fogs. 

It remains for us to speak of the third zone, 
known by the denomination of tierras frias. It 
comprehends the plains elevated more than 2200 
metres, or 7217 feet, above the level of the ocean, 
of which the mean temperature is under 17, or 62 
of Fahrenheit. In the capital of Mexico, the cen 
tigrade thermometer has been known to fall several 
degrees below the freezing point ; but this is a very 
rare phenomenon ; and the winters are usually as~| 



MEXICO. 



163 



[mild there as at Naples. In the coldest season, the 
mean heat of the day is from 13 to 14, from 55 
to 70 of Fahrenheit. In summer the thermometer 
never rises in the shade above 21, or 75 of Fah 
renheit. The mean temperature of the whole 
table-land of Mexico is in general 17, or 62 of 
Fahrenheit, which is equal to the temperature of 
Rome. Yet this same table-land, according to 
the classification of the natives, belongs, as we 
have already stated, to the tierras frias ; from 
which we may see that the expressions, hot or cold, 
have no absolute value. At Guayaquil, under a 
burning sky, the people of colour complain of ex 
cessive cold, when the centigrade thermometer 
suddenly sinks to 24, (75 of Fahrenheit), while 
it remains the rest of the day at 30, (86 of Fah 
renheit). 

But the plains more elevated than the valley of 
Mexico, for example, those whose absolute height 
exceeds 2500 metres, or 8201 feet, possess, within 
the tropics, a rude and disagreeable climate, even 
to an inhabitant of the n. Such are the plains of 
Toluca, and the heights of Guchilaqne, where, 
during a great part of the day, the air never heats 
to more than 6 or 8, (43 or 46 of Fahrenheit), 
and the olive tree bears no fruit, though it is culti 
vated successfully a few hundred metres lower in 
the valley of Mexico. 

All those regions called cold enjoy a mean tem 
perature of from 11 to 15, or from 51 to 55 of 
Fahrenheit, equal to that of France and Lombardy. 
Yet the vegetation is less vigorous, and the Euro 
pean plants do not grow with the same rapidity as 
in their natal soil. The winters, at an elevation 
of 2500 metres, are not extremely rude ; but the 
sun has not sufficient power in summer over the 
rarefied air of these plains to accelerate the develop 
ment of flowers, and to bring fruits to perfect ma 
turity. This constant equality, this want of a 
strong ephemeral heat, imprints a peculiar cha 
racter on the climate of the higher equinoctial re 
gions. Thus the cultivation of several vegetables 
succeeds worse on the ridge of the Mexican cordil- 
leras than in plains situated to the n. of the tropic, 
though frequently the mean heat of these plains is 
less than that of the plains between the 19 and 22 
of Int. 

These general considerations on the physical 
division of New Spain are extremely interesting in 
apolitical view. In France, even in the greatest 
p r irt of Europe, the employment of the soil de 
pends almost entirely on gcopraphical latitude; 
but in the equinoctial regions of Peru, New Gre 
nada, and Mexico, the climate, productions, 
aspect, we may say physiognomy, of the country, 



are solely modified by the elevation of the soil 
above the level of the sea. The influence of geo 
graphical position is absorbed in the effect of this 
elevation. Lines of cultivation similar to those 
drawn by Arthur Young and M. Decatidolle ou 
the horizontal projections of France can on\y be 
indicated on sections of New Spain. Under the 
19 and 22 of lat. with some few exceptions, 
sugar, cotton, particularly cacao, and indigo, are 
only produced abundantly at an elevation of from 
6 to 800 metres, or from 1968 to 2624 feet. The 
wheat of Europe occupies a zone on the declivity 
of the mountains, which generally commences at 
1400 metres, or 4592 feet, and ends at 3000 metres, 
or 9842 feet. The banana tree (musa paradisiaca), 
the fruit of which constitutes the principal nourish 
ment of all the inhabitants of the tropics, bears 
almost no fruit above J550 metres, or 5084 feet; 
the oaks of Mexico grow only between 800 and 
3000 metres, (2624 and 9842 feet) ; and the pines 
never descend towards the coast of Vera Cruz 
farther down than 1850, or 6068 feet, nor rise near 
the region of perpetual snow to an elevation of 
more than 4000 metres, or 13,123 feet. 

The provinces called internas, situated in the 
temperate zone (particularly those included be 
tween the 30 and 38 of lat.) enjoy, like the rest 
of N. America, a climate essentially different from 
that of the same parallels in the old continent. 
A remarkable inequality prevails between the 
temperature of the different seasons. German 
winters succeed to Neapolitan and Sicilian sum 
mers. It would be superfluous to assign here 
other causes for this phenomenon than the great 
breadth of the continent and its prolongation to 
wards the n. pole. This subject has been dis 
cussed by enlightened natural philosophers, par 
ticularly by M. V olney, in his excellent work on 
the soil and climate of the United States, with all 
the care which it deserves. We shall merely ob 
serve, that the difference of temperature observable 
between the same latitudes of Europe and America, 
is much less remarkable in those parts of the new 
continent bordering on the Pacific ocean than in 
the e. parts. M. Barton has proved, from the 
state of agriculture and the natural distribution of 
vegetables, that the Atlantic provinces are much 
colder than the extensive plains situated to the w. 
of the Allcghany mountains. 

A remarkable advantage for the progress of 
national industry arises from the height at wh ch 
nature, in New Spain, has deposited the precious 
metals. In Peru the most considerable silver 
mines, those of Potosi, Pasco, and Chota, are 
immensely elevated very near the region of per-j 
y 2 



MEXICO. 



[petual snow. In working them, men, provisions, 
and cattle must all be brought from a distance. 
Cities situated in plains, where water freezes the 
whole year round, and where trees never vegetate, 
can hardly be an attractive abode. Nothing can 
determine a free-man to abandon the delicious cli 
mate of the valleys to insulate himself on the top 
of the Andes but the hope of amassing wealth. 
But in Mexico, the richest seams of silver, those 
of Guanaxuato, Zacatecas, Tasco, and Real del 
Monte, are in moderate elevations of from 1700 
to 2COO metres, (5576 to 6561 feet). The mines 
are surrounded with cultivated fields, towns, and 
villages ; the neighbouring summits are crowned 
with forests ; and every thing facilitates the ac 
quisition of this subterraneous wealth. 

In the midst of so many advantages bestowed 
by nature on the kingdom of New Spain, it suffers 
in general, like old Spain, from the want of water 
and navigable rivers. The great river of the n. 
(Rio Bravo del Norte) and the Rio Colorado, arc 
the only rivers worthy of fixing the attention of 
travellers, either for the length of their course, or 
the mass of water which they pour into the ocean. 
The Rio del Norte, from the mountains of the 
Sierra V r erde (to the e. of the lake of Timpanogos) 
to its mouth in the province of New Santander, 
has a course of 512 leagues. The course of the 
Rio Colorado is 250. But these two rivers, 
situated in the most uncultivated part of the king 
dom, can never be interesting for commerce, till 
great changes in the social order, and other fa 
vourable events, introduce colonization into these 
fertile and temperate regions. These changes are 
not perhaps very distant. The banks of the Ohio 
were even in 1797 so thinly inhabited, (Voyage 
de Michaux a I* Quest des Monts Alleghanys, p. 
115), that 30 families could hardly be found in a 
space of ISO leagues, while the habitations are 
now so multiplied that they are never more than 
one or two leagues distant from one another. 

In the whole equinoctial part of Mexico there 
are only small rivers, the mouths of -which are of 
considerable size. The narrow form of the con 
tinent prevents the collection of a great mass of 
water. The rapid declivity of the Cordillera 
abounds more properly with torrents than rivers. 
Mexico is in the same state with Peru, where the 
Andes approach so near to the coast as to occasion 
the aridity of the neighbouring plains. Among 
the small number of rivers in the s. part of New 
Spain, the only ones which may in time become 
interesting for interior commerce are, 1. The Rio 
Guasacualco, and the Rio Alvarado, both to the 
y; e. of Vera Cruz, and adapted for facilitating the 



communication with the kingdom of Guatemala ; 

2. The Rio de Moctezuma, which carries the 
Avaters of the lakes and valley of Tcnochtitlan to 
the Rio de Panuco, and by which, forgetting that 
Mexico is 2277 metres, or 7468 feet, elevated 
above the level of the sea, a navigation has been 
projected between the capital and the o&amp;gt;. coast; 

3. The Rio dc Zacatula ; 4. The great river of 
Santiago, formed by the junction of the rivers 
Lerma and Las Laxas, which might carry the 
flour of Salamanca, Zelaya, and perhaps the 
whole intendancy of Guadalaxara, to the port of 
San Bias, or the coast of the Pacific ocean. 

The lakes with which Mexico abounds, and of 
which the most part appear annually on the de 
cline, are merely the remains of immense basins 
of water, which appear to have formerly existed 
on the high and extensive plains of the cordillera. 
We shall merely mention in this physical view 
the great lake of Chapala in New Galicia, of 
nearly 160 square leagues, double the size of the 
lake of Constance ; the lakes of the valley of 
Mexico, which include a fourth part of its sur 
face; the lake ofPatzcuaro, in the intendancy of 
Valladolid, one of the most picturesque situations 
found in either continent ; and the lakes of Mex- 
titlan and Parras in New Biscay. 

The interior of New Spain, especially a great 
part of the high table-land of Anahuac, is destitute 
of vegetation : its arid aspect brings to mind in 
some places the plains of the two Castiles. Se 
veral causes concur to produce this extraordinary 
effect. The evaporation which takes place on 
great plains is sensibly increased by the great 
elevation of the Mexican cordillera. On the other 
hand, the country is not of sufficient elevation for 
a great number of summits to penetrate the region 
of perpetual snow. This region commences under 
the equator at 4800 metres, or 15,747 feet, and 
under the 45 of lat. at 2550 metres, or S365 feet, 
above the level of the sea. In Mexico the eternal 
snows commence in the 19 and 20 of lat. at 4600 
metres, or 15,091 feet, of elevation. Hence, of 
six colossal mountains which nature has ranged in 
the same line, between the parallels of 19 and 
19|, only four, the Pic d Orizaba, Popocatepetl, 
Iztaccihuatl, and the Nevado de Toluca, are co 
vered with perpetual snow, while the two others, 
the Cofre de Perote, and the Volcan dc Colima, 
remain uncovered the greatest part of the year. 
To the n. and s. of this parallel of great elevations, 
beyond this singular zone, in which the new 
Volcan de Jorullo is also ranged, there are no 
mountains which exhibit the phenomenon of per- 
petual snow.] 



MEXICO. 



165 



[These snows, at the period of their minimum, 
in the month of September, never descend in the 
parallel of Mexico below 4500 metres, or 14,763 
feet. But in the month of January they fall as 
low as 3700 metres, or 12,133 feet: this is the 
period of their maximum. The oscillation of the 
limits of perpetual snow is, consequently, under 
the lat . of 1 9, from one season to the other, 800 
metres, or 2624 feet ; while under the equator it 
never exceeds 60 or 70 metres, (196 or 229 feet). 
We must not confound these eternal snows with 
the snows which in winter accidentally fall in much 
lower regions. Even this phenomenon, like every 
other in nature, is subject to immutable laws 
worthy the investigation of philosophers. This 
ephemeral snow is never observed under the equa 
tor below 3800 or 3900 metres, (12,466 to 12,794 
feet) ; but in Mexico, under the lat. of 18 and 22 
it is commonly seen at an elevation of 3000 metres, 
or 9842 feet. Snow has even been seen in the 
streets of the capital of Mexico at 2si77 metres, or 
7468 feet, and 400 metres, or 6156 feet, lower in 
the city of Valladolid. 

In general, in the equinoctial regions of New 
Spain, the soil, climate, physiognomy of vegetables, 
all assume the character of the temperate zones. 
The proximity of Canada, the great breadth of 
the new continent towards the n. the mass of snows 
with which it is covered, occasion in the Mexican 
atmosphere frigorifications by no means to be ex 
pected in these regions. 

If the table-land of New Spain is singularly cold 
in winter, its temperature is, on the other hand, 
much higher in summer than what Avas found by 
the thermometrical observations of Bouguer and 
La Condamine in the Andes of Peru. The great 
mass of the cordiflera of Mexico, and the immense 
extent of its plains, produce a reverberation of the 
solar rays, never observed in mountainous coun 
tries of greater inequality. This heat, and other 
local causes, produce the aridity of these fine re 
gions. 

To then, of 20, from the 22 to the 30 of lat. 
the rains, which only fall in the months of June, 
July, August, and September, are very unfre- 
quent in the interior of the country. We have 
already observed that the great height of this table 
land, and the small barometrical pressure of the 
rarefied air, accelerate the evaporation. The as 
cending current or column of warm air which rises 
from the plains prevents the clouds from precipi 
tating in rain to water a land, dry, saline, and 
destitute of vegetation. The springs are rare in 
mountains composed principally of porous amyg 
daloid und fendilatcd porphyry. The filtrated 

9 



water, in place of collecting in small subterraneous 
basins, is lost in the crevices which old volcanic 
revolutions have opened, and only issues forth at 
the bottom of the Cordillera. It forms a great 
number of rivers on the coast, of which the course 
is very short, on account of the configuration of the 
country. 

The aridity of the central plain, the want of 
trees, occasioned, perhaps, in a good measure by 
the length of time the great valleys have remained 
covered with water, obstruct very much the work 
ing of the mines. These disadvantages have aug 
mented since the arrival of Europeans in Mexico, 
who have not only destroyed without planting, 
but in draining great extents of ground have oc 
casioned another more important, evil. Muriate 
of soda and lime, nitrate of potash, and other sa 
line substances, cover the surface of the soil, and 
spread with a rapidity very difficult to be ex 
plained. Through this abundance of salt, and 
these efflorecenccs, hostile to cultivation, the table 
land of Mexico bears a great resemblance in many 
places to Thibet and the saline steppes of central 
Asia. In the valley of Tenochtitlan, particularly, 
the sterility and want of vigorous vegetation have 
been sensibly augmenting since the Spanish con 
quest ; for this valley was adorned with beautiful 
verdure when the lake occupied more ground, and 
the clayey soil was washed by more frequent in 
undations. 

Happily, however, this aridity of soil, of which 
we have been indicating the principal physical 
causes, is only to be found in the most elevated 
plains. A great part of the vast kingdom of New 
Spain belongs to the most fertile regions of the 
earth. The declivity of the cordiUera is exposed 
to humid winds and frequent fogs; and the vege 
tation nourished with these aqueous vapours ex 
hibits an uncommon beauty and strength. The 
humidity of thecoasts, assisting the putrefaction of 
a great mass of organic substances, gives rise to 
maladies, to which Europeans and others not sea 
soned to the climate are alone exposed ; for under 
the burning sun of the tropics the unhealthiness 
of the air almost always indicates extraordinary 
fertility of soil. Thus at Vera Cruz the quantity 
of rain in a year amounts to l m .62, equal to 63.780 
inches, while in France it scarcely amounts to 
O m .80, or 37.496 inches. Yet with the excep 
tion of a few sea- ports and deep valleys, where the 
natives suffer from intermittent fevers, New Spain 
ought to be considered as a country remarkably 
salubrious. 

The inhabitants of Mexico are less disturbed by 
earthquakes and volcanic explosions than the in-] 



166 



MEXICO. 



[habitants of Quito, and the provinces of Guate 
mala and Cumana. There are only five burning 
volcanoes in all New Spain, Orizaba, Popocate 
petl, and the mountains of Tustla, Jorullo, and 
Colima. Earthquakes, however, are by no means 
rare on the coast of the Pacific ocean, and in the 
environs of the capital; but they never produce 
such desolating effects as have been witnessed in 
the cities of Lima, Riobamba, Guatemala, and 
Cumana. On the 14th of September 1759, a hor 
rible catastrophe took place : the volcanoes of Jo- 
rullo burst, and were seen surrounded with an in 
numerable multitude of small smoking cones. 
Subterraneous noises, so much the more alarming 
as they were followed by no phenomenon, were 
heard at Guanaxuato in the month of January 
1784. All these phenomena seem to prove, that 
the country between the parallels of 18 and 22 
contains an active internal fire, which pierces, 
from time to time, through the crust of the globe, 
even at great distances from the sea shore. 

The physical situation of the city of Mexico 
possesses inestimable advantages, if we consider it 
in the relation of its communication with the rest 
of the civilized world. Placed on an isthmus, 
washed by the S. sea and Atlantic ocean, Mexico 
appears destined to possess a powerful influence 
over the political events which agitate the two con 
tinents. A king of Spain resident in the capital of 
Mexico, might transmit his orders in five weeks 
to the peninsula in Europe, and in six weeks to 
the Philippine islands in Asia. The vast kingdom 
of New Spain, under a careful cultivation, would 
alone produce all that commerce collects together 
from the rest of the globe, sugar, cochineal, cacao , 
cotton, cofiee, wheat, hemp, flax, silk, oils, and 
wine. It would furnish every metal without even 
the exception of mercury. Superb timber and an 
abundance of iron and copper would favour the 
progress of Mexican navigation; but the state of 
the coasts and the want of ports from the mouth of 
the Rio Alvarado to the mouth of the Hio Bravo, 
oppose obstacles in this respect which would be 
difficult to overcome. 

These obstacles, it is true, do not exist on the 
coast of the Pacific ocean. San Francisco in New 
California, San Bias in the intendancy of Gua- 
dalaxara, near the mouth of the river Santiago, 
and especially Acapulco, are magnificent ports. 
The last, probably formed by a violent earth 
quake, is one of the most admirable basins in the 
whole world. In the S. sea there is only Co- 
quirabo on the coast of Chile which can lie com 
pared with Acapulco; yet in winter, during great 
hurricanes, the sea becomes very rough in Aca 



pulco. Farther s. we find the port of Rialexo, 
in the kingdom of Guatemala, formed, like 
Guayaquil, by a large and beautiful river. Son- 
sonate is very much frequented during the fine 
season, but it is merely an open road like Tehuan- 
tepec, and is consequently very dangerous in 
winter. 

When we examine the e. coast of New Spain, 
we see that it does not possess the same advantages 
as the w. coast. We have already observed, that, 
properly speaking, it possesses no port ; for Vera 
Cruz, by which an annual commerce of 50 or 
60,000,000 of piastres is carried on, is merely a 
bad anchorage between the shallows of La Caleta, 
La Gallcga, and La Lavandera. The physical 
cause of this disadvantage is easily discovered. 
The coast of Mexico, along the Mexican gulf, 
may be considered as a dike against which the 
trade winds, and perpetual motion of the waves 
from e. to w. throw up the sands which the agitated 
ocean carries along. This current of rotation runs 
along S. America from Cumana to the isthmus of 
Darien ; it ascends towards cape Catoche, and 
after whirling a long time in the Mexican gulf, 
issues through the canal of Florida, and flows to 
wards the banks of Newfoundland. The sands 
heaped up by the vortices of the waters, from the 
peninsula of Yucatan to the mouths of the Rio del 
Norte and the Mississippi, insensibly contract the 
the basin of the Mexican gulf. Geological facts 
of a very remarkable nature prove this increase of 
the continent ; we see the ocean every where re 
tiring. M. Ferrer found near Sotto la Marina, to 
the e . of the small town of New Santander, 10 
leagues in the interior of the country, moving 
sands filled with sea shells. Humboldt observed 
the same thing in the environs of Antigua and New 
Vera Cruz. The rivers which descend from the 
Sierra Madre and enter the Atlantic ocean have in 
no small degree contributed to increase the sand 
banks. It is curious to observe that the e. coasts 
of Old and New Spain are equally disadvantageous 
for navigation. The coast of New Spain, from 
the 18 to the 26 of lat. abounds with bars; and 
vessels which draw more than 32 centimetres, or 
12 inches, of water, cannot pass over any of 
these bars, without danger of grounding. Yet 
obstacles like these, so unfavourable for commerce, 
would at the same time facilitate the defence of the 
country against the ambitious projects of a Euro 
pean conqueror. 

The inhabitants of Mexico, discontented with 
the port of Vera Cruz, if we may give the name 
of port to the most dangerous of all anchorages, 
entertain the hope of finding out surer channels] 



MEXICO. 



167 



[for the commerce with the mother country. We 
shall merely name the mouths of the rivers Alva- 
rado and Guasacualco to the s. of Vera Cruz ; 
and to the n. of that city the Rio Tampico, and 
especially the village of Sotto la Marina, near the 
bar of Santander. These four points have long 
fixed the attention of the government ; but even 
there, however advantageous in other respects, 
the sand-banks prevent the entry of large vessels. 
These ports would require to be artificially cor 
rected ; but it becomes necessary in the first place 
to inquire if the localities are such as to warrant a 
belief that this expensive remedy would be durable 
in its effects. It is to be observed, however, that 
we still know too little of the coasts of New Santan 
der and Texas, particularly that part to the n. of 
the lake of S. Bernard or Carbonera, to be able to 
assert that in the whole of this extent nature pre 
sents the same obstacles and the same bars. Two 
Spanish officers of distinguished zeal and astrono 
mical knowledge, MM. Cevallos and Herrera, 
have engaged in this interesting and useful inves 
tigation. At present Mexico is in a military de 
pendence on the Havannah, which is the only 
neighbouring port capable of receiving squadrons, 
and the most important point for the defence of 
the e. coast of New Spain. Accordingly, the go 
vernment, since the last taking of the Havannah 
by the English, has been at enormous expences in 
increasing the fortifications of the place. Sensible 
of its true interests, the court of Madrid has wisely 
laid it down as a principle, that the dominion of 
the island of Cuba is essential for the preservation 
of New Spain. 

A very serious inconvenience is common to the 
c. coast, and to the coast washed by the Great 
ocean, falsely called the Pacific ocean. They are 
rendered inaccessible for several months by violent 
tempests, which effectually prevent all navigation. 
The n. winds (los nortes), which are n. w. winds, 
blow in the gulf of Mexico from the autumnal to 
the spring equinox. These winds are generally 
moderate in the months of September and October ; 
their greatest fury is in the month of March ; and 
they sometimes last to April. Those navigators 
who have long frequented the port of Vera Cruz 
know the symptoms of the coming tempest as a 
physician knows the symptoms of an acute malady. 
According to the excellent observations of M. Orta, 
a great change in the barometer, and a sudden in 
terruption in the regular recurrence of the horary 
variations of that instrument, are the sure fore 
runners of the tempest. It is accompanied by the 
following phenomena. At first a small land wind 
(terrat) blows from the ?. n. w, : and to this ter- 



ral succeeds a breeze, first from the n. e. and then 
from the s. During all this time a most suffocat 
ing heat prevails ; and the water dissolved in the 
air is precipitated on the brick walls, the pave 
ment, and iron or wooden balustrades. The sum 
mits of the Pic d Orizaba and the Cofre de Perote, 
and the mountains of Villa Rica, particularly the 
Sierra de San Martin, which extends from Tustla 
to Guasacualco. appear uncovered with clouds, 
while their bases are concealed under a veil of 
demi-transparent vapours. These Cordilleras ap 
pear projected on a fine azure ground. In this 
state of the atmosphere the tempest commences, 
and sometimes with such impetuosity, that before 
the lapse of a quarter of an hour it would be dan 
gerous to remain on the mole in the port of Vera 
Cruz. All communication between the city and 
the castle of S. Juan d Ulua is thenceforth inter 
rupted. These n. wind hurricanes generally re 
main for tiirec or four days, and sornelimes tor 10 
or 12. If the n. wind change into a s. breeze the 
latter is very inconstant, and it is then probable 
that the tempest will recommence ; but if the n^ 
veers to e. by the n. e. then the breeze or fine wea 
ther is durable. During winter we may reckon on 
the breeze continuing for three or four successive 
days, an interval more than sufficient for allowing 
any vessel leaving Vera Cruz to get out to sea and 
escape the sand-banks adjoining to the coast. 
Sometimes even in the months of May, June, 
July, and August, very strong hurricanes are felt 
in the gulf of Mexico. They are called nortes de 
hueso Colorado; but fortunately they are not very 
common. The periods in which the black vomit 
ing (yellow fever) and tempests from the n. pre 
vail at Vera Cruz do not coincide ; consequently 
the European who arrives in Mexico, and the 
Mexican whose affairs compel him to embark, 
or to descend from the table-land of New Spain 
to the coast, have both to make their election 
between the danger of navigation and a mortal 
disease. 

The w. coast of Mexico is of very dangerous 
navigation during the months of July and August, 
when terrible hurricanes blow from the s. w. At 
that time, and even in September and October, the 
ports of San Bias and Acapulco are of very diffi 
cult access. Even in the fine season, from the 
month of October to the month of May (-veratio tic 
la mar del stir), the tranquillity of the Pacific 
ocean is interrupted on this coast by impetuous 
winds from the n. e. and the n. n. e. known by the 
names oi papagtillo and tehuantepec. 

In illustration of this phenomenon, we might bo 
led to believe that the equilibrium of the atmo-1 



168 



M E X I C O. 



[sphere being disturbed in the months of January 
and February on the coast of the Atlantic, the 
agitated air flows back with impetuosity towards 
the Great ocean. The tehuantepec should seem 
therefore to be merely the effect, or rather the con 
tinuation, of the n. wind of the Mexican gulf and 
the brisottes of St. Martha. It renders the coast 
of Solinas and La Ventosa almost as inaccessible 
as that of Nicaragua and Guatemala, where vio 
lent s. w. winds prevail during the months of 
August and September, known by the name of 
tapayaguas. 

These s. w. winds are accompanied with thun 
der and excessive rains, while the tehuantepec 
and papagallos, which blow particularly from cape 
Blanc de^Nicoya (lat. 9 30 ) to L Ensenada de S. 
Catharina (lat. 10 45 ), exert their violence 
during a clear and azure sky. Thus at certain 
periods almost all the coasts of New Spain are dan 
gerous for navigators. 

CHAP. VI. 

Particular statistical account of the inlendancies 
of Nueva Espana. 

BEFORE giving the table which contains a par 
ticular statistical account of the intendancies of 
New Spain, we shall discuss the principles on 
which the new territorial divisions are founded. 
These divisions have been, till lately, entirely un 
known to the most modern geographers ; and 
it was M. Humboldt who first afforded a general 
map of New Spain, in which were contained the 
limits of the intendancies established since 1776. 

Before the introduction of the new administra 
tion by Count Don Jose de Galvez, minister of the 
Indies, New Spain contained, 1. El lleyno de 
Mexico; 2. El lleyno de Nueva Galicia ; 3. El 
Nuevo Reyno de Leon ; 4. La Colonia del Nuevo 
Santander; 5. La Provincia de Texas ; 6. La 
Provincia de Cohahuila ; 7. La Provincia de 
Nueva Biscaya ; 8. La Provincia de la Sonora ; 9. 
La Provincia de Nuevo Mexico; and, 10. Ambas 
Californias, or Las Provincias de la Vieja y Nueva 
California. These old divisions are still very fre 
quently used in the country. Thelimits which sepa 
rate La Nueva Galicia from El Reyno de Mexico, 
to which a part of the old kingdom of Mechoacan 
belongs, are also the line of demarcation between 
the jurisdiction of the two audiences of Mexico and 
Guadalaxara. This line begins on the coast of 
the gulf of Mexico, 10 leagues to the n. of the Rio 
de Panuco and the city of Altamira near Bara 
Ciega, and runs through the intendancy of S. 
Luis Potosi to the mines of Potosi and Bernalejo ; 
from thence passing along the s. extremity of the 



intendancy of Zacatecas, and the w. limits of the 
intendancy of Guanaxuato, it traverses the inten 
dancy of Guadalaxara between Zapotlan and 
Sayula, between Ayotitlan and the Ciudad de la 
Purificacion, to Guatlan, one of the ports of the 
S. sea. All n. of this line belongs to the audiencia 
of Guadalaxara ; and all s, of it to the audiencia 
of Mexico. 

In its present state New Spain is divided into 
12 intendancies, to which we must add three other 
districts, very remote from the capital, which have 
preserved the simple denomination of provinces. 
These fifteen divisions are, 

I. UNDER THE TEMPER ATE ZoNE,82,000 leagues, 

with 677 ,000 souls, or eight inhabitants to the 
square league. 

A. Region of the North, an interior region. 

1. Provincia de Nuevo Mexico, along the Rio 
del Norte to the n. of the parallel of 31. 

2. Intendencia de Nueva Biscaya, to the s. w. 
of the Rio del Norte, on the central table 
land which declines rapidly from Durango 
towards Chihuahua. 

B. Region of the North-west, in the vicinity 

of the Great ocean. 

3. Provincia de la Nueva California, or n. w. 
coast of N. America, possessed by the Spa 
niards. 

4. Provincia de la Antigua California. Its s. 
extremity ends the torrid zone. 

5. Intendencia de la Sonora. The most s. 
part of Cinaloa, in which the celebrated 
mines of Copala and Rosario are situated, 
also passes the tropic of cancer. 

C. Region of the North-east, adjoining the 

gulf of Mexico. 

6. Intendencia de San Luis Potosi. It com 
prehends the provinces of Texas, La Colonia 
de Nuevo Santander and Cohahuila, El 
Nuevo Reyno de Leon, and the districts of 
Charcas, Altamira, Catorce, and Ramos. 
These last districts compose the intendancy 
of San Luis properly so called. The s. 
part, which extends to the .9. of the Barra 
de Santander and the real de Catorce, be 
longs to the torrid zone. 

II. UNDER THK TORRID ZONE, 36,500 square 

leagues, with 5,160,000 souls, or 141 inhabi 
tants to the square league. 

D. Central Region. 

7. Intendencia de Zacatecas, excepting the 
part which extends to the n. of the mines of 
Fresnillo. 

8. Intendencia de Guadalaxara. 

9. Intendencia de Guanaxuato.] 



MEXICO. 



169 



[10. Intenclencia de Valladolid. 
] J . Intendencia de Mexico. 

12. Intendencia de la Puebla. 

13. Intendencia de V r era Cruz. 
E. Region of the South-west. 

14. Intendencia de Oaxaca. 

15. Intendencia de Merida. 

The divisions in this table are founded on the 
physical state of the country. We see that nearly 
seven-eighths of the inhabitants live under the tor 
rid zone. The population becomes thinner as we 
advance towards Durango and Chihuahua. In 
this respect New Spain bears a striking analogy 
to Hindostan, which in its n. parts is bounded by 
regions almost uncultivated and uninhabited. Of 
5,000,000 who inhabit the equinoctial part of 
Mexico, four-fifths live on the ridge of the cor- 
dillera or table-lands, whose elevation above the 
level of the sea equals that of the passage of mount 
Cenis. 

New Spain, considering its provinces according 
to their commercial relations, or the situation of 
the coasts, is divided into three regions. 

I. PROVINCES OF THE INTERIOR, which do 

not extend to the ocean. 

1. Nuevo Mexico. 

2. Nueva Biscaya. 

3. Zacatecas. 

4. Guanaxuato. 

II. MARITIME PROVINCES of the e. coast 

opposite to Europe. 

5. San Luis Potosi. 

6. Vera Cruz. 

7. Merida, or Yucatan. 

ill. MARITIME PROVINCES of the o&amp;gt;. coast 
opposite to Asia. 

8. New California. 

9. Old California. 

10. Sonora. 

11. Guadalaxara. 

12. Valladolid. 
J3. Mexico. 

14. Puebla. 

15. Oaxaca. 

These divisions may, as H umboldt observes, one 
day possess great political interest, when the cul 
tivation of Mexico shall be less concentrated on the 
central table-land or ridge of the cordillera^ and 
when the coasts shall become more populous. The 
maritime provinces of the a&amp;gt;. will send their vessels 
to Nootka, to China, and the E. Indies. The 
Sandwich islands, inhabited by a ferocious, but 
industrious and enterprising people, appear more 
likely destined to receive Mexican than European 

TOT,, in. 



colonists. They afford an important stage to the 
nations who carry on commerce in the Great ocean. 
The inhabitants of New Spain and Peru have never 
yet been able to profit by their advantageous 
position on a coast opposite Asia and New Holland. 
They do not even know the productions of the 
S. sea islands. What efforts have not been made 
by the United States of North America, within the 
last 10 years, to open a communication with the w. 
coast, with the same coast on which the Mexicans 
possess the finest ports, but without activity and 
without commerce ! 

According to the ancient division of the country, 
the Reyno de Nueva Galicia contained more than 
14,000 square leagues, and nearly a million of 
inhabitants : it included the intendancies of Zaca 
tecas and Guadalaxara, (with the exception of the 
most 5. part, which contains the volcano of Colima 
and the village of Ayotitan,) as well as a small 
part of that of San Luis Potosi. The regions now 
known by the denomination of the seveiMntendan- 
cies of Guanaxuato, Valladolid or Mechoacan, 
Mexico, Puebla, Vera Cruz, Oaxaca, and Merida, 
formed along with a small portion of the intcndancy 
of San Luis Potosi, (the most s. part through which 
the river of Panuco runs), the Reyno de Mexico, 
properly so called. This kingdom consequently 
contained more than 27,000 square leagues, and 
nearly 4,500,000 of inhabitants. 

Another division of New Spain, equally ancient 
and less vague, is that which distinguishes New 
Spain, properly so called, from the protindas in- 
ternas. To the latter belongs all to the n. and 
. w. of the kingdom of Nueva Galicia, with the 
exception of the two Californias; consequently, 
1. The small kingdom of Leon ; 2. The colony 
of New Santander ; 3. Texas ; 4. New Biscay ; 
5. Sonora; 6. Cohahuila ; and, 7. New Mexico. 
The provincias internas del Vireynato, which 
contain 7814 square leagues, are distinguished 
from the provincias internas de la comandancia (of 
Chihuahua), erected into a capitania general in 
1779, which contain 59,375 square leagues. Of 
the twelve new intendancies, three are situated in 
the provintias internas, Durango, Sonora, and San 
Luis Polosi. We must not, however, forget that 
the intendant of San Luis is only under the direct 
authority of the viceroy for Leon, Santander, and 
the districts near his residence, those of Charcas, 
Catorce, and Altamira. The governments of 
Cohahuila and Texas make also part of the inten- 
dancy of San Luis Potosi, but they belong directly 
to the comandancia general de Chihuahua. The 
following tables will throw some light on these very] 
z 



170 



MEXICO. 



[complicated territorial divisions. Let us divide 
all New Spain into, 

A. Provincial sujetas al Virey de Nueva Es- 
paiia, 59,103 square leagues, with 5,479,095 
souls : the 10 intendancics of Mexico, Puebla, 
Vera Cruz, Oaxaca, Merida, Valladolid, Gua- 
dalaxara, Zacatccas, Guanaxuato, and San 
Luis Potosi (without including Cohahuila 
and Texas.) 

The two Californias. 

B. Pro dncias sujetas al comamlante general de 
provincial- internas, 59,375 square leagues, 
with 359,200 inhabitants. 

The two intendancies of Durango and So- 
nora. 

The province of Nuevo Mexico. 
Cohahuila and Texas. 

The whole of New Spain, 118,478 square 
leagues, with 5,837,100 inhabitants. 

These tables exhibit the surface of the provinces, 
calculated in square leagues of 25 to the degree, 
according to the general map accompanying Hum- 
boldt s work. The first calculations were made at 
Mexico in the end of 1803, by M. Oteyza and 
Humboldt. His geographical labours having since 
that period attained to greater perfection, M. Olt- 
rrianns took the pains to recalculate the whole terri 
torial surfaces. He executed this operation with the 
precision which characterises whatever he under 
takes, having formed squares of which the sides 
did not contain more than three minutes. 

The population indicated in the following tables 
is what may be supposed to have existed in 1803. 
In all times the population of Asia has been exag 
gerated, arid that of the Spanish possessions in 
America lowered. We forget that with a fine 
climate and fertile soil, population makes rapid 
advances even in countries the worst administered ; 
and we also forget that men scattered over an im 
mense territory suffer less from the imperfections 
of the social state than when the population is very 
concentrated. 



We are uncertain as to the limits which ought 
to be assigned to New Spain to the n. and e. Jt 
is not enough that a country has been run over by 
a missionary monk, or that a coast has been seen by 
a vessel of war, to consider it as belonging to the 
Spanish colonies of America. Cardinal Lorenzana 
printed at Mexico, even in 1770, that New Spain, 
through the bishopric of Durango, bordered per 
haps on Tartary and Greenland ! We are now 
too well instructed in geography to yield ourselves 
up to such vague suppositions. A viceroy of 
Mexico caused the American colonies of the Rus 
sians on the peninsula of Alaska to be visited from 
San Bias. The attention of the Mexican govern 
ment was for a long time turned to the n. w. coast, 
especially since the establishment at Nootka, which 
the court of Madrid was compelled to abandon to 
avoid a war with England. The inhabitants of 
the United States carry their civilization towards 
the Missoury. They gradually approach the coast 
of the Great ocean, to which the fur trade invites 
them. The period approaches when, through the 
rapid progress of human cultivation, the bounda 
ries of New Spain will join those of the Russian 
empire, and the great confederation of American 
republics. At present, however, the Mexican 
government extends no farther along the w. coast 
than the mission of St. Francis, to the s. of cape 
Mendocin, and the village of Taos in New Mexico. 
The boundaries of the intendancy of San Luis 
Potosi on the e. towards the state of Louisiana, are 
not very well determined ; the congress of Wash 
ington endeavoured to confine them to the riffht 
bank of the Rio Bravo del Norte, while the Spa 
niards comprehend under the denomination of 
province of Texas, ihe savanas which extend to 
the Rio Mexicano or Mermentas, to the e. of the 
Rio Sabina. 

The following table exhibits the surface and po 
pulation of the greatest political associations of 
Europe and Asia. It will furnish curious com 
parisons with the present state of Mexico.] 



GREAT 



MEXICO. 



171 



GREAT POLITICAL ASSOCIATIONS IN* JS08. 


Square leasj. 
of 25 to the 
degree. 


Total 
population. 


liilub. 
to the 
square 
league. 


Russian empire 


942,452 


40,000,000 


42 


1. European part 


215,809 


36,400,000 


169 


2. Asiatic part 


726,644 


3,597,000 


5 


The single government of Irkutzk "fc 


350,000 


680,600 


g 


The single government of Tobolsk 


200,000 


72,547 


I 


All Europe - 


476,111 


185,599,000 


383 


The united States of North America, viz. 








1. With Louisiana + - - 


260,340 


6,800,000 


22 


2. Without Louisiana - 


117,478 


6,715,000 


43 


3. Without Louisiana and the Indian territory (in Georgia 








and Western Waters) - - 


78,120 


6,655,000 


85 


Hindoslan on this side (en-deqa) the Ganges* 


162,827 






English territory, of which the East India company possess 








the sovereignty - 


48,299 


23,806,000 


493 


Allies and tributaries of the English company 


32,647 


16,900,000 


518 


Turkish empire in Europe, Asia, and Africa - 


136,110 


25,330,000 


186 


Austrian monarchy - &amp;gt;v 


33,258 


25,588,000 


769 


France, according to M. Peuchet 


32,000 


35,000,000 


1094 


Spain, according to M. Laborde 


25,147 


10,409,000 


413 


New Spain, 








1. With the provincias internas 


118,378 


5,837,100 


49 


2. Without the provincias interims - - 


51,289 


5,413,900 


105 



* According to Arrowsmith s beautiful map of India, 1804. ( Journal^ st ronomique de MM. Zach 
et Lindenau, 1807, p. 361.) The rest of the date from the classical work of M. Hassel, Statistical Vievr 
of the States of Europe, No. I. (1805,) in German. 



We see from this table, which may suggest 
very curious considerations as to the dispropor 
tion of European cultivation, that New Spain is 
almost four times larger than the French empire, 
with a population which till this day is seven 
times smaller. We also see that the points of analogy 
in a comparison of the United States with Mexico 
are very striking, especially if we consider Lou 
isiana and the a&amp;gt;. territory as the provincias inter 
nets of the great confederation of American re 
publics. 

The state of the proiincias internas are described 
as it was when Humboldt left Mexico. A con 
siderable change has since taken place in the 
military government of these vast provinces, of 
which the surface almost doubles that of the French 
empire. In 1807, two comwandantes generales, 
brigadier generals, by name Don Nernesio Sal- 
cedo and Don Pedro Grimarest, governed these n. 
provinces. The following is the present division 
of the gobierno militar, which is now no longer in 
the hands of the governor of Chihuahua alone : 



PROVINCIAS INTERNAS DEL REFNO DE NUEVA 

ESPANA. 

A. Provincias internas occidentals . 

1. Sonora. 

2. Durango o Nueva Biscaya. 

3. Nuevo Mexico. 

4. Californias. 

B. Provincias internas orientates. 

1. Cohahuila. 

2. Texas. 

3. Colonia del Nuevo Santander. 

4. Nuevo Reyrio de Leon. 

The new commandantes generates of the internal 
provinces, as well as the old, are considered as at 
the head of the administration of finances in the 
two intendancies of Sonora and Durango, in the 
province of Nuevo Mexico, and in that part of the 
intendancy of San Luis Potosi which compre 
hends Texas and Cohahuila. As to the small 
kingdom of Leon and New Santander, they are 
only subject to the commandant in a military point 
of view.] 

z 2 



172 



MEXICO. 



TERRITORIAL DIVISIONS. 


Surface in sq. 
leagues of 25 
to the degree. 


Population reduc 
ed to tlie epoch:i &amp;lt; 

1803. 


No. of 
in .ah. to 
tiie sq. 
it airiie. 


New Spain, (extent of the whole viceroyalty without including 
the kingdom of Guatemala.) 


118,478 


5,837,100 


49 


A. Provincias interims - - 


67,189 


423,200 


6 


a. Immediately subject to the viceroy , (provincias internas 








del Vireynato) - ... 


7,814 


64,000 


8 


1. Nuevo Key no de Leon 


2,621 


29,000 


10 


2. Nuevo Santander - - - 


5,193 


38,000 


7 


b. Subject to the gorernnor of Chihuahua (provincias internas 








de la cornandancia general) ,;..-., - * 


59,375 


359,200 


6 


1. Intendenciade la Nueva Biscaya o Durango 


16,873 


159,700 


10 


2. Intendencia de la Sonora - ,.-.. 


19,143 


121,400 


6 


o. Cohahuila - ,.-&amp;gt;;. . ... - ^ :* 


6,702 


16,900 


2 


4. Texas - - - ... 


10,948 


21,000 


2 


5. Nuevo Mexico - - - - 


5,709 


40,200 


7 


B. New Spain, properly so called, immediately subject to 








the viceroy, comprehending los Reynos dc Mexico, 








Mechoacan y Nueva Galicia, and the two Californias 


51,289 


5,413,900 


105 


1. Intendencia de Mexico - _ - 


5,927 


1,511,900 


255 


2. Intendencia de Puebla - - - 


2,696 


813,300 


301 


3. Intendencia de Vera Cruz - - 


4,141 


156,000 


38 


4. Intendencia de Oaxaca - - .- - 


4,447 


534,800 


120 


5. Intendencia de Merida, or Yucatan - - ^ 


5,977 


465,800 


81 


6. Intendencia de Valladolid - - 


3,446 


476,400 


273 


7. Intendencia de ( uadalaxara 


9,612 


630,500 


66 


8. Intendencia de Zacatecas - - - - 


2,355 


153,300 


65 


9. Intendencia de Guanaxuato 


911 


517,300 


568 


. 10. Intendencia de San Luis Potosi, (without including 








New Santander, Texas, Cohahuila, and the kingdom 








of Leon) - - - - - 


2,357 


230,000 


98 


11. Old California, (Antigua California) -} 


7,295 


9,000 


1 


12. New California, (Nueva California) - - 


2,125 


15,600 


7 



This statistical table proves the imperfection of 
the territorial division. It appears that in confid 
ing to intendants the administration of police and 
finances, the object was to divide the Mexican soil 
on principles analogous to those followed by the 
French government on the division of the king 
dom into generalities. In New Spain every in- 
tendancy comprehends several sub-delegations. 
In the same manner the generalities in France were 
governed by sub-delegates, who exercised their 
functions under the orders of the intendant. But 
in the formation of the Mexican intendancies, little 
regard has been paid to the extent of territory or 
the greater or less degree of concentration of the 
population. This new division indeed took place 
at a time when the ministers of the colonies, the 
council of (lie Indies, and the viceroys, were un 



furnished with the necessary materials for so im 
portant an undertaking. How is it possible to 
possess the detail of the administration of a coun 
try of which there has never been any map, arid 
regarding which the most simple calculations of 
political arithmetic have never been attempted ? 

Comparing the extent of surface of the Mexican 
intendancies, we find several of them 10, 20, even 
30 times larger than others. The intendancy of 
San Luis Potosi, for example, is more extensive 
than all European Spain, while the intendancy of 
Guanaxuato does not exceed in size two or three of 
the departments of France. The following is an 
exact table of the extraordinary disproportion 
among the several Mexican intendancies in their 
territorial extent ; we have arranged them in the 
order of their extent :] 



MEXICO. 



173 



f liitendan-cy of San Luis Potosi, 27,821 sq. leag. 
Sonora, - - 19,143 
Durango, - 16,873 
Guadaiaxara, 9,612 
Merida, - - 5,977 
Mexico, - - 5,927 
Oaxaoa, - - 4,447 
Vera Cruz, - 4,141 
Valladoiid, - 3,447 
Puebla, - - 2,696 
Zacutecas, - 2,355 
Guanaxuato, 9J1 

With the exception of the three intendancies of 
San Luis Potosi, Sonora, and Durango, of which 
each occupies more ground than the whole empire 
of (Jreat Britain, the other intendancies contain a 
mean surface of 3 or 4000 square leagues. We 
may compare them for extent to the kingdom of 
Naples, or that of Bohemia. We can conceive 
that the less populous a country is, the less its 
administration requires small divisions. In France 
no department exceeds the extent of 550 square 
leagues : the mean extent of the departments is 
300. But in European Russia and Mexico the 
governments and intendancies are 10 times more 
extensive. 

Jn France, the heads of departments, the pre 
fects, watch over the wants of a population which 
rarely exceeds 450,000 souls, and which on an 
average we may estimate at 300,000. The govern 
ments into which the Russian empire is divided, 
as well as the Mexican intendancies, comprehend, 
notwithstanding their very different states of civi 
lization, a greater number of inhabitants. The 
following table will show the disproportion of po 
pulation among the territorial divisions of New 
Spain. It begins with the most populous intcnd- 
ancy, and ends with the one most thinly inha 
bited. 

Intendancy of Mexico, - 1,511,800 inhab. 
Puebla, , .-., 813,300 
Guadaiaxara, - 630,500 
Oaxaca, - 534,800 
Guanaxuato, 517,300 
Valladolid, - 476,400 
Mcrida, . -, 465,700 
San Luis Potosi, 331,900 
Onrango, - 159,700 
Vera Cruz - 156,000 
/acatecas, - 153,000 
Sonora, - 121,400 

It is in comparing together the tables of the 
population of the 12 intendancies, and the extent 
of their surface, that we are particularly struck 
with the inequality of the distribution of the 



Mexican population, even in the most civilized 
part of the kingdom. The intendancy of Puebla, 
which in the second table occupies one of the first 
places, is almost at the end of the first table. Yet 
no principle ought more to guide those who chalk 
out territorial divisions than the proportion of the 
population to the extent expressed in square leagues 
or myriametres. A third table exhibits the state of 
the population, which may be called relative. To 
arrive at numerical results which indicate the pro 
portion between the number of inhabitants and ex 
tent of inhabited soil, we must divide the absolute 
population by the territory of the intendancies. 
The following are the results of this operation : 
Intendancy of Guanaxuato, - 568 inhab. to 

the sq. leag. 
Puebla, - - 301 
Valladolid, - 273 
Mexico, - - 255 
Oaxaca, - - 120 
Merida, f*^t 81 
Guadaiaxara, 66 
Zacatecas, - 65 
Vera Cruz, - 38 
San Luis Potosi, 12 
Durango, - - 10 
Sonora, - - 6 

This last table proves that in the intendancies 
where the cultivation of the soil has made least 
progress, the relative population is from 50 to 90 
times less than the old civilized regions adjacent 
to the capital. This extraordinary difference in 
the distribution of the population is also to be 
found in thew. and n. e. of Europe. In Lapland 
we scarcely find one inhabitant to the square league, 
while in other parts of Sweden, in Gothland, for 
example, there are more than 248. In the states 
subject to the king of Denmark, the island of 
Zealand contains 944, and Iceland 1 1 inhabitants, 
to the square league. In European Russia, the 
governments of Archangel, Olonez, Kalouga, and 
Moscow, differ so much in their relative population 
to the extent of the territory, that the two former 
of these governments contain six and 26, and the 
tv.o last 842 arid 974 souls to the square league. 
These enormous differences indicate that one pro 
vince is 160 times better inhabited than another. 

In France, where the whole of the population 
gives 1094 inhabitants to the square league, the 
best peopled departments, those of L Escaut, Le 
Nord, and La Lys, afford a relative population of 
3869, 2786, and 2274. The worst peopled depart 
ment, that of the Hautes-Alpes, composed of apart 
of old Dauphiny, contains only 471 inhabitants to 
the square league. Hence the extremes are in] 



174 



MEXICO. 



[France in the relation of 8 : I ; so that (he inlen- 
dancy of Mexico in which the population is the 
most concentrated, that of G uanaxuato, is scarcely 
so well inhabited as the worst peopled department 
of continental France. 

The three tables which have been given of the 
extent, absolute population, and relative popula 
tion of the intendancies of New Spain, will suffi 
ciently prove the great imperfection of the present 
territorial division. A country in which the po 
pulation is dispersed over a vast extent requires 
that the provincial administration be restricted to 
smaller portions of ground than those of the Mex 
ican intendancies. Whenever a population is 
under 100 inhabitants to the square league, the 
administration of an intendancy or a department 
should not extend over more than 100,000 inhabi 
tants. We may assign a double or triple number 
to regions in which the population is more con 
centrated. 

It, is on this concentration that the degree of in 
dustry, the activity of commerce, and the number 
of affairs consequently demanding the attention of 
government, undoubtedly depend. In this point 
of view the small intendancy of G uanaxuato gives 
more occupation to an administrator than the pro 
vinces of Texas, Cohahuila, and New Mexico, 
which are six times more extensive. But, on the 
other hand, how is it possible for an intendant of 
San Luis Potosi ever to know the wants of a pro 
vince of 28,000 square leagues in extent ? How 
can he, even while he devotes himself with the 
most patriotic zeal to the duties of his place, su 
perintend the sub-delegates, and protect the In 
dian from the oppressions which are exercised in 
the villages ? 

This point of administrative organization can 
not be too carefully discussed. A reforming go 
vernment ought, before every other object, to set 
about changing the present limits of the intendan 
cies. This political change ought to be founded 
on the exact knowledge of the physical state, and 
the state of cultivation of the provinces which con 
stitute the kingdom of Nueva Espaiia. 

CHAP. VII. 

Minuter details of the state of the agriculture of 
Nueva Espana, and of its metallic mines, viz. 
Of the vegetable productions of the Mexican 
territory. Progress of the cultivation of the 
soil. Influence of the mines on cultivation. 
Plants which contribute to the nourishment of 
man. 

WE have run &amp;lt;Ker the immense extent of terri 
tory comprehended under the denomination of 



Nueva Espana. We have rapidly described the 
limits of each province, the physical aspect of the 
country, its temperature, its natural fertility, ami 
the progress of a nascent population. It is now 
time to enter more minutely into the state of agri 
culture and territorial wealth of Mexico. 

An empire extending from lat. 16 to 37 U af 
fords us, from its geometrical position, all the mo 
difications of climate to be found on transporting 
ourselves from the bunks of the Senegal to Spain, 
or from the Malabar coast to (lie steppes of the 
Great Buchuria. The variety of climate is also 
augmented by the geological constitution of the 
country, by the mass and extraordinary form 
of the Mexican mountains. On the ridge and de 
clivity of the cordillcras the temperature of each 
table-land varies as it is more or less elevated : not 
merely insulated peaks, of which the summits ap 
proach the region of perpetual snow, are covered 
with oaks and pines, but whole provinces sponta 
neously produce alpine plants ; and the cultivator 
inhabiting the torrid zone frequently loses the 
hopes of his harvest from the effects of frost or the 
abundance of snow. 

Such is the admirable distribution of heat on the 
globe, that in the aerial ocean we meet with colder 
strata in proportion as we ascend, while in the 
depth of the sea the temperature diminishes as we 
leave the surface of the water. In the two ele 
ments the same latitude unites, as it were, every 
climate. At unequal distances from the surface of 
the ocean, but in the same vertical plane, we find 
strata of air and strata of water of the same tem 
perature. Hence, under the tropics, on the de 
clivity of the Cordilleras, and in the abyss of the 
ocean, the plants of Lapland, as well as the ma 
rine animals in the vicinity of the pole, find the 
degree of heat necessary to their organic develop 
ment. 

From this order of things, established by na 
ture, we may conceive that, in a mountainous and 
extensive country like Mexico, the variety of in 
digenous productions must be immense, and that 
there hardly exists a plant in the rest of the globe 
which is not capable of being cultivated in some 
part of Nueva Espana. Notwithstanding the la 
borious researches of three distinguished botanists, 
MM. Sesse, Mocino, and Cervantes, employed 
by the court in examining the vegetable riches of 
Mexico, we are far from yet being able to flatter 
ourselves that we know any thing like all the 
plants scattered over the insulated summits, or 
crowded together in the vast forests at the foot of 
the Cordilleras. If we still daily discover new her 
baceous species on the central table-land, and even] 



MEXICO. 



ITT 



[in (lie vicinity of the city of Mexico, how many 
arborescent plants have never yet been discovered 
by botanists in the humid and warm region along 
the c. coast, from the province of Tobasco, and 
the fertile banks of the Guasacualco, to Colipa 
and Papantla, and along the w. coast from the 
port of San Bias and Soriora to the plains of the 
province of Oaxaca? Hitherto no species of quin 
quina (cinchona), none even of the small group, 
of which the stamina arc longer than the corolla, 
which form the genus exostema, has been disco 
vered in the equinoctial part of Nueva Espana. 
It is probable, however, that this precious disco 
very will one day be made on the declivity of the 
cordtlleras, where arborescent ferns abound, and 
where the region of the true febrifuge quinquina 
with very short stamina and downy coroilae com 
mences. 

We do not propose here to describe the innu 
merable variety of vegetables with which nature 
has enriched the vast extent of Nueva Espana, and 
of which the useful properties will become better 
known when civilization shall have made farther 
progress in the country. We mean merely to 
speak of the different kinds of cultivation which 
an enlightened government might introduce with 
success ; and we shall confine ourselves to an ex 
amination of the indigenous productions which at 
this moment furnish objects of exportation, and 
which form the principal basis of the Mexican 
agriculture. 

Under the tropics, especially in the W. Indies, 
which have become the centre of the commercial 
activity of the Europeans, the word agriculture is 
understood in a very different .sense from what it 
receives in Europe. When we hear at .Jamaica or 
Cuba of the flourishing state of agriculture, this 
expression does not offer to the imagination the 
idea of harvests which serve for the nourishment 
of man, but of ground which produces objects of 
commercial exchange, and rude materials for ma 
nufacturing industry. Moreover, whatever be the 
riches or fertility of the country, in the valley I)e 
los Guines, for example, to the s. e. of the Hava- 
nah, one of the most delicious situations of the 
New World, we see only plains carefully planted 
v/ith sugar-cane and coffee ; and these plains arc 
watered with the sweat of African slaves! Rural 
life loses its charms when it is inseparable from the 
aspect of the sufferings of our species. 

But in the interior of Mexico, the word agri 
culture suggests ideas of a less afflicting nature. 
The Indian cultivator is poor, but he is free. His 
state is even greatly preferable to that of the pea 
santry in. a great part of the n. of Europe. There 



are neither corve es nor villeinage in Nueva Espanaj 
and the number of slaves is extremely small. Su - 
gar is chiefly the produce of free hands. There 
the principal objects of agriculture are not the 
productions to which European luxury has as 
signed &amp;lt;i variable and arbitrary value, but cereal 
gramina, nutritive roots, and the agave, the vine 
of the Indians. The appearance of the country 
proclaims to the traveller that the soil nourishes 
him who cultivates it, and that the true prosperity 
of the Mexican people neither depends on the ac 
cidents of foreign commerce, nor on the unruly 
politics of Europe. 

Those who only know the interior of the Spa 
nish colonies from the vague and uncertain notions 
hitherto published, will have some difficulty in be 
lieving that the principal sources of the Mexican 
riches are by no means the mines, but an agricul 
ture which has been gradually ameliorating since 
the end of the last century. Without reflecting 
on the immense extent of the country, and espe 
cially the great number of provinces which appear 
totally destitute of precious metals, we generally 
imagine that all the activity of the Mexican po 
pulation is directed to the working of mines. Be 
cause agriculture has made a very considerable pro 
gress in the capitania-general of Caracas, in the 
kingdom of Guatemala, the island of Cuba, and 
wherever the mountains are accounted poor in mi 
neral productions, it has been inferred that it is to 
the working of the mines that we are to attribute 
the small care bestowed on the cultivation of the 
soil in other parts of the Spanish colonies. This 
reasoning is just when applied to small portions of 
territory. No doubt, in the provinces of Choco 
and Antioquia, and the coast of Barbacoas, the 
inhabitants are fonder of seeking for the gold 
washed down into the brooks and ravines than of 
cultivating a virgin and fertile soil; and in the be 
ginning of the conquest, the Spaniards who aban 
doned the peninsula or Canary islands to settle in 
Peru and Mexico, had no other view but the dis 
covery of the precious metals. " Ami niblda sit is 
a cullura Hispunos divertit" says a writer of those 
times, Pedro Martyr, in his work on the discovery 
of Yucatan and the colonization of the Antil es. 
But this reasoning cannot now explain why in 
countries of three or four times the extent of 
France agriculture is in a state of languor. The 
same physical and moral causes which fetter the 
progress of national industry in the Spanish colo 
nies have been inimical to a better cultivntio 1 of 
the soil. It cannot be doubted that under im 
proved social institutions the countries which most 
abound with mineral productions will be as well, if J 



176 



MEXICO. 



(not better, cultivated than those in which no such 
productions are to be found. But the desire natu 
ral to man of simplifying the causes of every thing 
has introduced into works of political economy a 
species of reasoning, which is perpetuated, because 
it flatters the mental indolence of the multitude. 
The depopulation of Spanish America, the state 
of neglect in which the most fertile lands are found, 
and the want of manufacturing industry, are at 
tributed to the metallic wealth, to the abundanceof 
gold and silver ; as, according to the same logic, 
all the evils of Spain are to be attributed to the 
discovery of America, or the wandering race of 
the Merinos, or the religious intolerance of the 
clergy. 

We do not observe that agriculture is more ne 
glected in Peru than in the province of Cumanaor 
Guayana, in which, however, there are no mines 
worked. In Mexico the best cultivated fields, 
those which recal to the mind of the traveller the 
beautiful plains of France, are those which extend 
from Salamanca towards Silao, Guanaxuato, and 
the Villa de Leon, and which surround the richest 
mines of the known world. VY^hercver metallic 
seams have been discovered in the most unculti 
vated parts qf the Cordilleras, on the insulated and 
desert table-lands, the working of mines, far from 
impeding the cultivation of the soil, has been sin 
gularly favourable to it. Travelling along the 
ridge of the Andes, or the mountainous part of 
Mexico, we every where see the most striking ex 
amples of the beneficial influence of the mines on 
agriculture. Were it not for the establishments 
formed for the working of the mines, how many 
places would have remained desert ? how many 
districts uncultivated in the four intendancies of 
Guanaxuato, Zacatecas, San Luis Potosi, and 
Durango, between the parallels of 21 and 25, 
where the most considerable metallic wealth of 
Nueva Espana is to be found ? If the town is 
placed on the arid side or the crest of the cordil- 
leras, the new colonists can only draw from a dis 
tance the means of their subsistence, and the main 
tenance of the great number of cattle employed in 
drawing off the water, and raising and amalga 
mating the mineral produce. Want soon awakens 
industry. The soil begins to be cultivated in the 
ravines and declivities of the neighbouring moun 
tains, wherever the rock is covered with earth. 
Farms are established in the neighbourhood of the 
mine. The high price of provision, from the com 
petition of the purchasers, indemnities the cultiva 
tor for the privations to which he is exposed from 
the hard life of the mountains. Thus from the 
hope of gain alone, and the motives of mutual in 



terest, which are the most powerful bonds of so 
ciety, and without any interference on the part of 
government in colonization, a mine, which at first 
appeared insulated in the midst of wild and desert 
mountains, becomes in a short time connected 
with the lands which have been lonir under culti- 

J 

vat ion. 

Moreover, this influence of the mines on the pro 
gressive cultivation of the country is more durable 
than they are themselves. When the seams arc 
exhausted, and the subterraneous operations arc 
abandoned, the population of the canton undoubt 
edly diminishes, because the miners emigrate else 
where ; but the colonist is retained by his attach 
ment for the spot where he received his birth, and 
which his fathers cultivated with their hands. The 
more lonely the cottage is, the more it has charms 
for the inhabitant of the mountains. It is with 
the beginning of civilization as with its decline : 
man appears to repent of the constraint which he 
has imposed on himself by entering into society; 
and he loves solitude because it restores to him his 
former freedom. This moral tendency, this de 
sire for solitude, is particularly manifested by the 
copper-coloured indigenous, whom a long and 
sad experience has disgusted with social life, and 
more especially with the neighbourhood of the 
whites. Like the Arcadians, the Aztec people 
love to inhabit the summits and brows of the steep 
est mountains. This peculiar trait in their dispo 
sition contributes very much to extend population 
in the mountainous regions of Mexico. What a 
pleasure it is for the traveller to follow these peace 
ful conquests of agriculture, and to contemplate 
the numerous Indian cottages dispersed in the 
wildest ravines and necks of cultivated ground ad 
vancing into a desert country between naked and 
arid rocks! 

The plants cultivated in these elevated and soli 
tary regions differ essentially from those cultivated 
on the plains below, on the declivity and at the 
foot of the Cordilleras. The height requisite for 
the different kinds of cultivation depends, in ge 
neral, on the latitude of the places ; but such is 
the flexibility of organization in cultivated plants, 
that with (he assistance of the care of man they 
frequently break through the limits assigned to 
them by the naturalist. 

Under the equator, the meteorological pheno 
mena, such as those of the geography of plants 
and animals, are subject to laws which are immu 
table and easily to be perceived. The climate 
there is only modified by the height of the place, 
and the temperature is nearly constant, notwith 
standing- the difference of seasons. As we leave] 



MEXICO. 



177 



[ the equator, especially between the 15th degree and 
the tropic, the climate depends on a great number 
of local circumstances, and varies at the same ab 
solute height, and under the same geographical 
latitude. This influence of localities, of which the 
study is of such importance to the cultivator, is 
still much more manifest in the n. than the s. he 
misphere. The great brendtli of the new conti 
nent, the proximity of Canada, the winds which 
blow from the n. and other causes already deve 
loped, give the equinoctial region of Mexico and 
the island of Cuba a particular character. One 
would say that in these regions the temperate 
zone, the zone of variable climates, increases 
towards the s. and passes the tropic of Cancer. It 
is sufficient here to state that in the environs of the 
Havannah (lat. 23 8 ) the thermometer has been 
seen to descend to the freezing point at the small 
elevation of 80 metres, or 262 feet, above the level 
of the ocean, and that snow has fallen near Val- 
ladolid (lat. 19 42 ), at an absolute elevation of 
1900 metres, or 6232 feet, while under the equa 
tor this last phenomenon is only observable at the 
double of the elevation. 

These considerations prove to us that towards 
the tropic, where the torrid zone approaches the 
temperate zone, the plants tinder cultivation are 
not subject to fixed and invariable heights. We 
might be led to distribute them according to the 
mean temperature of the places in which they ve 
getate. We observe, in fact, that in Europe the 
minimum of the mean temperature which a pro 
per cultivation requires, is, for the sugar-cane, from 
19 to 20 ; for coffee 18 ; for the orange 17; for 
the olive 13 5 to 14 ; and for the vine yield 
ing wine fit to be drunk from 10 to 11 of the 
centigrade thermometer, viz. from 66 to 68; 
64 ;" 62 ; from 56. 3 to 57 ; and from 50 to 
51. 8 of Fahrenheit. This thermometrical agri 
cultural scale is accurate enough when we embrace 
the phenomena in their greatest generality. But 
numerous exceptions occur when we consider 
countries of which the mean annual heat is the 
same, while the mean temperatures of the months 
differ very much from one another. It is the un 
equal division of the heat among the different sea 
sons of the year which has the greatest influence 
on the kind of cultivation proper to such or such a 
latitude, as has been very well proved by M. De- 
candole. Several annual plants, especially gra- 
mina with farinaceous seed, are very little affected 
by the rigour of winter, but, like fruit-trees and 
the vine, require a considerable heat during sum 
mer. In part of Maryland, and especially Vir 
ginia, the mean temperature of the year, is equal 

VOL. III.. 



and perhaps even superior to that of Lombardy ; 
yet the severity of winter will not allow the same 
vegetables to be there cultivated with which the 
plains of the Milanese arc adorned. In the equi 
noctial region of Peru or Mexico, rye, and espe 
cially wheat, attain to no maturity in plains of 3500 
or4000 metres, or 1 1,482 and 13,123 feet, of eleva 
tion, though the mean heat of these alpine regions 
exceeds that of the parts of Norway and Siberia 
in which cerealia are successfully cultivated. But 
for about 30 days the obliquity of the sphere and 
the short duration of the nights render the summer 
heats very considerable in the countries in the vi 
cinity of the pole, while under the tropics or the 
table-land of (he cordilleras the thermometer never 
remains a whole day above 10 or 12 centigrade de- 
groes. 

To avoid mixing ideas of a theoretical nature 
and hardly susceptible of rigorous accuracy with 
facts, the certainty of which has been ascertained^ 
we shall neither divide the cultivated plants in 
Nueva Espana according to the heat of the soil iu 
which they vegetate most abundantly, nor accord 
ing to the degrees* of mean temperature which they 
appear to require for their development : but we 
shall arrange them in the order of their utility to 
society. We shall begin with the vegetables which 
form the principal support of the Mexican people ; 
we shall afterwards treat of the cultivation of the 
plants which afford -materials to manufacturing in 
dustry ; and we shall conclude with a description, 
of the vegetable productions which are the sub 
ject of an important commerce with the mother 
country. 

The banana is for all the inhabitants of the torrid 
zone what the cereal gamina, wheat, barley, and 
rye, are for W. Asia and for Europe, ar.d what 
the numerous varieties of rice are for the countries 
beyond the Indus, especially for Bengal and China. 
In the.twocontincnts, in the islands throughout the 
immense extent of the equinoctial seas, wherever 
the mean heat of the year exceeds 24 centigrade 
degrees, or 75 of Fahrenheit, the fruit of the 
banana is one of (lie most interesting objects of culti 
vation for the subsistence of man. The celebrated 
traveller George Forster, and other naturalists after 
him, pretended that this valuable plant did not 
exist in America before the arrival of the Spaniards, 
but that it was imported from the Canary islands 
in the beginning of the 16th century. In fact, 
Oviedo, who in his Natural History of the Indies, 
very carefully distinguishes the indigenons vege 
tables from those which were introduced there, 
positively says that the first bananas were planted 
in 1516 in the island of St. Domingo, by Thomas] 
A A 



178 



MEXICO. 



[tie Berlangas, a monk of the order of preaching 
friars. He affirms that he himself saw the musa 
cultivated in Spain, near the town of Armeria in 
Grenada, and in the convent of Franciscans at the 
island of La Gran Canaria, where Berlangas pro 
cured suckers, which were transported to Hispa- 
niola, and from thence successively to the other 
islands and to the continent. In support of M. 
Forster s opinion it may also be stated, that in the 
first accounts of the voyages of Columbus, Alonzo 
Negro, Pen/on, Vespucci, and Cortes, there is 
frequent mention of maize, the papayer, the ja- 
tropha manihot, and the agave, but never of the 
banana. However, the silence of these first tra 
vellers only proves the little attention which they 
paid to the natural productions of the American 
soil. Hernandez, who, besides medical plants, 
describes a great number of other Mexican vege 
tables, makes no mention of the musa. Now this 
botanist lived half a century after Oviedo, and 
those who consider the musa as foreign to the new 
continent cannot doubt that its cultivation was ge 
neral in Mexico towards the end of the 16th cen 
tury, at an epocha when a crowd of vegetables of 
less utility to man had already been carried there 
from Spain, the Canary islands, and Peru. The 
silence of authors is not a sufficient proof in fa 
vour of M. Forster s opinion. 

It is, perhaps, with the true country of the ba 
nanas as with that of the pear and cherry-trees. 
The prunus avium, for example, is indigenous in 
Germany and France, and has existed from the most 
remote antiquity in French forests, like the robur 
and the linden-tree ; while other species of cherry- 
trees which arc considered as varieties become 
permanent, and of which the fruits are more sa 
voury than the primus avium, have originally come 
through the Romans from Asia Minor, and par 
ticularly from the kingdom of Pontus. In the 
same manner, under the name of banana, a great 
number of plants, which differ essentially in the 
form of their fruits, and which, perhaps, con 
stitute true species, are cultivated in the equinoc 
tial regions, and even to the parallel of 33 or 34 
degrees. If it is an opinion not yet proved, that 
all the pear-trees which are cultivated descend 
from the wild pear-tree as a common stock, we are 
still more entitled to doubt whether the great num 
ber of constant varieties of the banana descend 
from the musa troglodytarum, cultivated in the 
Molucca islands, which itself, according to Gaer- 
tner, is not perhaps a musa, but a species of the 
genus ravenala of Adanson. 

The musae, or pisangs, described by Rumphius 
and Rheecle, are not all known in the Spanish co- 

1 



lonies. Three species, however, are there dis 
tinguished, still very imperfectly determined by 
botanists, the true platano or arton (musa para- 
disiaca.Lin. ?); the camburi (M. sapientum Lin. ?); 
and the dominico ( M. regia Rumph . ?) There is also 
a fourth species of very exquisite taste cultivated 
in Peru, the meiya of the S. sea, which is called in 
the market of Lima the platano de taiti, because 
the first roots of it were brought in the frigate 
Aguila from the island of Otaheite. Now it is a 
constant tradition in Mexico and all the continent 
of S.America, that the platano arton and the do 
minico were cultivated there long before the arrival 
of the Spaniards, but that the guinea^ a variety of 
the camburi, as its name proves, came from the 
coast of Africa. The author who has most care 
fully marked the different epochas at which Ame 
rican agriculture was enriched with foreign pro 
ductions, the Peruvian Garcillasso de la Vega, ex 
pressly says, " that in the time of the Incas the 
maize, quinoa, potatoes, and in the warm and tem 
perate regions bananas, constituted the basis of the 
nourishment of the natives." He describes the 
musa of the valleys of the Antis, and he even dis 
tinguishes the most rare species with small sugary 
and aromatic fruit, the dominico, from the com 
mon or arton banana. Father Acosta also affirms, 
(Historia natural de Indias, 1608, p. 50), though 
not so positively, that the musa was cultivated by 
the Americans before the arrival of the Spaniards. 
" The banana," says he, " is a fruit to be found 
in all the Indies, though there are people who pre 
tend that it is a native of Ethiopia, and that it came 
from thence into America." On the banks of the 
Orinoco, the Cassiquiare, or the Beni, among the 
mountains DC 1 Esmeralda and the sources of the 
river Carony, in the midst of the thickest forests, 
wherever we discover Indian tribes who have had 
no connections with European establishments, we 
find plantations of manioc and bananas. 

Father Thomas de Berlangas could not trans 
port from the Canary Islands to St. Domingo any 
other species but the one which is there cultivated, 
the camburi (caule nigrescente strialo fructu minore 
ovalo-elongato), and not the platano arton or zap a- 
lote of the Mexicans, (caule albovirescente Icevi, 
fruclu longiore apicem versus subarcualo acute tri- 
gono). 1 he first of these species only grows in 
temperate climates, in the Canary islands, at 
Tunis, Algiers, and the coast of Malaga. In the 
valley of Caracas also, placed under lat. 10 30 
but at 900 metres, or 2952 feet, of absolute eleva 
tion, we find only the camburi and the dominico 
(caule albo-virescente, fructu minima obsolete tri- 
gono)j and not the platano arton, of which the] 



MEXICO. 



179 



[fruit only ripens under the influence of a very high 
temperature. From these numerous proofs we 
cannot doubt that the banana, which several tra 
vellers pretend to have found wild at Amboina, at 
Gilolo, and the Mariana islands, was cultivated in 
America long before the arrival of the Spaniards, 
who merely augmented the number of the indige 
nous species. However, we are not to be asto 
nished that there was no musa seen in the island of 
St. Domingo before 1516. Like the animals 
around them, savages generally draw their nourish 
ment from one species of plant. The forests of 
Guayaua afford numerous examples of tribes 
whose plantations (conucos) contain manihot, arum 
or dioscorea, and not a single banana. 

Notwithstanding the great extent of the Mexi 
can table-land, and the height of the mountains in 
the neighbourhood of the coast, the space of 
which the temperature is favourable for the cul 
tivation of the musa is more than 50,000 square 
leagues, and inhabited by nearly a million and a 
half of inhabitants. In the warm and humid 
valleys of the intendancy of yera Cruz, at the foot 
of the cordillera of Orizaba, the fruit of the platano 
arton sometimes exceeds three decimetres, or 11.8 
inches, and often from 20 to 22 centimetres, or 
7.87 to 8.66 inches, in length. In these fertile re 
gions, especially in the environs of Acapulco, San 
Bias, and the Rio Guasacnalco, a cluster (regime) 
of bananas contains from 160 to 180 fruits, and 
weighs from 30 to 40 kilogrammes, or from 66 to 
88Ib. avoird. 

We doubt whether there is another plant on the 
globe which on so small a space of ground can 
produce so considerable a mass of nutritive sub 
stance. Eight or nine months after the sucker has 
been planted, the banana commences to develop 
its clusters ; and the fruit may be collected in the 
tenth or eleventh month. When the stalk is cut, 
we find constantly among the numerous shoots 
which have put forth roots a sprout (pimpollo), 
which having two-thirds of the height of the mo 
ther plant, bears fruit three months later. In this 
manner a plantation of musa, called in the Spanish 
colonies platanar, is perpetuated without any other 
care being bestowed by man than to cut the stalks 
of which the fruit has ripened, and to give the 
earth once or twice a year a slight dressing, by 
digging round the roofs. A spot of ground of 
100 square metres, or 1076 square feet, of surface, 
may contain at least from 30 to 40 banana plants. 
In the space of a year, this same ground, reckon 
ing only the weight of a cluster at from 15 to 20 
kilogrammes, or from 33 to 44lb. avoird. yields 
more than 2000 kilogrammes,, or 4il41b. avoird. 



or 4000 pounds of nutritive substance. What a 
difference between this produce and that of the 
cereal gramma in the most fertile parts of Europe ! 
Wheat, supposing it sown arid not planted in the 
Chinese manner, and calculating on the basis of a 
decuple harvest, does not produce on 100 square 
metres more than 15 kilogrammes, (3311). avoird.) 
or 30 pounds of grain. In France, for example, 
the demi-hcctare, or legal arpent^ of 1344 square 
toises, or 54,995 square feet, of good land, is sown 
( lavolce) with 160 pounds of grain ; and if the land 
is not so good or absolutely bad, with 200 or 220 
pounds. The produce varies from 1000 to 2500 
pounds per acre. The potato, according to M. 
Tessie, yields in Europe on 100 square acres of 
well cultivated and well manured ground a pro 
duce of 45 kilogrammes, or 991b. avoird. of roots. 
We reckon from 4 to 6000 pounds to the legal 
arpent. The produce of bananas is consequently 
to that of wheat as 133 :1, and to that of potatoes 
as 44 : 1 . 

Those who in Europe have tasted bananas ri 
pened in hot-houses have a difficulty in conceiving 
that a fruit, which from its great mildness has some 
resemblance to a dried fig, can be the principal 
nourishment of many millions of men in both 
Indies. We seem to forget that in the act of ve 
getation the same elements form very different 
chemical mixtures according as they combine or 
separate. How should we even discover in the 
lacteous mucilage, which the grains of gramina 
contain before the ripening of the ear, the farina 
ceous perisperma of the cerenlia^ which nourishes 
the majority of the nations of the temperate zone ? 
In the musa, the formation of the amylaceous 
matter precedes the epocha of maturity. We 
must distinguish between the banana fruit col 
lected when green, and what is allowed to grow 
yellow on the plant. In the second the sugar is 
quite formed ; it is mixed with the pulp, and in 
such abundance that if the sugar-cane was not 
cultivated in the banana region, we might extract 
sugar from this fruit to greater advantage than is 
done in Europe from red beet and the grape. The 
banana, when gathered green, contains the same 
nutritive principle which is observed in grain, 
rice, the tuberose roots, and the sagou, namely 
the amylaceous sediment united with a very small 
portion of vegetable gluten. By kneading with 
water meal of bananas dried in the sun, Humboldt 
could only obtain a few atoms of this ductile and 
viscous mass, which resides in abundance in the 
perisperma, and especially in the embryo of the 
cerealia. If, on the one hand, the gluten, which 
has so much analogy to animal matter, and which] 
A A 2 



ISO 



MEXICO. 



[swells with heat, is of great use in the making of 
bread ; on the other hand, it is not indispensable 
to render a root or fruit nutritive. M. Proust dis 
covered gluten in beans, apples, and quinces ; but 
be could not discover any in the meal of potatoes. 
Gums, for example, that, of the mimosa nihtica 
(acaciavera Willd.), which serves for nourishment 
to several African tribes in their passages through 
the desert, prove that a vegetable substance may be 
a nutritive aliment without containing cither gluten 
or amylaceous matter. 

It would be difficult to describe the numerous 
preparations by which the Americans render the 
fruit of the musa, both before and after its matu 
rity, a wholesome and agreeable diet. Humboldt 
frequently observed in ascending rivers, that the 
natives, after the greatest fatigues, make a com 
plete dinner on a very small portion of manioc and 
three bananas (platano arton) of the large kind. In 
the time of Alexander, if we are to credit the an 
cients, the philosophers of Hindostan were si ill 
more sober. u Avbori nornen palce porno arienjr, 
quo sapientes Indorum vivunt. Fructus admira- 
bilis succi dulcedinc nt uno quaternos satiet." 
\Plin. xii. 12). In warm countries the people in 
general not only consider sugary substances as a 
food which satisfies for the moment, but as truly 
nutritive. Humboldt has frequently observed, 
that the mule-drivers who carry the baggage on 
the coast of Caracas give the preference (o unpre 
pared sugar (papelon) over fresh animal food. 

Physiologists have not yet determined with pre 
cision what characterises a substance eminently 
nutritive. To appease the appetite by stimulating 
the nerves of the gastric system, and to furnish 
matter to the body which may easily assimilate 
with it, are modes of action very different. To 
bacco, the leaves ot thc en/thro.Tf/lon cocca mixed 
with quick lime, the opium which the natives of 
Bengal have frequently used for whole months in 
times of scarcity, will appease the violence of hun 
ger; but those substances act in a very different 
manner from wheaten bread, the root of the ja- 
tropha, gum-arabic, the lichen of Iceland, or the 
putrid fish which is the principal food of several 
tribes of African Negroes. There can be no doubt, 
the bulk being equal, superazoted matter, or ani 
mals, arc more nutritive than vegetable matter ; 
and it appears that, among vegetables, gluten is 
more nutritive than starch, and starch more than 
mucilage ; but we must beware of attributing to 
these insulated principles what depends, in the 
action of the aliment on living bodies, on the va 
ried mixture of hydrogen, carbonate, and oxygen. 
Hence a matter becomes eminently nutritive if it 



contains, like the bean of the cocoa-tree (theobrn* 
ma cacao), besides the amylaceous matter, an aro 
matic principle which excites and fortifies the ner 
vous system. 

These considerations, to which we cannot give 
more development here, will serve to throw some 
light on the comparisons which we have already- 
made of the produce of different modes of cultiva 
tion. If we draw from the same space of ground 
three times as many potatoes as wheat in weight, 
we must not therefore conclude that the cultiva 
tion of tuberous plants will on an equal surface 
maintain three times as many individuals as the 
cultivation of cereal gramina. The potato is re 
duced to the fourth part of its weight when dried 
by a gentle heat ; and the dry starch that can be 
separated from 200 kilogrammes, the produce 
of half a hectare of ground, would hardly equal 
the quantity furnished by 800 kilogrammes of 
wheat. It is the same with the fruit of the ba 
nana, which before its maturity, even in the state 
in Avhicb it is very farinaceous, contains much 
more water and sugary pulp than the seeds of gra- 
mina. We have seen that the same extent of 
ground in a favourable climate will yield J 06,000 
kilogrammes of bananas, 2400 kilogrammes of 
tuberous roots, and 800 kilogrammes of wheat. 
These quantities bear no proportion to the number 
of individuals which can be maintained by these 
different kinds of cultivation 0.1 the same extent of 
ground. The aqueous mucilage which the banana 
contains, and the tuberous root of the solamim, 
possess undoubted nutritive properties. The fari 
naceous pulp, such as is presented by nature, 
yields undoubtedly more aliment than the starch 
which is separated from it by art. But the weights 
alone do not indicate the absolute quantities of 
nutritive matter; and to shew the amount of the 
aliment which the cultivation of the musa yields on 
the same space of ground to man more than the 
cultivation of wheat, we ought rather to calculate 
according to the mass .of vegetable substance ne 
cessary to satisfy a full-grown person. According 
to this last principle, and the tact is very curious, 
we find that in a very fertile country a demi-hcc- 
tare, or legal arpent (5i,998 square feet), culti 
vated with bananas of the large species (platano 
arton), is capable of maintaining 50 individuals ; 
when the same arpent in Europe would only yield 
annually, supposing the eighth grain 576 kilo 
grammes, or 127J Ib. avoird. of flour, a quantity 
not equal to the subsistence of two individuals. 
Accordingly, a European newly arrived in the 
torrid zone is struck with nothing so much as the 
extreme smallness of the spots under cultivation] 



MEXICO. 



181 



[round a cabin which contains a numerous family 
of Indians. 

The ripe fruit of the musa, when exposed to the 
sun, is preserved like our figs. The skin becomes 
black and takes a particular odour, which resem 
bles that of smoked ham. The fruit in this state 
is called patano pasado, and becomes an object of 
commerce in the province of Mechoacan. This 
dry banana is an aliment of an agreeable taste, and 
extremely healthy. But those Europeans who 
newly arrive consider the ripe fruit of the platano 
arton, newly gathered, as very ill to digest. This 
opinion is very ancient, for Pliny relates that 
Alexander gave orders to his soldiers to touch 
none of the bananas which grow on the banks of 
the Hyphasus. Meal is extracted from the musa 
by cutting the green fruit into slices, drying it in 
the sun on a slope, and pounding it when it be 
comes friable. This flour, less used in Mexico 
than in the islands, may serve for the same use as 
flour from rice or maize. 

The facility with which the banana is repro 
duced from its roots gives it an extraordinary ad 
vantage over fruit trees, and even over the bread 
fruit tree, which for eight months in the year is 
loaded with farinaceous fruit. When tribes are at 
war with one another and destroy the trees, the dis 
aster is felt for a long time. A plantation of bana 
nas is renewed by suckers in the .space of a few 
months. 

We hear it frequently repeated in the Spanish 
colonies, that the inhabitants of the warm region 
(tierra calientc) will never awake from the state 
of apathy in which for centuries they have been 
plunged, till a royal cedilla shall order (he destruc 
tion of the banana plantations (platanares). The 
remedy is violent, and those who propose it with 
so much warmth do not in general display more 
activity than the lower people, whom they would 
force to work by augmenting the number of their 
wants. It is to be hoped that industry will make 
progress among the Mexicans without recurring to 
.means of destruction. When we consider, how 
ever, the facility with which our species can be 
maintained in a climate where bananas are pro 
duced, we are not to be astonished that in the 
equinoctial region of the new continent civilization 
first commenced on the mountains, in a soil of infe 
rior fertility, and under a sky less favourable to the 
development of organized beings, in whom neces 
sity even awakes industry. At the foot of the cor- 
dillera, in the humid valleys of the intcndancies of 
Vera Cruz, Valladolid, and Guadalaxara, a man 
who merely employs two days in the week in a 
work by no means laborious may procure subsist 



ence for a whole family. Vet such is the love of 
his native soil, that the inhabitant of the moun 
tains, whom the frost of a single night frequently 
deprives of the whole hopes of his harvest, never 
thinks of descending into the fertile but thinly in 
habited plains, where Nature showers in vain her 
blessings and her treasures. 

The same region in which the banana is culti 
vated produces also the valuable plant of which 
the root affords the flour of manioc, or magnoc. 
The green fruit of the musa is eaten dressed, like 
the bread fruit, or the tuberous root of the potato ; 
but the flour of the manioc is converted into bread, 
and furnishes to the inhabitants of warm countries 
what the Spanish colonists call pan de tiewa ca- 
liente. The maize, as we shall afterwards see, 
affords the great advantage of being cultivated 
under the tropics, from the level of the ocean to 
elevations which equal those of the highest sum 
mits of the Pyrenees. It possesses that extraordi 
nary flexibility of organization for which the ve 
getables of the family of the gramma are charac 
terised ; and it even possesses it in a higher de 
gree than the cerealia of the old continent, which 
suffer under a burning sun, while the maize vege 
tates vigorously in the warmest regions of the earth. 
The plant whose root yields the nutritive flour of 
the manioc takes its name from juca, a w r ord of 
the language of Haity, or St. Domingo. It is 
only successfully cultivated within the tropics ; 
,and the cultivation of it in the mountainous part 
of Mexico never rises above the absolute height of 
6 or 800 metres, or 1968 and 2624 feet. This 
height is much surpassed by that of the cam- 
buri, or banana of the Canaries, a plant which 
grows nearer the central table-land of the cor* 
dilleras. 

The Mexicans, like the natives of all equinoctial 
America, have cultivated, from the remotest anti 
quity, two kinds of juca, which the botanists, in 
their inventory of species, have united under the 
name of jafropha manihot. They distinguish, in 
the Spanish colony, the sweet (dulce) from the tart 
or bitter (amarga) juca. The root of the former, 
which bears the name of camagnoc at Cayenne, 
may be eaten without danger, while the other is a 
very active poison. The two may be made into 
bread ; however, the root of the bitter juca is ge 
nerally used for this purpose, the poisonous juice 
of which is carefully separated from the fecula 
before making the bread of the manioc, called 
cazavi, or cassave. This separation is operated by 
co.mpressing the root after being grated down in 
the cibucan, which is a species of long sack. It 
appears from a passage of Oviedo, (lib. vii. c. 2)] 



182 



MEXICO. 



[that the juca dulcc, which he calls boniata, and 
which is the huacamote of the Mexicans, was 
not found originally in the W. India islands, 
and that it was transplanted from the neighbour 
ing continent. " The boniata," says Oviedo, 
** is like that of the continent ; it is riot poisonous, 
and may be eaten with its juice either raw or 
prepared." The natives carefully separate in 
their fields (conucos) the two species of jntro- 
pha. 

It is very remarkable that plants, of which the 
chemical properties are so very different, are yet 
so very difficult to distinguish from their exterior 
characters. Brown, in his Natural History of 
Jamaica, .imagined lie found these characters in 
dissecting the leaves. Me calls the sweet juca, 
sweet cassava, jatropha foliis palmatishbisincertis; 
and the bitter or tart juca, common cassava, .;"#- 
trophafoliis palmatis pentadactylibus. Humboldt, 
having examined many plantations of manihot, 
found that the two species of jatropha, like all cul 
tivated plants with lobed or palmated leaves, vary 
prodigiously in their aspect. He also observed 
that the natives distinguish the sweet from the 
poisonous manioc, not so much from the superior 
whiteness of the stalk and the reddish colour of the 
leaves as from the taste of the root, which is not 
tart or bitter. It is with the cultivated jatropha as 
with the sweet orange-tree, which botanists cannot 
distinguish from the bitter orange-tree, but which, 
however, according to the beautiful experiments of 
M.Galesio, is a primitive species, propagated from 
the grain, as well as the bitter orange-tree. Several 
naturalists, from the example of Dr. Wright of 
Jamaica, have taken the sweet juca for the true./Vz- 
tropha janipha of Linnaeus, or the jatropha fru- 
tescens of Loffling. (Reza til Spanska I.oenderna^ 
1758, p. 309). But this last species, which is the 
jatropha Cart hag inen sis of Jacquin, differs from it 
essentially by the form of the leaves (lobis utrinque 
sinuoHs), which resemble those of the papayer. 
We very much doubt whether the jatropha can 
be transformed by cultivation into the jatropha 
rnanihot. It appears equally improbable that the 
sweet juca is a poisonous jatropha, which, by the 
care of man, or the effect of a long cultivation, 
has gradually lost the acidity of its juices. The 
juca amarga of the American fields has remained 
the same for centuries, though planted and culti 
vated like the juca dulce. Nothing is more mys 
terious than this difference of interior organization 
in cultivated vegetables, of which the exterior 
forms are nearly the same. 

Itaynal (Histoire PhUosophique^ torn. iii. p. 
212214) has advanced that the manioc was 



transplanted from Africa to America to serve for 
the maintenance of the Negroes, and that if it 
existed on the continent before the arrival of the 
Spaniards, it was not, however, known by the na 
tives of the W. Indies in the time of Columbus. 
We are afraid that this celebrated author has con 
founded the manioc with the ignames ; that is to 
say, the jatropha with a species of dioscorea. We 
should wish to know by what authority we can 
prove that the manioc was cultivated in Guinea 
from the remotest period. Several travellers have 
also pretended that the maize grew wild in this 
part of Africa, and yet it is certain that it was 
transported there by the Portuguese in the 16th 
century. Nothing is more difficult to resolve than 
the problem of the migration of the plants useful to 
man, especially since communications have be 
come so frequent between all continents. Fernan 
dez de Oviedo, who went in 1513 to the island of 
Hispaniola, or St. Domingo, and who for more 
than 20 years inhabited different parts of the new 
continent, speaks of the manioc as of a very ancient 
cultivation, and peculiar to America. If, how 
ever, the Negro slaves introduced the manioc, 
Oviedo would himself have seen the commence 
ment of this important branch of tropical agricul 
ture. If he had believed that the jatropha was 
not indigenous in America, he would have cited 
the epochaat which the first maniocs were planted, 
as he relates in the greatest detail the first introduc 
tion of the sugar-cane, the banana of the Canaries, 
the olive, and the date. Amerigo Vespucci relates 
in his letter addressed to the Duke of Loraine, 
(Grynceus, p. 215), that he saw bread made of the 
manioc on the coast of Paria in 1497. " The na 
tives," says this adventurer, in other respects by 
no means accurate in his recital, " know nothing 
of our corn and our farinaceous grains ; they draw 
their principal subsistence from a root which they 
reduce into meal, which some of them calljucha, 
others chambi, and others igtiame." It is easy to 
discover the word jucca in jucha. As to the 
word ignamey it now means the root of the dios 
corea atata, which Columbus describes under the 
name of ages, and of which we shall afterwards 
speak. The natives of Spanish Guayana who da 
not acknowledge the dominion of the Europeans 
have cultivated the manioc from the remotest an 
tiquity. Running out of provisions in repassing 
the rapids of the Orinoco, Humboldt on his re 
turn from the Rio Negro, applied to the tribe of 
Piraoas Indians, who dwell to the e. of the May- 
pures, and they supplied him with jatropha bread. 
There can therefore remain no doubt that the ma 
nioc is a plant of which the cultivation is of a much] 



MEXICO. 



183 



[earlier date than the arrival of the Europeans 
and Africans into America. 

The manioc bread is very nutritive, perhaps on 
account of the sugar which it contains, and a vis 
cous matter which unites the farinaceous mole 
cules of the cassava. This matter appears to have 
some analogy with the caoutchouc, which is so 
common in all the plants of the group of the tithy- 
maloides. They give to the cassava a circular 
form. The disks, which are called turtas, or 
xauxau in the old language of Haity, have a dia 
meter of from five to six decimetres, or from 19.685 
inches to 23.622 inches, of thickness. The na 
tives, who are much more sober than the whites, 
generally eat less than half a kilogramme, or about 
a pound, of manioc per day. The want of gluten 
mixed with the amylaceous matter, and the thin 
ness of the bread, render it extremely brittle and 
difficult of transportation. This inconvenience is 
particularly felt in long navigations. The fecula 
of manioc grated, dried, and smoked, is almost un 
alterable. Insects and worms never attack it, and 
every traveller knows in equinoctial America the 
advantages of the couaque. 

It is not only the fecula of the juca amarga 
which serves for nourishment to the Indians, they 
use also the juice of the root, which in its natural 
state is an active poison. This juice is decomposed 
by fire. When kept for a long time in ebullition 
it loses its poisonous properties gradually as it is 
skimmed. It is used without danger as a sauce, 
and Ilumboldt himself frequently used this brownish 
juice, which resembles a very nutritive bouillon. 
At Cayenne, (Aublet, Hist, des Plantes de la 
Guyane Franqoise, torn. ii. p. 72), it is thickened 
to make cabiou^ which is analogous to the souy 
brought from China, and which serves to season 
dishes. From time to time very serious accidents 
happen when the juice has not been long enough 
exposed (o the heat. It is a fact very well known 
in the islands, that formerly a great number of the 
natives of Haity killed themselves voluntarily by 
the raw juice of the root of the juca amarga. 
Oviedo relates, as an eye-witness, that these un 
happy wretches, who, like many African tribes, 
preferred death to involuntary labour, united to 
gether by fifties to swallow at once the poisonous 
juice of the jatropha. This extraordinary con 
tempt of life characterises the savage in the most 
remote parts of the globe. 

Reflecting on the union of accidental circum 
stances which have determined nations to this or 
that species of cultivation, we are astonished to 
see the Americans, in the midst of the richness of 
their country, seek in the poisonous root of a tithy- 



matoid the same amylaceous substance which 
other nations have found in the family of gramina, 
in bananas, asparagus (dioscorea alata), aroides 
(arum macrorrhizen, dracontium polyphillum), 
solana, lizerons (convolvulus batatas, c.chrysorhi- 
zus), narcissi (tacca pinnatifida), polygonoi (p. 
fagopyrurn), urtica? (artocarpus), legumens and 
arborescent ferns (cycas circinnalis). \Ve ask 
why the savage who discovered the jatropha 
manihot did not reject a root of the poisonous 
qualities of which a sad experience must have 
convinced him before he could discover its nutri 
tive properties? But the cultivation of the juca 
dulce, of which the juice is not deleterious, pre 
ceded perhaps that of the juca arnarga, from which 
the manioc is now taken. Perhaps also the same 
people who first ventured to feed on the root of 
the jatropha manihot had formerly cultivated 
plants analogous to the arum and the dracontium , 
of which the juice is acrid, without being poison 
ous. ]t was easy to remark, that the fecula ex 
tracted from the root of an aroid is of a taste so 
much the more agreeable, as it is carefully washed 
to deprive it of its milky juice. This very simple 
consideration would naturally lead to the idea of 
expressing the fecula, and preparing it in the same 
manner as the manioc. We can conceive that a 
people who knew how to dulcify the roots of an 
aroid could undertake to nourish themselves on a 
plant of the group of the euphorbia. The transi 
tion is easy, though the danger is continually aug 
menting. In fact, the natives of the Society and 
Molucca islands, who are unacquainted with the 
jatropha manihot, cultivate the arum macrorrhizon 
and the tacca pinnatifida. The root of this last 
plant requires the same precaution as the manioc, 
and yet the tacca bread competes in the market of 
Banda with the sagou bread. 

The cultivation of the manioc requires more 
care than that of the banana. It resembles that 
of potatoes, and the harvest takes place only from 
seven to eight months after the slips have been 
planted. The people who can plant the jatropha 
have already made great advances towards civili 
zation. There are even varieties of the manioc, 
for example, those which are called at Cayenne 
manioc bois blanc, and manioc mai-pourri-rouge^ 
of which the roots can only be pulled up at the end 
of J5 months. The savage of New Zealand would 
not certainly have the patience to wait for so tardy 
a harvest. 

Plantations of jatr/&amp;gt;pha manihot are now found 
along the coast from the mouth of the river of 
Guasacualco to the . of Santander, and from 
Tehuantepec to San Bias and Sinaloa, in the low] 



184 



MEXICO. 



[and warm regions of the intendancies of Vcra 
Cruz, Oaxaca, Puebla, Mexico, Valladolid, and 
Guadalaxara. M. Aublct, a judicious botanist, 
\vlio, happily, has not disdained in his travels to 
inquire into the agriculture of the tropics, says 
very justly, " that the manioc is one of the 
finest and most useful productions of the American 
soil, and that with this plant the inhabitants of 
the torrid zone could dispense with rice and every 
sort of wheat, as well as all the roots and fruits 
which serve as nourishment to the human spe 
cies." 

Maize occupies the same region as the banana 
and the manioc; but its cultivation is still more 
important and more extensive, especially than that 
of the two plants which we have been describing. 
Advancing towards the central table-land we meet 
with fields of maize all the way from the coast to 
the valley of Toluca, which is more than 2800 me 
tres, or 9185 feet, above the level of the ocean. 
The year in which the maize harvest fails is a 
year of famine and misery for the inhabitants of 
Mexico. 

It is no longer doubted among botanists, that 
maize, or Turkey corn, is a true American grain, 
and that the olid continent received it from the 
new. It appears also that the cultivation of this 
plant in Spain long preceded that of potatoes. 
Oviedo (Rerttm Medicarum Novce Hispance The 
saurus, 1651, lib. vii. c. 40, p. 247), whose first 
essay on the natural history of the Indies was 
printed at Toledo in 1525, says that he saw maize 
cultivated in Andalusia, near the chapel of Atocha, 
in the environs of Madrid. This assertion is so 
much the more remarkable, as from a passage of 
Hernandez (book vii. chap. 40) we might believe 
that maize was still unknown in Spain in the 
time of Philip II. towards the end of the 16th 
century. 

On the discovery of America by the Europeans, 
the zea maize (tlaolli in the Aztec language, mahiz 
in the Haitian, and cam in the Quichua) was cul 
tivated from the most 5. part of Chile to Pennsyl 
vania. According to a tradition of the Aztec 
people, the Toultecs, in the 7th century of our 
era, were the first who introduced into Mexico the 
cultivation of maize, cotton, and pimento. It 
might happen, however, that these different 
branches of agriculture existed before the Toul 
tecs, and that this nation, the great civilization of 
which has been celebrated by all the historians, 
merely extended them successfully. Hernandez 
informs us, that the Otamites even, who were only 
a wandering and barbarous people, planted rnaize. 
The cultivation of this grain consequently ex 



tended beyond the Rio Grande de Santiago-, for 
merly called Tololotlari. 

The maize introduced into the n. of Europe suf 
fers from the cold wherever the mean temperature 
docs not reach 7 or 8 of the ccntigr.-ule thermo 
meter, or 44 or 46 of Fahrenheit. We therefore 
see rye, and especially barley, vegetate vigorously 
on the ridge of the Cordilleras, at heights where, 
on account of the roughness of the climate, the 
cultivation of maize would be attended wi(h no 
success. But, on the other hand, the latter de 
scends to the warmest regions of the torrid zone, 
even to plains where wheat, barley, and rye can 
not develop themselves. Hence on the scale of 
the different kinds of cultivation, the rnaize, at pre 
sent, occupies a much greater extent in the equi 
noctial part of America than the cereal ia of the old 
continent. The maize, also, of all the grains use 
ful to man, is the one whose farinaceous peris- 
perma has the greatest volume. 

It is commonly believed that this plant is the 
only species of grain known by the Americans be 
fore the arrival of the Europeans. It appears, 
however, certain enough, that in Chile, in the 15th 
century, and even long before, besides the zea 
maize and the zea curagua, two gramina called 
magu and tuca were cultivated, of which, accord 
ing to the Abbe Molina, the first was a species of 
rye, and the second a species of barley. The 
bread of this araucan bread went by the name of 
covgue, a word which afterwards was applied to 
the bread made of European corn. (Molina, His- 
toire naturelle du Chile, p. 101). Hernandez even 
pretends to have found among the Indians of Me- 
choacan a species of wheat, (p. vii. 43. Clam- 
gero, i. p. 56, note F.), which, according to his 
very succinct description, resembles the corn-of- 
abundance, (iriticum composilum), which is be 
lieved to be a native of Egypt. Notwithstanding 
every information which Ilumboldt procured dur 
ing his stay in the intendancy of Valladolid, it was 
impossible for him to clear up this important point 
in the history of cerealia. Nobody there knew 
any thing of a wheat peculiar to the country, and 
he suspected that Hernandez gave the name of 
triticum Michuacancnse to some variety of Euro 
pean grain become wild and growing in a very 
fertile soil. 

The fecundity of the tlaotli, or Mexican maize, 
is beyond any thing that can be imagined in Eu 
rope. The plant, favoured by strong heats and 
much humidity, acquires a height of from two to 
three metres, or from 6| to 9 T ^ feet. In the beau 
tiful plains which extend from San Juan del Rio 
to Querelaroj for example, in the lands of the great] 



MEXICO. 



^plantation of L Esperanza, one foncga of maize 
produces sometimes 800. Fertile lands yield, 
commuuibus annt s, from 3 to 400. In the en 
virons of Valladolid a harvest is reckoned bad 
which yields only the seed 130 or 150 fold. Where 
the soil is even most sterile it still returns from 60 
to 80 grains for one. It is believed that we may 
estimate the produce of maize in general, in the 
equinoctial region of the kingdom of Nueva 
Espaiia, at 150 for one. The valley of Toluca 
alone yields annually more than 600,000 fanegas, 
or 66,210,6001bs. on an extent of 30 square 
leagues, of which a great part is cultivated in 
agave. Between the parallels of 18 and 22 the 
frosts and cold winds render this cultivation by no 
means lucrative on plains whose height exceeds 
3000 metres, or 9842 feet. The annual produce 
of maize in the intendancy of Guadalaxara is, as 
we have already observed, more than 80,000,000 
of kilogrammes, or 176,562,400 Ibs. avoirdupois. 

Under the temperate zone, between lat. 33 and 
38, in New California for example, maize pro 
duces in general only, communibus annis, from 70 
to 80 for one. By comparing the manuscript me 
moirs of Father Fermin Lassuen with the statisti 
cal tables published in the historical account of the 
voyage of M. de Galeano, we should be enabled to 
indicate village by village the quantities of maize 
sown and reaped. We find that in 1791, 12 mis 
sions of New California reaped 7625 fanegas on a 
piece of ground sown with 96. In 1801 the har 
vest of 16 missions was 4661 fanegas, while the 
quantity sown only amounted to 66. Hence for 
the former year the produce was 79, and for the 
latter 70 for one. This coast in general appears 
better adapted for the cultivation of the cerealia of 
Europe. However, it is proved by the same 
tables, that in some parts of New California, for 
example in the fields belonging to the villages 
of San Buenaventura and Capistrano, the maize 
has frequently yielded from 180 to 200 for one. 

Although a great quantity of other grain is cul 
tivated in Mexico, the maize must be considered 
as the principal food of the people, as also of the 
most part of the domestic animals. The price of 
this commodity modifies that of all the others, of 
which it is, as it were, the natural measure. When 
the harvest is poor, either from the want of rain 
or from premature frost, the famine is general, and 
produces the most fatal consequences. Fowls, 
turkies, and even the larger cattle, equally suffer 
1 rom it. A traveller who passes through a coun 
try in which the maize has been frost-bitten finds 
neither egg nor poultry, nor arepa bread, nor meal 
for the ato/li, which is a nutritive and agreeable 

VOL. III. 



soup. The dearth of provisions is especially felt 
in the environs of the Mexican mines ; in those of 
Guanaxuato, for example, where 14,000 mules, 
which are necessary in the process of amalgama 
tion, annually consume an enormous quantity of 
maize. We have already mentioned the influence 
which dearths have periodically had on the pro 
gress of population in Nueva Espana. The fright 
ful dearth of 1784 was the consequence of a strong 
frost, which was felt at an epocha when it was 
least to be expected in the torrid zone, the 28th 
August, and at the inconsiderable height of 1800 
metres (5904 feet) above the level Of the ocean. 

Of all the gramina cultivated by man none is 
so unequal in its produce. This produce varies 
in the same field, according to the changes of hu 
midity and the mean temperature of the year, from 
40 to 200 or 300 for one. If the harvest is good, 
the colonist makes his fortune more rapidly with 
maize than with wheat: and we may say that this 
cultivation participates in both the advantages and 
disadvantages of the vine. The price of maize 
varies from 2 livres 10 sous to 25 livres the fanega. 
The mean price is five livres in the interior of the 
country ; but it is increased so mnch by the car 
riage, that during Humboldt s stay in the intend 
ancy of Guanaxuato, the fanega cost at Salamanca 
9, at Queretaro 12, and at San Luis Potosi 22 livres. 
In a country where there are no magazines, and 
where the natives merely live from hand to mouth, 
the people suffer terribly whenever the maize re 
mains for any length of time at 2 piastres, or JO 
livres, the fanega. The natives then feed on un 
ripe fruit, on cactus berries, and on roots. This 
insufficient food occasions diseases among them ; 
and it is observed that famines are usually ac 
companied with a great mortality among the 
children. 

In warm and very humid regions the maize will 
yield from two to three harvests annually ; but 
generally only one is taken. It is sown from the 
middle of June till near the end of August. 
Among the numerous varieties of this gramcn 
there is one of which the ear ripens two months 
after the grain has been sown. This precious va 
riety is well known in Hungary, and M. Parmen- 
tier has endeavoured to introduce the cultivation 
of it into France. The Mexicans who inhabit the 
shores of the S. sea give the preference to another, 
which Oviedo (lib. vii. c. 1, p. 103) affirms he 
saw in his time, in the province of Nicaragua, and 
which is reaped in between 30 and 40 days. Hum- 
boldt also observed it near Tomependa, on the 
banks of the river of the Amazons ; but all these 
varieties of maize, of which the vegetation is so] 

B It 



186 



MEXICO. 



[rapid, appear to be of a less farinaceous grain, 
and almost as small as the zea curagua of Chile. 

The utility which the Americans draw from 
maize is too well known to make it necessary for 
us to dwell on it. The use of rice is not more 
various in China and the E. Indies. The ear is 
eaten boiled or roasted. The grain when beat 
yields a nutritive bread (arepa), though not fer 
mented and ill baked, on account of the small 
quantity of gluten mixed with the amylaceous 
fecula. The meal is employed like gruel in the 
boullies, which the Mexicans call attolli^ in which 
they mix sugar, honey, and sometimes even 
ground potatoes. The botanist Hernandez (lib. 
vii. c. 40, p. 244) describes 16 species of attolis 
which were made in his time. 

A chemist would have some difficulty in pre 
paring the innumerable variety of spirituous, acid, 
or sugary beverages, which the Indians display a 
particular address in making, by infusing the grain 
of maize, in which the sugary matter begins to de 
velop itself by germination. These beverages, 
generally known by the name of chicha , have some 
of them a resemblance to beer, and others to cider. 
Under the monastic government of the Incas it 
\vas not permitted in Peru to manufacture intoxi 
cating liquors, especially those which are called 
vinapu and sora. (Garcilasso, lib. viii. c. 9, 
torn. i. p. 277. Acosla, lib. iv. c. ]6, p. 238.) 
The Mexican despots were less interested in the 
public and private morals ; and drunkenness was 
very common among the Indians of the times of 
the Aztec dynasty. But the Europeans have 
multiplied the enjoyments of the lower people, by 
the introduction of the sugar-cane. At present 
in every elevation the Indian has his particular 
drinks. The plains in the vicinity of the coast 
furnish him with spirit from the sugar-cane, (gua- 
rapo, or aguardiente de catia) t and the chicha de 
manioc. The chicha de mnis abounds on the de 
clivity of the cordilleras. The central table-land 
is the country of the Mexican vines, the agave 
plantations, which supply the favourite drink of 
the natives, the pulque de maguey. The Indian 
in easy circumstances adds to these productions of 
the American soil a liquor still dearer and rarer, 
grape brandy (aguardiente de Casti/la), partly 
famished by European commerce, and partly dis 
tilled in the country. Such are the numerous re 
sources of a people who love intoxicating liquors 
to excess. 

Before the arrival of the Europeans, the Mexi 
cans and Peruvians pressed out the juice of the 
maize-stalk to make sugar from it. They not only 
concentrated this juice by evaporation ; they knew 



also to prepare the rough sugar by cooling 
the thickened syrup. Cortes, describing to the 
Emperor Charles V. all the commodities sold in 
the great market of Tlatelolco, on his entry into 
Tenochtitlan, expressly names the Mexican sugar. 
" There is sold," says he, u honey of bees and 
wax, (honey from the stalks of maize), which are 
as sweet as sugar-cane, and honey from a shrub 
called by the people maguey. The natives mnke 
sugar of these plants, and this sugar they also sell.** 
The stalk of all the gramina contains sugary mat 
ter, especially near the knots. The quantity of 
the sugar that maize can furnish in the temperate 
zone appears, however, to be very inconsiderable ; 
but under the tropics its fistulous stalk is so sugary 
that the Indians have been frequently seen sucking 
it, as the sugar-cane is sucked by the Negroes. In, 
the valley of Toluca the stalk of the maize is 
squeezed between cylinders, and then is prepared 
from its fermented juice a spirituous liquor, called 
"pulque de mahis, or tlaolli, a liquor which becomes 
a very important object of commerce. 

From the statistical tables drawn up in the in- 
tendancy of Guadalaxara, of which the popula 
tion is more than 500,000 of inhabitants, it ap 
pears extremely probable that, communibus annis t 
the actual produce of maize in all Nueva Espaila 
amounts to more than 17,000,000 of fanegas, or 
more than 800,000,000 of kilogrammes, or 1765| 
millions of pounds avoirdupois, of weight. This 
grain will keep in Mexico, in the temperate cli 
mates, for three years, and in the valley of To. 
luca, and all the levels of which the mean tempera 
ture is below 14 centigrade degrees, or 57 of Fah 
renheit, for five or six years, especially if the dry 
stalk is not cut before the ripe grain has been 
somewhat struck with the frost. 

In good years the kingdom of Nueva Espafia 
produces much more maize than it can consume. 
As the country unites in a small space a great va 
riety of climates, and as the maize almost never 
succeeds at the same time in the warm region 
(tierras calientes) and on the central table-land, in 
the terras frias, the interior commerce is singu 
larly vivified by the transport of this grain. Maize 
compared with European grain has the disadvan 
tage of containing a smaller quantity of nutritive 
substance in a greater volume. This circum 
stance, and the difficulty of the roads on the de 
clivities of the mountains, present obstacles to its 
exportation, which will be less frequent when the 
construction of the fine causeway from Vera Cruz 
to X a la pa. and Perote shall be finished. The 
islands in general, and especially the island of 
Cuba, consume an enormous quantity of maize, j 



MEXICO. 



187 



[These islands are frequently in want of it, because 
the interest of their inhabitants is almost exclu 
sively fixed on the cultivation of sugar and coffee ; 
although it has been long observed by well in 
formed agriculturists, that in the district contained 
between the Havanah, the port of Batabano, and 
Matanzas, fields cultivated with maize and by free 
hands yield a greater nett revenue than a sugar 
plantation, for which enormous advances are ne 
cessary in the purchase and maintenance of slaves 
and the construction of edifices. 

If it is probable that in Chile formerly, besides 
maize, there were two other gramina with farinace 
ous seed sown, which belonged to the same genus 
as our barley and wheat, it is no less certain that 
before the arrival of the Spaniards in America 
none of the cerealia of the old continent were 
known there. Could we suppose that all man 
kind were descended from the same stock, we 
might be tempted to admit that the Americans, 
like the Atlantes, (see the opinion of Diodorus 
S .culus, Bib/, lib. iii. p. 186. Rhodom.), sepa 
rated from the rest of the human race before the 
cultivation of wheat on the central plains of Asia. 
But are we to lose ourselves in fabulous times to 
explain the ancient communications which appear 
to have existed between the two continents ? In 
the time of Herodotus all the n. part of Africa pre 
sented no other agricultural nations but the Egyp 
tians and the Carthaginians. (Heerenuber Africa, 
p. 41). In the interior of Asia the tribes of the 
Mongol race, the Hiong-nu, the Burattes, the Kal- 
kas, and the Sifancs, have constantly lived as 
wandering shepherds. Now, if the people of cen 
tral Asia, or if the Lybians of Africa, could have 
passed into the new pontinent, neither of them 
would have introduced the cultivation of cerealia. 
The want of these gramina then proves nothing 
cither against the Asiatic origin of the Americans, 
or against the possibility of a very recent transmi 
gration. 

The introduction of European grain having had 
the most beneficial influence on the prosperity of 
the natives of Mexico, it becomes interesting to 
relate at what epocha this new branch of agricul 
ture commenced. A Negro slave of Cortes found 
three or four grains of wheat among the rice which 
served to maintain the Spanish army. These 
grains were sown, as it appears, before the year 
1530. History has brought down to us the name 
of a Spanish lady, Maria d Escobar, the wife of 
Diego de Chaves, who first carried a few grains of 
wheat into the city of Lima, then called Rimac. 
The produce of the harvest which she obtained 
from these grains was distributed for three years 



among the new colonists, so that each farmer re 
ceived 20 or 30 grains. Garcilasso already com 
plained of the ingratitude of his countrymen, who 
hardly knew the name of Maria d Escobar. We 
are ignorant of the epocha at which the cultivation 
of cerealia commenced in Peru, but it is certain 
that in 1547 whcaten bread was hardly known in 
the city of Cuzco. (Commentaries Reales, ix. 24, 
t. ii. p. 332). At Quito the first European grain 
was sown near the convent of St. Francis by Fa 
ther Josse Rixi, a native of Gand in Flanders. 
The monks still show there with enthusiasm the 
earthen vase in which the first wheat came from 
Europe, which they look upon as a precious relic. 
(See Humboldfs Tableaux de la Nature, t. ii. 
p. 16b ). Why have not every where the names 
of those been preserved, who, in place of ravaging 
the earth, have enriched it with plants useful to 
the human race ? 

The temperate region, especially the climate 
where the mean heat of the year does not exceed 
from 18 to 19 centigrade degrees, or 64 and 66 
of Fahr. appears most favourable to the cultiva 
tion of cerealia, embracing under this denomina 
tion only the nutritive gramina known to the an 
cients, namely, wheat, spelt, barley, oats, and rye. 
In fact, in the equinoctial part of Mexico, the 
cerealia of Europe are no where cultivated in 
plains of which the elevation is under from 8 to 
900 metres, or from 2629 to 2952 feet; and we 
have already observed, that on the declivity of the 
cordilleras between Vera Cruz and Acapulco, we 
generally see only the commencement of this cul 
tivation at an elevation of 1200 or 1300 metres, 
or 3936 and 4264 feet. A long experience has 
proved to the inhabitants of Xulapa that the wheat 
sown around their city vegetates vigorously, but 
never produces a single ear. It is cultivated be 
cause its straw and its succulent leaves serve for 
forage (zacate) to cattle. It is very certain, how 
ever, that in the kingdom of Guatemala, and 
consequently nearer the equator, grain ripens at 
smaller elevations than that of the (own of Xalapa. 
A particular exposure, the cool winds which blow 
in the direction of the n. and other local causes, 
may modify the influence of the climate. In the 
province of Caracas the finest harvests of wheat 
near Victoria (lat. 10 13 ) are found at 500 or 
600 metres (1640 or J968 fat) of absolute eleva 
tion ; and it appears that the wheaten fields which 
surround the Quatro Villas in the is and of Culm 
(lat. 21 58 ) have still a smaller elevation. At the 
isle of France (lat. 20 10 ) wheat is cultivated on 
a soil almost level with the ocean. 

The European colonists have not sufficiently] 
u B 2 



188 



MEXICO. 



[varied their experiments to know what is the mini 
mum of height at which cerealia grow in the equi 
noctial region of Mexico. The absolute want of 
rain during the summer months is so much the 
more unfavourable to the wheat as the heat of the 
climate is greater. It is true that the droughts 
and heats are also very considerable in Syria and 
Egypt ; but this last country, which abounds so 
much in grain, has a climate which differs essen 
tially from that of Ihe torrid zone, and the soil 
preserves a certain degree of humidity from the 
beneficent inundations of the Nile. However, the 
vegetables, which are of the same kind with our 
cerealia, grow only wild in temperate climates, 
and even in those only of the old continent. With 
the exception of a few gigantic arundinaceous, 
which are social plants, the gramina appear in 
general infinitely rarer in the torrid zone than in 
the temperate zone, where they have the ascend 
ancy, as it were, over the other vegetables. We 
ought not, then, to be astonished that the cerealia, 
notwithstanding the great flexibility of organiza 
tion attributed to them, and which is common to 
them with the domestic animals, thrive better on 
the central table-land of Mexico, in the hilly re 
gion, where they find the climate of Rome and 
Milan, than in the plains in the vicinity of the 
equinoctial ocean. 

Were the soil of Nueva Espana watered by 
more frequent rains, it would be one of the most 
fertile countries cultivated by man in the two 
hemispheres. The hero who, in the midst of a 
bloody war, had his eyes continually fixed on 
every branch of national industry, Hernan Cortes, 
wrote to his sovereign shortly alter the siege of 
Tenochtitlan : " All the plants of Spain thrive 
admirably in this land. We shall not proceed 
here as we have done in the isles, where we have 
neglected cultivation and destroyed the inhabi 
tants. A sad experience ought to render us more 
prudent. 1 beseech your Majesty to give orders 
to the Casa do Contratacion of Seville, that no 
vessel set sail for this country without a certain 
quantity of plants and grain." The groat fertility 
of the Mexican soil is incontrovertible, but the 
want of water frequently diminishes the abundance 
of the harvests. 

There are only two seasons known in the equi 
noctial region of Mexico, even as far as the 28 
of w. lat. : the rainy season (eslacion de las aguas), 
which begins in the month of June or July, and 
ends in the month of September or October, and 
the dry season (el estio), which lasts eight months, 
from October to the end of May. The first rains 
generally commence on the c. declivity of the cor- 



dillera. The formation of the clouds and the pre 
cipitation of the water dissolved in the air com 
mence on the coast of Vera Cruz. These pheno 
mena are accompanied with strong electrical ex 
plosions, which take place successively at Mexico, 
Guadalaxara, and on the w. coast. The chemical 
action is propagated from e. to w. in the direction 
of the trade-winds, and the rains begin 15 or 20 
days sooner at Vera Cruz than on the central table 
land. Sometimes we see in the mountain, even 
below 2000 metres, or 6561 feet, of absolute height, 
rain mixed with rime (gresil) and snow in the 
months of November, December, and January ; 
but these rains are very short, and only last from 
four to five days; and however cold they may be, 
they are considered as very useful for the vegeta 
tion of wheat and the pasturages. In Mexico in 
general, as in Europe, the rains are most frequent 
in the mountainous regions, especially in that part 
of the Cordilleras which extends from the Pic 
d Orizaba by Guanaxuato, Sierra de Pinos, Zaca- 
tecas, and Bolanos, to the mines of Guarisamejr 
and the Rosario. 

The prosperity of Nueva Espana depends on 
the proportion established between the duration of 
two seasons of rain and drought. The agricultu 
rist has seldom to complain of too great a humi 
dity, and if sometimes the maize and the cerealia 
of Europe are exposed to partial inundations in 
the plains, of which several form circular basins 
shut in by the mountains, the grain sown on the 
slopes of the hills vegetates with so much the 
greater vigour. From the parallel of 24 to that 
of SO the rains are seldomer, and of short dura 
tion. Happily the snow, of which there is great 
abundance from the 26 of lat. supplies the want 
of rain. 

The extreme drought to which Nueva Espana 
is exposed from the month of June to the month 
of September, compels the inhabitants in a great 
part of this vast country to have recourse to arti 
ficial irrigations. The harvests of wheat are rich 
in proportion to the water taken from the rivers 
by means of canals of irrigation. This system is 
particularly followed in the fine plains which bor 
der the river Santiago, called Rio Grande, and 
in those between Salamanca, Irapuato, and the 
Villa de Leon. Canals of irrigation (acequias), 
reservoirs of water (presets), and the hydraulical 
machines called norias, are objects of the greatest 
importance for Mexican agriculture. Like Persia, 
and the lower part of Peru, the interior of Nueva 
Espana is infinitely productive in nutritive gra 
mina wherever the industry of man has diminished 
the natural dry ness of the soil and the air.] 



MEXICO. 



189 



[No where does the proprietor of a large farm 
more frequently feel the necessity of employing 
engineers skilled in surveying ground and the 
principles of hydraulic constructions. However, 
at Mexico, as elsewhere, those arts have been pre 
ferred which please the imagination to those which 
are indispensable to the wants of domestic life. 
They possess architects, who judge learnedly of 
the beauty and symmetry of an edifice ; but no 
thing is still so rare there as to find persons capa 
ble of constructing machines, dikes, and canals. 
Fotunately the feeling of their want has excited 
the national industry, and a certain sagacity pecu 
liar to all mountainous people supplies in some 
sort the want of instruction. 

In the places which are not artificially watered 
the Mexican soil yields only pasturage to the 
months of March and April. At this period, 
when the s. w. wind, which is dry and warm, 
(viento de la Misteca) frequently blows, all verdure 
disappears, and the gramina and other herbaceous 
plants gradually dry up. This change is more 
sensibly felt when the rains of the preceding year 
have been less abundant and the summer has been 
warmer. The wheat then, especially in the month 
of May, suffers much if it is not artificially wa 
tered. The rain only excites the vegetation in the 
month of June ; with the first falls the fields be 
come covered with verdure ; the foliage of the 
trees is renewed; and the European, who recals 
to his mind incessantly the climate of his native 
country, enjoys doubly this season of the rains, be 
cause it presents to him the image of spring. 

In indicating the dry and rainy months we have 
described the course which the meteorological phe 
nomena commonly follow. For several years, 
however, these phenomena appear to have devi 
ated from the general law, and the exceptions have 
unfortunately been to the disadvantage of agricul 
ture. The rains have become more rare,, and 
especially more tardy. It is observed in Mexico 
that the maize, which suffers much more than the 
wheat from the frosts in autumn, has the ad 
vantage of recovering more easily after long 
droughts. In the intendancy of Valladolid, be 
tween Salamanca and the lake of Cuizeo, are seen 
fields of maize which were believed to be de 
stroyed, vegetate with an astonishing vigour after 
two or three days of rain. The great breadth of 
the leaves undoubtedly contributes greatly to the 
nutrition and vegetative force of this American 
gramen. 

In the farms (haciendas de trigo) in which the 
system of irrigation is well established, in those of 
Silao and Irapuato, for example, near Leon, the 



wheat is twice watered ; first, when the young 
plant springs up in the month of January ; and the 
second time in the beginning of March, when the 
ear is on the point of developing itself. Sometimes 
even the whole field is inundated before sowing. 
It is observed, that in allowing the water to remain 
for several weeks, the soil is so impregnated with 
humidity that the wheat resists more easily the long 
droughts. They scatter the seed (semer a la voice) 
at the moment when the waters begir; to flow from 
the opening of the canals. This method brings to 
mind the cultivation of wheat in Lower Egypt, and 
these prolonged inundations diminish at the same 
time the abundance of the parasitical herbs which 
mix with the harvest at reaping, and of which a 
part has unfortunately past into America w r ith the 
European grain. 

The riches of the harvests are surprising inlands 
carefully cultivated, especially in those which are 
watered or properly separated by different courses 
of labour. The most fertile part of the table-land 
is that which extends from Queretaro to the town 
of Leon. These elevated plains are SO leagues in 
length by eight or ten in breadth. The wheat 
harvest is 35 and 40 for one, and several great 
farms can even reckon on 50 or 60 to one. An 
equal fertility is found in the fields which extend 
from the village of Santiago to Yurirapundaro in 
the intendancy of Valladolid. In the environs of 
Puebla, Atlisco, and Zelaya, in a great part of the 
bishoprics of Mechoacan and Guadalaxara, the 
produce is from 20 to 30 for one. A field is con 
sidered there as far from fertile when a fanega 
of wheat yields only, cointnvnibus annis, 16 fane- 
gas. At Choi u la the common harvest is from 30 
to 40, but it frequently exceeds from 70 to 80 for 
one. In the valley of Mexico the maize yields 
200, and the wheat 18 or 20. We have to observe, 
that the numbers which we here give have all the 
accuracy which can be desired in so important an 
object for the knowledge of territorial riches. Be 
ing eagerly desirous of knowing the produce of 
agriculture under the tropics, Humboldt procured 
all the information on the very spots ; and com 
pared it with the data with which he was furnished 
by intelligent colonists, who inhabited provinces at 
a distance from one another. He was induced to 
be so much the more precise in this operation, a 
from having been born in a country where grain 
scarcely produces four or five for one, he was na 
turally more apt than another to be disposed to 
suspect the exaggerations of agriculturists, exag 
gerations which are the same in Mexico, China, 
and wherever the vanity of the inhabitants wishef 
to take advantage of the credulity of travellers.] 



190 



MEXICO. 



[The same author was aware that on account of 
the great inequality with which different coun 
tries sow, it would have been better to compare the 
produce of the harvest with the extent of ground 
sown up. But the agrarian measures are so in 
exact, and there are so few farms in Mexico in 
which we know with precision the number of 
square toises or varas which they contain, that he 
was obliged to confine himself to the simple com 
parison between the wheat reaped and the wheat 
sown. The researches to which he applied him 
self during his stay in Mexico gave him for result, 
communibus annis, the mean produce of all the 
country at 22 or 25 for one. When he returned 
to Europe he began again to entertain doubts as to 
the precision of this important result, and he 
asserts, he should perhaps have hesitated to pub 
lish it, if had not had it in his power to consult on 
this subject quite recently, and in Paris even, a re 
spectable and enlightened person who has inha 
bited the Spanish colonies these 30 years, and who 
applied himself with great success to agriculture. 
M. Abad, a canon of the metropolitan church of 
Valladolid de Mechoacan, assured him, that from 
his calculations the mean produce of the Mexican 
wheat, far from being belosv 22 grains, is probably 
from 25 to 30, which, according to the calculations 
of Lavoisier and Neckar, exceeds from five to six 
limes the mean produce of France. 

Near Zelaya the agriculturists shewed him the 
enormous difference of produce between the lands 
artificially watered and those which are not. The 
former, which receive the water of the Rio Grande, 
distributed by drains into several pools, yield from 
40 to 50 for one; while the latter, which do not 
enjoy the benefit of irrigation, only yield 15 or 20. 
The same fault prevails here of which agricultural 
writers complain in almost every country of Eu 
rope, that of employing too much seed, so that 
the grain chokes itself. Were it not for this the 
produce of the harvests would still appear greater 
than what we have stated. 

It may be of use to insert here an observation 
made near Zelaya by a person worthy of confi 
dence, and very much accustomed to researches 
of this nature. M. Abad took at random, in a fine 
field of wheat of several acres in extent, 40 wheaten 
plants (triticinn hi/bernum) ; he put the roots in 
water to clear them of all earth, and he found that 
every grain had produced 40, 60, and even 70 
stalks. The ears were almost all equally well fur 
nished. The number of grains which they con 
tained was reckoned, and it was found that this 
number frequently exceeded 100 and even J20. 
The mean term appeared 90. Some ears even 



contained 160 grains. What an astonishing ex 
ample of fertility ! It is remarked in general that 
wheat divides enormously in the Mexican fields, 
that from a single grain a great number of stalks 
shoot up, and that each plant has extremely long 
and bushy roots. The Spanish colonists call this 
effect of the vigour of vegetation el macollar del 
trigo. 

To the n. of this very fertile district of Zelaya, 
Salamanca, and Leon, the country is arid in the 
extreme, without rivers, without springs, and 
presenting vast extents of crusts of hardened clay 
(tcpetate), which the cultivators call hard and cold 
lands, and through which the roots of the herba 
ceous plants with difficulty penetrate. These beds 
of clay, which are also found in the kingdom of 
Quito, resemble at a distance banks of rock desti 
tute of every sort of vegetation. They belong to 
the trappish formation, and constantly accompany 
on the ridge of the Andes of Peru and Mexico the 
basaltes, the griinstein, the amygdaloid, and the 
amphibolic porphyry. But in other parts of Nueva 
Espaiia, in the beautiful valley of Santiago, and to 
the s. of the town of Valladolid, the decomposed 
basaltes and amygdaloids have formed in the suc 
cession of ages a black and very productive earth. 
The fertile fields which surround the Alberca of 
Santiago bring to mind the basaltic districts of the 
Mittelgcbirge of Bohemia. 

All the table-land which extends from Sombre- 
rete to the Saltillo, and from thence towards La 
Punta de Lampazos, is a naked and arid plain, in 
which cactus and other prickly plants only vege 
tate. The sole vestige of cultivation is on some 
points, where, as around the town of Saltillo, the 
industry of man has procured a little water for the 
watering of the fields. We have also traced under 
its proper head a view of Old California, of which 
the soil is a rock both destitute of earth and water. 
All these considerations concur to prove, that on 
account of its extreme dryness a considerable part of 
Nueva Espana situate to the n. of the tropic is not 
susceptible of a great population. Hence, what a 
remarkable contrast between the physiognomy of 
two neighbouring countries, between Mexico and 
the United States of N. America ! In the latter 
the soil is one vast forest, intersected by a great 
number of rivers, which flow into spacious gulfs ; 
while Mexico presents from e. to w. a wooded 
shore, and in its centre an enormous mass of colos 
sal mountains, on the ridge of which stretch out 
plains destitute of wood, and so much the more 
arid, as the temperature of the ambient air is aug 
mented by the reverberation of the solar rays. In. 
the n. of Nueva Espana, as in Thibet, Persia, and all] 



MEXICO. 



191 



[the mountainous regions, a part of the country 
will never be adapted for the cultivation of cereal ia 
till a concentrated and highly civilized population 
shall have vanquished the obstacles opposed by 
nature to the progress of rural economy. But this 
aridity, we repeat it, is not general ; and it is 
compensated for by the extreme fertility observable 
in the s. countries, even in that part of the pro- 
vincias inlernas in the neighbourhood of rivers, in 
the basins of the Rio del Norte, the Gila, the 
Hiaqui, the Mayo, the Culiacan, the Rio del 
Rosario, the Rio de Conchos, the Rio de Santan- 



der, the Tigre, and the numerous torrents of the 
province of Texas. 

In the most n. extremity of the kingdom, on 
the coast of New California, the produce of wheat 
is from 16 to 17 for one, taking the mean term 
among the harvest of 18 villages for two years. 
We believe that agriculturists will peruse with 
pleasure the detail of these harvests in a country 
situated under the same parallel as Algiers, Tunis, 
and Palestine, beUveen the 32 59 and 37 48 of 
lat. 



Names of the villages of New California. 


1791. 

Fanegas of wheat. 


1802. 

Fanegas of wheat. 


Harvest considered as 
multiple of the grain sown. 


Sown. 


Reaped. 


Sown. 


Reaped. 


1791. 


1802. 


San Diego .... 
San Luis Rey de Francia 
San Juan Capistrano 
San Gabriel - 


60 

"so" 

178 


3021 

1586 
3700 


"166 
103 

282 


1200 

2908 
3800 


50A 


"li" 

QO 2. 
(^O"J"^ 


San Fernando - 


.... 


- . . 


100 


2800 


m 


28 


San Buenaventura ... 
Sanla Barbara .... 


44 
65 


259 
1500 


96 
113 


3500 
2876 


&amp;JQ 

23 


25* 


La Purissima Concepcion 
San Luis Obispo , - - 
San Miguel 
Soledad 


76 

86 


800 
1078 


96 
161 
70 

78 


3500 
4000 
1600 
500 


$. 


Si 


San Antonio de Padua 


90 


952 


139 


1200 


10 T 5 ^ 


8_7_ 


San Carlos ... 
San J uan Baptista 
Santa Cruz .... 


71 


221 


60 
52 
60 


240 
1200 
550 


.. S 1 V 


4 
23 T \&amp;gt; 








Santa Clara - 


64 


1400 


129 


2000 


2]_8_ 


15 , 5 


San Jose - 


.... 


.... 


84 


1200 


m m m m 


J4_3_ 


San Francisco - 


60 


680 


233 


2322 


11* 


9* 


874 


15,197 


1956 


35,396 


IV* 


17&amp; 



It appears that the most n. part of this coast is 
less favourable to the cultivation of wheat than 
that which extends from San Diego to San Miguel. 
However, in newly cultivated grounds the pro 
duce of the soil is more unequal than in lands which 
have been long under cultivation, though we ob 
serve in no part of Nueva Espafrn that progressive 
diminution of fertility which is so distressing to 
new colonists wherever forests have been converted 
into arable land. 

Those who have seriously reflected on the riches 
of the Mexican soil know that by means of a more 
careful cultivation, and without supposing any 



extraordinary labour in the irrigation of the soil, 
the portion of ground already under cultivation 
might furnish subsistence lor a population eight 
or ten times more numerous. If the fertile plains 
of Atlixco, Cholula, and Puebla, do not produce 
very abundant harvests, the principal cause ought 
to be sought for in the want of consumers, and in 
the obstacles opposed by the inequality of the soil 
to the interior commerce of grain, especially to its 
carriage towards the Atlantic coast. We shall 
afterwards return to this interesting subject when 
we come to treat of the exportation from Vera 
Cruz.] 



193 



MEXICO. 



[What is actually the produce of the grain har 
vest in the whole of Nueva Espaila ? We can con 
ceive how difficult must be (he resolution of this pro 
blem in a country where the government, since the 
death of the Count dc Revillagigedo, has been 
very unfavourable to statistical researches. In 
France, even the estimations of Quesnay, Lavoi 
sier, and Arthur Young, vary from 45 and 50 
to 75 millions of septiers of 1 17 kilogrammes 
(11,620, 12,911, and 19,366 millions of pounds 
avoird.) in weight. We have no positive data as 
to the quantity of rye and oats reaped in Mexico, 
but we conceive ourselves enabled to calculate ap 
proximately the mean produce of wheat. The 
most sure estimate in Europe is the computed 
consumption of each individual. This method 
was successfully employed by MM. Lavoisier and 
A mould ; but it is a method which cannot be fol 
lowed in the case of a population composed of 
very heterogeneous elements. The Indian and 
Mestizo, the inhabitants of the country, are only 
fed on maize and manioc bread. The white Cre 
oles who live in great cities consume much more 
wheaten bread than those who habitually live on 
their farms. The capital, which includes more 
than 33,000 Indians, requires annually 19,000,000 
of kilogrammes of flour. This consumption is 
almost the same as that of the cities of Europe of 
an equal population ; and if, according to this 
basis, we were to calculate the consumption of the 
whole kingdom of Nueva Espafia, we should at 
tain to a result which would IK five times too high. 
From these considerations we prefer the method 
which is founded on partial estimations. The 
quantity of wheat reaped in 1802 in the intendancy 
of Guadalaxara was, according to the statistical 
table communicated by the intendant of this pro 
vince to the chamber of commerce at Vera Cruz, 
43,000 cargas, or 645,000 kilogrammes. Now 
the population of Guadalaxara is nearly a ninth of 
the total population. In this part of Mexico there 
is a great number of Indians who eat maize bread, 
and there are few populous cities inhabited by 
whites in easy circumstances. According to the 
analogy of this partial harvest, the general har 
vest of Nueva Espana would onlv be 59,000,000 
kilogrammes. But if we add 36,000,000 of kilo 
grammes on account of the beneficial influence of 
the consumption of the cities of Mexico, Puebla, 
and Guanaxuato, on the cultivation of circum 
jacent districts, and on account of the provincias 
internns, of \vhich the inhabitants live almost ex 
clusively on whcaten bread, we find for the whole 
kingdom nearly 10,000,000 of myriagrammes, or 
upwards of 220,500,000 of pounds avoird. This 



estimate gives too small a result, because in the 
above calculation we have not suitably separated 
the n. provinces from the equinoctial region. This 
separation is dictated, however, by the very nature 
of the population. 

In the provincial internets the greatest number 
of the inhabitants areeither white or reputed white; 
and they are calculated at 400,000. Supposing 
their consumption of wheat equal to that of the 
city of Puebla, we shall find 6,000,000 of myria 
grammes. We may admit, calculating according 
to the annual harvest of the intendancy of Guada 
laxara, that in the s. regions of Nueva Espana, of 
which the mixed population is estimated at 
5,437,000, the consumption of wheat in the coun 
try amounts to 5,800,000 myriagraniines. If we 
add 3,600,000 myriagrammes for the consumption 
of the great interior cities of Mexico, Puebla, and 
Guanaxuato, we shall find the total consumption of 
Nueva Espana above 15,000,000 of myriagrammes, 
or 331,000,000 of pounds avoird. 

We might be astonished to find from this cal 
culation that the provincias internas, of which the 
population is only a fourteenth of the whole popu 
lation, consume more than the third of the harvest 
of. Mexico. But we must not forget that in these 
n. provinces the number of whites is to the total 
mass of Spaniards, (Creoles and Europeans), as 
one to three, and that it is principally this cast by 
which the wheaten flour is consumed. Of the 
800,000 whites who inhabit the equinoctial region 
of Nueva Espana, nearly 150,000 live in an exces 
sively warm climate in the plains adjacent to the 
coast, and feed on manioc and bananas. These 
results, we repeat, are merely simple approxima 
tions. 

In France the whole grain harvest, that is to say, 
wheat, rye, and barley, was, according to Lavoi 
sier, before the revolution, and consequently at a 
period when the population of the kingdom amount 
ed to 25,000,000 of inhabitants, 58,000,000 of 
setiers, or 6,786,000,000 of kilogrammes. Now, 
according to the authors of the Feuille du Culti- 
co/ewr, the wheat reaped in France is to the whole 
mass of grain as 5:17. Hence the produce of 
wheat alone was, previous to 1789, J 7,000,000 of 
setiers, which, taking merely absolute quantities, 
and without considering the populations of the 
two empires, is nearly 13 times more than the 
produce of wheat in Mexico. This comparison 
agrees very well with the bases of the anterior es 
timation. For the number of inhabitants of Nueva 
Espana who habitually live on wheaten bread does 
not exceed 1 ,300,000 ; and it is well known that 
the French consume more bread than the Spa-] 



MEXICO. 



193 



[nish race, especially those who inhabit Ame 
rica. 

But on account of the extreme fertility of the 
soil, the 15,000,000 of myriagrammes annually 
produced by Nueva Espaiia are reaped on an extent 
of ground four or five times smaller than would 
be requisite for the same harvest in France. We 
may expect, it is true, as the Mexican population 
shall increase, that this fertility, "which may be 
called medium^ and which indicates a total pro 
duce of 24 for one, will decrease. Everywhere 
men begin with the cultivation of the least arid 
lands, and the mean produce must naturally di 
minish when agriculture embraces a greater ex 
tent, and consequently a greater variety of ground. 
But in a vast empire like Mexico this effect can 
only be very tardy in its manifestation, and the 
industry of the inhabitants increases with the po 
pulation and the number of increasing wants. 

We shall collect into one table the knowledge 
which we have acquired as to the mean produce 
of the cerealia in the two continents. We are not 
here adducing examples of an extraordinary fer 
tility observable in a small extent of ground, nor 
of grain sown according to the Chinese method. 
The produce would nearly be the same in every 
zone, if, in choosing our ground, we were to bestow 
the same care on cerealia which we bestow on our 
garden plants. But in treating of agriculture in 
general, we speak merely of extensive results, of 
calculations, in which the total harvest of a coun 
try is considered as the multiple of the quantity of 
wheat sown. It will be found that this multiple, 
which may be considered as oneof the first elements 
of the prosperity of nations, varies in the follow 
ing manner: 

5 to 6 grains for 1, in France, according to La 
voisier and Neckar. We estimate, with M. 
Peuchet, that 4,400,000 arpenssown with wheat 
yield annually 5,280,000,000 of pounds, which 
amounts to 1173 kilogrammes per hectare, 
(25881b. avoird. per 107,639 square feet). This 
is also the mean produce in the n. of Germany, 
Poland, and, according to M. Ruhs, in Swe 
den. They reckon in France in some remark 
ably fertile districts of the departments of L r Es- 
caut and Lc Nord 15 for 1 ; in the good land 
of Picardy and the isle of France from 8 to 10 
for 1 ; and in the lands of less fertility from 4 
to 5 for 1. ( Peuchct, Statislique, p. 290). 
8 to 10 grains for 1 in Hungary, Croatia, and 
Sclavonia, according to the researches of M. 
Swartner. 

12 grains for 1 in ihe Reyno de lu Plata, espe- 
VOL. in., 



cially in the environs of Montevideo, according 
to Don Felix Azara. Near the city of Buenos 
Ay res they reckon even 16. In Paraguay the 
cultivation of cerealia does not extend farther n. 
than the parallel of 24, ( Voyage d Azara, t. 
i. p. 140). 

17 grains lor 1 in the n. part of Mexico, and at 
the same distance from the equator as Paraguay 
and Buenos Ayres. 

24 grains for 1 in the equinoctial region of Mexico 
at 2 or 3000 metres of elevation above the 
level of the ocean. They reckon 5000 kilo 
grammes per hectare, or ll,0351b. avoird. per 
107,639 square feet. In the province of Pasto 
of the kingdom of Santa Fe, the plains of La 
Vega de San Lorenzo, Pansitara, and Almaguer, 
lat. 1 54 K. commonly produce 25, in very 
fertile years 35, and in cold and dry years 12 
for 1. In Peru, in the beautiful plain of Caxa- 
marca, lat. 7 8 n. watered by the rivers Mas- 
con and Utusco, and celebrated from the defeat 
of the Inca Atahualpa, wheat yields from 18 to 
20 for 1. 

The Mexican flour enters into competition at the 
Havanah market with that of the United States. 
When the road which is constructing from the 
table-land of Perote to.Vera Cruz shall be com 
pletely finished, the grain of Nueva Espana will be 
exported for Bourdeaux, Hamburgh, and Bremen. 
The Mexicans will then possess a double advantage 
over the inhabitants of the United States, that of 
a greater fertility of territory, and that of a lower 
price of labour. It would be very interesting in 
this point of view could we compare here the mean 
produce of the different provinces of the Ame 
rican confederation with the results which we have 
obtained for Mexico. But the fertility of the soil 
and the industry of the inhabitants vary so much 
in different provinces, lhat it becomes difficult to 
find the mean term which corresponds to the total 
harvest. What a difference between the excellent 
cultivation of the environs of Lancaster and several 
parts of New England arid that of N. Carolina ! 
** An English farmer," says the immortal Wash- 
ington in one of his letters to Arthur Young, 
" ought to have a horrid idea of the state of our 
agriculture, or the nature of our soil, when he is 
informed that an acre with us only produces eight 
or 10 bushels. But it must be kept in mind that 
in all countries where land is cheap and labour 
dear, men are fonder of cultivating much than 
cultivating well. Much ground has been scratched 
over, and none cultivated as it ought to have been. * 
According to the recent researches of M. Blodget,] 
c c 



194 



MEXICO. 



[which may be regarded as sufficiently exact, we 
find the following results : 



Jn the Atlantic provinces to 
the e. of the Alleghany 
mountains. 


per acre. 


pei hectare. 


bushels. 


kilogramme^ 


In rich lands .... 
In common lands ---.,- 


32 
9 


2372 
667 


In the w. territory between 
the Alleghany and the 
Mississipi. 






In rich lands - - - - 
In common lands - 


40 

25 


2965 
1853 



We see from these data, that in the Mexican 
intendancies of Puebla and (iuanaxuato, where on 
the ridge of the cordillera the climate of Rome and 
Naples prevails, the territory is more rich and 
productive than the most fertile parts of the United 
States ; the comparative fertility, taking the high 
est of the American produce, being 5000 : 2965. 

As since the death of General Washington the 
progress of agriculture has been very considerable 
in the w. territory, especially in Kentucky, Ten 
nessee, and Louisiana, we believe we may consider 
from 13 to 14 bushels as the mean term of the 
annual produce, which, however, only amounts 
to 700 kilogrammes (less than 13 bushels) per hec 
tare, or less than four for one. In England the wheat 
harvest is generally estimated at from 19 to 20 
bushels per acre, which gives 1100 kilogrammes 
per hectare. This comparison, we have to repeat, 
does not announce a greater fertility of the soil of 
Great Britain. Far from giving us an unfavour 
able idea of the sterlity of the Atlantic provinces of 
the United States, it proves only that whenever the 
colonist is master of a vast extent of ground, the 
art of cultivating the soil comes extremely slow 
to perfection. The Memoirs of the Agricultural 
Society of Philadelphia furnish us with different 
examples of harvests exceeding 38 and 40 bushels 
per acre, whenever the fields have been laboured 
in Philadelphia with the same care as in Ireland 
and Flanders. 

After comparing the mean produce of the lands 
in Mexico and Buenos Ay res with those in the 
United States and France, let us bestow a rapid 
glance at the price of labour in these different 
countries. In Mexico it amounts to two reals de 
plata (Is. Id.) per day in the cold regions, and 



to two reals and a half (Is. 4}d) per day in the 
warm regions, where there is a want of hands, and 
where the inhabitants in general arc very lazy. 
This price of labour ought to appear moderate 
enough when we consider the metallic wealth of 
the country, and the quantity of money constantly 
in circulation. In the United States, where the 
whiles have pushed the Indian population beyond 
the Ohio and the Mississipi, the price of labour 
varies from 3 livres 10 sols, to 4 francs, (from 
2s. lid. to 3.9. 4d.) In France we may estimate 
it from 30 to 40 sols, (from Is. 3d. to Is. Sd.) and 
in Bengal, according to M. Titzing, at six sols, or 
3d. Hence, notwithstanding the enormous differ 
ence of freight, the E. India sugar is cheaper at 
Philadelphia than that of Jamaica. From these 
data it follows, that the present price of labour in 
Mexico is to the price of labour, 

In France - - - r= 12 : 6. 
In the United States = 26 : 13. 
In Bengal - - - - 2 : 1. 
The mean price of wheat is in Nueva Espaila 
from four to five piastres, or from 20 to 25 francs, 
the carga, which weighs 150 kilogrammes, or from 
175. 6t/. to 21s. 10t?. This is the price at which it 
is purchased in the country, even from the farmers. 
At Paris, for several years, 150 kilogrammes of 
\vheat cost 30 francs. In the city of Mexico the 
high price of carriage adds so much to the price 
of the grain, that it generally sells there at 9 and 
10 piastres the carga, (that is to say, from I/. 17$. 
6d. to 2/. 3s. 4&amp;lt;f.) The extremes, at the periods 
of the greatest or least fertility, arc 8 and 14 
piastres. It is easy to foresee that the price of 
Mexican grain will suffer a considerable fall when 
the roads shall be constructed on the declivity of 
the Cordilleras, and the progress of agriculture shall 
be favoured by greater commercial freedom. 

The Mexican wheat is of the very best quality ; 
and it may be compared with the finest Andalu- 
sian grain. It is superior to that of Monte Video, 
which, according to M. Azara, has the grain 
smaller by one half than the Spanish grain. In 
Mexico the grain is very large, very white, and 
very nutritive, especially in farms where watering 
is employed. It is observed that the wheat of the 
mountains (trigo de sierra), that it is to say, that 
which grows at very great elevations on the ridge 
of the cordillera, has its grain covered with a 
thicker husk, while the grain of the temperate 
regions abounds in glutinous matter. The quality 
of the flour depends principally on the proportion 
which exists between the gluten and starch, and 
it appears natural that, under a climate favourable] 



MEXICO. 



[to the vegetation of gramina, the embryo and the 
cellular reticulation of the albumen should become 
more voluminous. 

In Mexico grain is with difficulty preserved for 
more than two or three years, especially in the 
temperate climates, and the causes of this pheno 
menon have never been sufficiently attended to. 
It would be advisable to establish magazines in 
the coldest parts of the country. We find, how 
ever, a prejudice spread through several parts of 
Spanish America, that the flour of the cordillera 
docs not preserve so long as the flour of the 
United States. The cause of this prejudice, which 
lias been of particular detriment to the agriculture 
of New Granada, is easily to be discovered. The 
merchants who inhabit the coasts opposite to the 
W. Indies, and who find themselves constrained 
by commercial prohibitions, particularly the mer 
chants of Cavthagena for example, have the greatest 
interest in maintaining a connection with the United 
States. The custom-house officers are sometimes 
indulgent enough to take a Jamaica vessel for a 
vessel of the United States. 

Rye, and especially barley, resists cold better than 
wheat. They are cultivated on the highest regions. 
Barley yields abundant harvests at heights where 
the thermometer rarely keeps up during the day 
beyond 14, or 57 of Fahrenheit. In New Cali 
fornia, taking the term of the harvests of 13 villages, 
the barley produced in 1791, 24. and in 1802, 
18 for 1. 

Oats are very little cultivated in Mexico. They 
are even very seldom seen in Spain, where the 
horses are fed on barley, as in the times of the 
Greeks and Romans. The rye and barley are 
seldom attacked by a disease called by the Mexi 
cans chaquistle, which frequently destroys the 
finest wheat harvests when the spring and the 
beginning of the summer have been very warm, 
and when storms are frequent. It is generally be 
lieved (hat this disease is occasioned by small in 
sects, which fill the interior of the stalk, and 
hinder the nutritive juice from mounuiig up to 
the ear. 

A plant of a nutritive root, which belongs ori 
ginally to America, the potato (solatium tntxro- 
sinn)) appears to have been introduced into Mex 
ico nearly at the same period as the cerealia of the 
old continent. We shall not take upon ourselves 
to decide whether the papas (the old Peruvian 
name by which potatoes are now known in all the 
Spanish colonies) came to Mexico along with the 
schinus rnolle of Peru, and consequently by the 
S. sea;, or whether the first conquerors brought 



them from the mountains of New Granada. How 
ever this may be, it is certain that they were not 
known in the time of Montezmna ; and this fact 
is the more important, because it is one of those in 
which the history or the migrations of a plant is 
connected with the history of the migrations of 
nations. 

The predilections manifested by certain tribes 
for the cultivation of certain plants, indicates most 
frequently cither an identity of race, or ancient 
communications between men who live under dif 
ferent climates. In this view the vegetables, like 
the languages and physiognomy of nations, may 
become historical monuments. Not merely pas 
toral tribes, or those who live solely on the chase, 
undertake long voyages, instigated by an unquiet 
and warlike spirit ; the hordes of Germanic origin, 
the swarm of people who transported themselves 
from the interior of Asia to the banks of the Bo- 
rysthenes and the Danube, and the savages of 
Guayana, afford numerous examples of tribes, 
who, fixing themselves for a few years, cultivate 
small pieces of ground, on which they sow the 
grain reaped by them elsewhere, and abandon 
these imperfect cultivations when a bad year, or 
any otheraccident, disgusts them with the situation. 
It is thus that the people of the Mongol race have 
transported themselves from the wall which sepa 
rates China from Tartary to the very centre of 
Europe ; and it is thus that, from the . of Califor 
nia and the banks of the Rio Gila, the American 
tribes poured even into the s. hemisphere. We 
every where see torrents of wandering and warlike 
hordes pave a way for themselves through the 
midst of peaceable and agricultural nations. Im- 
moveableasthe shore, the latter collect and carefully 
preserve the nutritive plants and domestic animals 
which accompanied the wandering tribes in these 
distant courses. Frequently the cultivation of a 
small number of vegetables, as well as the foreign 
words mingled with languages of a different origin, 
serve to point out the route by which a nation 
has passed from one extremity of the continent to 
the other. 

These considerations are sufficient to prove how 
important it is for the history of our species to 
know with precision how far the primitive domi 
nion of certain vegetables extended before the spirit 
of colonization among the Europeans collected 
together the productions of the most distant cli 
mates. If the cerealia, if the rice of the E. Indies, 
were unknown to the first inhabitants of America, 
on the other hand, maize, the potato, and the qui- 
noa, were neither cultivated in e. Asia, nor in the ; 
c c 2 



196 



MEXICO. 



[islands of tbe S. sea. Maize was introduced into 
Japan by the Chinese, who, according to the 
assertion of some authors, ought to have known 
it from the remotest period. (Thunberg y Flora 
Japonica, p. 37.) This assertion, if it was founded, 
would throw light on the ancient communications 
supposed to have taken place between the inhabi 
tants of the two continents. But where are the 
monuments which attest that maize was cultivated 
in Asia before the 16th century? According to 
the learned researches of Father Gaubil, (see astro 
nomical MS. of the Jesuits preserved in the Bureau 
des Longitudes at Paris,) it appears even doubtful 
whether, a thousand years before that period, the 
Chinese ever visited the w. coast of America, as 
was advanced by a justly celebrated historian, M. 
de Guignes. We persist in believing that the 
maize was not transported from the table-land of 
Tartary to that of Mexico, and that it is equally 
improbable that, before the discovery of America 
by the Europeans, this precious gramen was trans 
ported from the new continent into Asia. 

The potato presents us with another very curious 
problem, when we consider it in a historical point 
of view. It appears certain, as A\e have already 
advanced, that this plant, of which the cultivation 
has had the greatest influence on the progress of 
population in Europe, was not known in Mexico 
before the arrival of the Spaniards. It was culti 
vated at this epocha in Chile, Peru, Quito, in the 
kingdom of New Granada, on all the cordillera of 
the Andes, from lat. 40 5. to 50 n. It is sup 
posed by botanists that it grows spontaneously in 
the mountainous part of Peru. On the other hand, 
the learned who have inquired into the introduc 
tion of potatoes into Europe, affirm that the pota 
to was found in Virginia by the first settlers sent 
there by Sir Walter Raleigh in 1584. Now, how 
can we conceive that a plant, said to belong origi 
nally to the s. hemisphere, was found under culti 
vation at the foot of the Allegheny mountains, 
while it was unknown in Mexico and the moun 
tainous and temperate regions of the W. Indies ? 
Is it probable that Peruvian tribes may have 
penetrated n. to the banks of the Rapahannoc 
in Virginia ; or have potatoes first come from n. 
to s. like the nations who from the 7th century 
have successively appeared on the table-land of 
Anahuac ? In either of these hypotheses, how 
came this cultivation not to be introduced or pre 
served in Mexico ? These are questions which 
have hitherto been very little agitated, but which, 
nevertheless, deserve to fix the attention of the 
naturalist, who, in embracing at one view the 



influence of man on nature, and the re-action of 
the physical world on man, appears to read in the 
distribution of the vegetables the history of the first 
migrations of our species. 

We have first to observe, stating here only what 
facts are to be relied on, that the potato is not 
indigenous in Peru, and that it is nowhere to be 
found wild in the part of the Cordilleras situated 
under the tropics. Humboldt and Bonpland her 
borized on the back and on the declivity of the 
Andes from 5 n. to 12 s. ; they informed them 
selves from persons who have examined this chain 
of colossal mountains as far as La Pas and Oruro, 
and are certain that in this vast extent of ground 
no species of solarium with nutritive root vegetates 
spontaneously. It is true that there are places 
not very accessible, and very cold, which the 
natives call Paramos de las Papas, (desert potato 
plains) ; but these denominations, of which it is 
difficult to conjecture the origin, by no means indi 
cate that these great elevations produce the plant 
of which they bear the name. 

Passing further s. beyond the tropic, we find if, 
according to Molina, in all the fields of Chile 
(Hist. JVcU. de Chile, p. 102.) The natives disl 
tinguish the wild potato, of which the tubercles 
are small and somewhat bitter, from that which 
has been cultivated for a long series of ages. The 
first of these plants bears the name of maglia, and 
the second that of pogny. Another species of 
solanum is also cultivated in Chile, which belongs 
to the same group, with pennated and not prickly 
leaves, and which has a very sweet root of a 
cylindrical form. This is the solanum cart, which 
is still unknown, not only in Europe, but also in 
Quito and Mexico. 

We might ask if these useful plants are truly 
natives of Chile, or if, from the effect of a long 
cultivation, they have become wild there. The 
same question has been put to the travellers who 
have found cerealia growing spontaneously in the 
mountains of India and Caucasus. MM. Ruiz 
arid Pavon, whose authority is of so great weight 
aflirm that they found the potato in cultivated 
grounds, in cultis, and not in forests, and on the 
ridges of the mountains. But we are to observe, 
that among us the solanum and the different kinds 
of grain do not propagate of themselves in a du 
rable manner, when the birds transport the grains 
into meadows and woods. Wherever these plants 
appear to become wild under our eyes, far from 
multiplying like the erigeron Canadense, the 
oenothera bicnnis, and other colonists of the vege 
table kingdom, they disappear in a very short] 



MEXICO. 



197 



[space of time. Are not the maglia of Chile, the 
grain of the banks of the Terek, and the wheat 
of the mountains (hill-wheat) of Boutan, which 
M. Banks (Bibl. Britt. 1809, n. 322, p. 86) has 
recently made known, more likely to be the 
primitive type of the solanum and cultivated 
cereal i a ? 

It is probable that from the mountains of Chile 
the cultivation of potatoes gradually advanced 
n. by Peru and the kingdom of Quito to the table 
land of Bogota, the ancient Cundinamarca. This 
is also the course followed by the Incas in their 
conquests. We can easily conceive why long be 
fore the arrival of Manco Capac, in those remote 
times when the province of Collao and the plains 
of Tiahuanacu were the centre of the first civiliza 
tion of mankind, (Pedro decade Leon, c. 105. Gar* 
cilasso, iii. 1), the migrations of the S. American 
nations would rather be from s. to . than in an op 
posite direction. Every where in the two hemis 
pheres the people of the mountains have manifested 
a desire to approach the equator, or at least the 
torrid zone, which, at great elevations, affords the 
mildness of climate and the other advantages of 
the temperate zone. Following the direction of 
the cordilleras, either from the banks of the Gila to 
the centre of Mexico, or from Chile to the beauti 
ful valleys of Quito, the natives found in the same 
elevations, and without descending towards the 
plains, a more vigorous vegetation, less premature 
frosts, and less abundance of snow. The plains 
of Tiahuanacu (lat. 17 10 s.) covered with ruins 
of an august grandeur, and the banks of the lake 
of Chucuito, a basin which resembles a small inte 
rior sea, are the Himala and Thibet of S. Ame 
rica. These men, under the government of laws, 
and collected together on a soil of no great ferti 
lity, first applied themselves to agriculture. From 
this remarkable plain, situated between the cities 
of Cuzco and La Paz, descended numerous and 
powerful tribes, who carried their arms, language, 
and arts even to the . hemisphere. 

The vegetables which were the object of the 
agriculture of the Andes, must have been carried 
n. in two ways ; either by the conquests of the 
Incas, who were followed by the establishment of 
Peruvian colonies in the conquered countries, or 
by the slow but peaceable communications which 
always take place between neighbouring nations. 
The sovereigns of Cuzco did not extend their con 
quests beyond the river of Mayo (lat. 1 34 n.) 
of which the course is n, from the town of Pasto. 
The potatoes which the Spaniards found under 
cultivation among the Muysca tribes in the king- 
of the zaque of Bogota (lat. 4 6 n.) could only 



have been transported there from Peru by means 
of the relations which are gradually established 
even among mountainous tribes separated from 
one another by deserts covered with snow, or im* 
passable valleys. The cor dill eras, which preserve 
a formidable height from Chile to the province of 
Antioquia, fall suddenly near the sources of the 
great Rio Atracto. Choco and Darien present 
merely a group of hills, which, in the isthmus of 
Panama, are only a few hundred toises in height. 
The cultivation of the polato succeeds well in 
the tropics only on very elevated grounds in a 
cold and foggy climate. The Indian of the warm 
regions gives the preference to maize, the manioc, 
and banana. Besides Choco, Darien, and the 
isthmus, covered with thick forests, have always 
been inhabited by hordes of savages and hunters, 
enemies to every sort of cultivation. We are not, 
therefore, to be astonished that both physical and 
moral causes have prevented the potato from pe 
netrating into Mexico. 

We know not a single fact by which the history 
of S. America is connected with that of N. Ame 
rica. In Nneva Espaiia, as we have already several 
times observed, the flux of nations was frornw. to 
s. A great analogy of manners and civilization 
has been thought to be perceived between the Toul- 
tecs, driven by a pestilence from the table-land of 
Anahuac in the middle of the 12th century, and 
the Peruvians under the government of Manco 
Capac. It might, no doubt, have happened, that 
people from Aztlan advanced beyond the isthmus 
or gulf of Panama ; but it is very improbable that 
by migrations from s. to n. the productions of Peru, 
Quito, and New Granada, ever passed to Mexico 
and Canada. 

From all these considerations it follows, that if 
the colonists sent out by Raleigh really found po 
tatoes among the Indians of Virginia, we can 
hardly refuse our assent to the idea that this plant 
was originally wild in some country of the n. he 
misphere, as it was in Chile. The interesting re 
searches carried on by MM. Beckman, Banks, 
and Dryander, (Beckmanri s Grundi dze der Teuts- 
chen Landwirthschaft) 1806, p. 289. Sir Joseph 
Banks s Attempt to ascertain the Time of the Intro 
duction of Potatoes, 1808,) prove that vessels 
which returned from the bay of Albemarle in 1586, 
first carried potatoes into Ireland, and that Thomas 
Harriot, more celebrated as a mathematician than 
as a navigator, described this nutritive root by the 
name of openazok. Gerard, in his Herbal, pub 
lished in 1597, calls it Virginian patatate, or nurem- 
bega. We might be tempted to believe tint the 
English colonists received it from Spanish America.} 



198 



MEXICO. 



[Their establishment had been in existence from the 
month of July 1584. The navigators of those 
times were not in the habit of steering straight w. 
to reach the coast of N. America ; they were still 
in the practice of following the tract indicated by 
Columbus, and profiting by the trade winds of the 
torrid zone. This passage facilitated communi 
cation with the W. India islands, which were the 
centre of the Spanish commerce. Sir Francis 
Drake, who had been navigating among these 
islands, and along the coast of Tierra Firme, put in 
at Hoanoke, in Virginia. It appears then natural 
enough to suppose, that the English themselves 
brought potatoes from S. America or from Mex 
ico into Virginia. At the time when they were 
brought from Virginia into England they were 
common both in Spain and Italy. We are not 
then to be astonished that a production which had 
past from one continent to the other, could in 
America pass from the Spanish to the English co 
lonies. The very name by which Harriot de 
scribes the potato seems to prove its Virginian 
origin. Were the savages to have a word for a 
foreign plant, and would not Harriot have known 
the name papa ? 

The plants which are cultivated in the highest 
and coldest part of the Andes and Mexican cordil- 
leras are the potato, the tropazolum esculentum^ 
and the chenopodinm qitinoa, of which the grain is 
an aliment equally agreeable and healthy. In 
Nueva Espana the first of these becomes an object 
of cultivation, of so much greater importance from 
its extent, as it does not require any great humi 
dity of soil. The Mexicans, like the Peruvians, 
can preserve potatoes for whole years by exposing 
them to the frost and dryingthem in the sun. The 
root, when hardened and deprived of its water, is 
called chunu, from aword ofthe Quichua language. 
It would be undoubtedly very useful to imitate this 
preparation in Europe, where a commencement 
of germination frequently destroys the winter s pro 
visions ; but it would be still of greater importance 
to procure the grain ofthe potatoes cultivated at 
Quito and on the plain of Santa Fe. These roots 
have been seen of a spherical form of more than 
three decimetres (11 inches) in diameter, and of a 
much better taste than any in our continent. We 
know that certain herbaceous plants which have 
been long multiplied from the roots, degenerate in 
the end, especially when the bad custom is fol 
lowed of cutting the roots into several pieces. It 
has been proved by experience in several parts of 
Germany, that, of all the potatoes, those which 
grow from the seed are the most savoury. We 
may ameliorate the species by collecting the seed 



in its native country, and by choosing on the cor* 
dillera of the Andes the varieties which are most 
recommendable from their volume and the savour 
of their roots. We have long possessed in Eu 
rope a potato which is known by agricultural 
writers under the name of red potato of Bedford 
shire, and of which the tubercles weigh more than 
a kilogramme, or 2^1b. avoird. but this variety 
(conglomerated potato) is of an insipid taste, and 
can almost be applied only to feed cattle, while 
the papad chogota, which contains less water, is 
is very farinaceous, contains very little sugar, and 
is of an extremely agreeable taste. 

Amongst the great number of useful productions 
which the migrations of nations and distant navi 
gations have made known, no plant since the dis 
covery of cerealia, that is to say from time imme 
morial, has had so decided an influence on the 
prosperity of mankind as the potato. This root, 
according to the calculations of Sir John Sinclair, 
can maintain nine individuals per acre of 5368 
square metres, or 55,356 square feet. It has be 
come common in New Zealand, (see John Sa 
vage s Account of New Zealand, J807, p. 18), 
in Japan, in the island of Java, in the Boutan, 
and in Bengal, where, according to the testimony 
of M. Bockford, potatoes are considered as more 
useful than the bread-fruit tree introduced at Ma 
dras. Their cultivation extends from the extre 
mity of Africa to Labrador, Iceland, and Lapland. 
It is a very interesting spectacle to see a plant de 
scended from the mountains under the equator ad 
vance towards the pole, and resist better than the 
cereal gramina all the colds ofthe n. 

We have successively examined the vegetable 
productions which are the basis of the food ofthe 
Mexican population, the banana, the manioc, the 
maize, and the cerealia ; and we have endeavoured 
to throw some interest into this subject by com 
paring the agriculture of the equinoctial regions 
with that of the temperate climate of Europe, and 
by connecting the history of the migration of the 
vegetables with the events which have brought the 
human race from one part of the globe to the 
other. Without entering into botanical details, 
which would be foreign to the aim of this part 
of the Avork, we shall terminate this chapter by a 
succinct indication of the other alimentary plants 
which are cultivated in Mexico. 

A great number of these plants has been intro 
duced since the 16th century. The inhabitants 
of w. Europe have deposited in America what 
they had been receiving for 2000 years by their 
communications with the Greeks and Romans, by 
the irruption of the hordes of central Asia&amp;gt; by the | 



MEXICO. 



ID!) 



[conquests of Ibe Arabs, by the crusades, and by 
the navigations of the Portuguese. All these ve 
getable treasures, accumulated in an extremity of 
the old continent by the continual flux of nations 
towards the w. and preserved under the happy 
influence of a perpetually increasing civilization, 
have become almost at once the inheritance of Mex 
ico and Perti. We see them afterwards aug 
mented by the productions of America, pass far 
ther still to the islands of the S. sea, and to the 
establishments which a powerful nation has formed 
on the coast of New Holland. In this way the 
smallest corner of the earth, if it become the do 
main of European colonists, and especially if it 
abounds with a great variety of climates, attests 
the activity which our species lias been for centu 
ries displaying. A colony collects in a small space 
every thing roost valuable which wandering man 
has discovered over the whole surface of the 
globe. 

America is extremely rich in vegetables with nu 
tritive roots. After the manioc and the papas, or 
potatoes, there are none more useful for the sub 
sistence of the common people than the oca (ox- 
alis tuberosa), the batate, and the igname. The 
first of these productions only grows in the cold 
and temperate climates, on the summit and decli 
vity of the Cordilleras ; and the two others belong 
to the warm region of Mexico. The Spanish his 
torians, who have described the discovery of Ame 
rica, confound the words axes and batates, though 
the one means a plant of the group of asparagus, 
and the other a convolvulus. 

The igname, or dioscarea data, like the banana, 
appears proper to all the equinoctial regions of the 
globe. The account of the voyage of Aloysio Ca 
rt am usto (Cadamusti Navigalio ad Terras incog- 
nilas. Grynaius Orb. nox. p. 47) informs us that 
this root was known by the Arabs. Its American 
name may even throw some light on a very im 
portant fact in the history of geographical disco 
veries, which never appears hitherto to have fixed 
the attention of the learned. Cadamusto relates, 
that the king of Portugal sent in 1500 a fleet of 
12 vessels round the cape of Good IJope to Cal 
cutta, under the command of Pedro Aliares. This 
admiral, after having seen the Cape Verd islands, 
discovered a great unknown land, which he took 
for a continent. He found there naked men, 
swarthy, painted red, with very long hair, who 
plucked out their beards, pierced their chins, 
slept in hammocks, and were entirely ignorant of 
the use of metals. From these traits we easily re 
cognise the natives of America. But what renders 
it extremely probable that Aliares either landed on 



the coast of Paria or on that of Guayana, is, that 
he said he found in cultivation there a species of 
millet (maize), and a root of which bread is made, 
and which bears the name of igname. Vespucci 
had heard the same word three years before pro 
nounced by the inhabitants of the coast of Paria. 
The Haitian name of the dioscoreaalata is axes or 
ajcs. It is under this denomination that Columbus 
describes the igname in the account of his first 
voyage ; and it is also that which it had in the 
times of Garcilasso, Acosta, and Oviedo, who 
have very well indicated the characters by which 
the axes are distinguished from batates. (See 
Christophori Columbi Navigatio, c. Ixxxix. Co- 
mentarios Reales, t. i. p. 278. IJistoria natural 
de Tndas, p. 242. Oviedo, libro vii. c. 3.) 

The first roots of the dioscorea were introduced 
into Portugal in 1596, from the small island of St. 
Thomas, situated near the coast of Africa, almost 
under the equator, (Clusii Rariorum Plantar nm 
Hist. lib. iv. p. 77). A vessel which brought 
slaves to Lisbon had embarked these ignames to 
serve for food to the Negroes in their passage. 
From similar circumstances several alimentary 
plants of Guinea have been introduced into the 
W. Indies. They have been carefully propa 
gated, for the sake of furnishing the slaves with a 
diet to which they have been accustomed in their 
native country. It is observed that the melan 
choly of these unfortunate beings diminishes sensi 
bly when they discover the plants familiar to them 
in their infancy. 

In the warm regions of the Spanish colonies the 
inhabitants distinguish the axe from the namas of 
Guinea. The latter came from the coast of Africa 
to the W.Indies, and the name of igname has 
gradually prevailed there over axe. ^These two 
plants are only, perhaps, varieties of the dioscorea 
alata, although Brown has endeavoured to elevate 
them to the rank of species, forgetting thai the 
form of the leaves of the ignames undergoes a sin* 
gular change by cultivation. We have no where 
discovered the plant called by Linnasus dioscorea 
sativa ; neither does it exist in the islands of the 
S. sen, where the root of the dioscorea alata, mixed 
with the white of cocoa-nuts and the pulp of the 
banana, is the favourite dish of the Olaheitans. 
The root of the igname acquires an enormous vo 
lume w hen it grows in a fertile soil. In the val 
ley of A ragua, in the province of Caracas, it has 
been seen to weigh from 25 to 30 kilogrammes 
(from 55 to o Olb. avoird). 

The bfitalcs go in Peru by the name of apichu, 
and in Mexico by that ofcamoles, which is a cor 
ruption of the Aztec word cacamotic. Several va-] 



200 



MEXICO. 



[ricties arc cultivated with white and yellow roots ; 
those of Queretaro, which grow in a climate ana 
logous to that of Andalusia, are the most in re 
quest. We doubt very much if these batates were 
ever found wild by the Spanish navigators, though 
it has been advanced by Clusius. It would be so 
much the more interesting to know whether the 
batates cultivated in Peru, and those which Cook 
found in Easter island (He de Paqites), are the 
same, as from the position of that island and the 
monuments which have been there discovered, 
several of the learned have been led to suspect the 
existence of ancient communications between the 
Peruvians and the inhabitants of the island dis 
covered by Roggeween. 

Gomara relates that Columbus, after his return 
to Spain, when he first made his appearance be 
fore Queen Isabella, brought to her grains, of 
maize, igname roots, and batates. Hence the cul 
tivation of the last of these must have been already 
common in the s. part of Spain towards the middle 
of the 16th century. In 1591 they were even 
sold in the market of London. (Clusius, iii. c. 51). 
It is generally believed that the celebrated Drake, 
or Sir John Hawkins, made them known in Eng 
land, where they were long thought to be endowed 
with the mysterious properties for which the 
Greeks recommended the onions of Megara. The 
cultivation of batates succeeds very well in the s. 
of France. It requires less heat than the igname, 
which, otherwise, on account of the enormous mass 
of nutritive matter furnished by its roots, would 
be much preferable to the potato, if it could be 
successfully cultivated in countries of which the 
mean temperature is under 18 centigrade degrees, 
(64 of Fahrenheit). 

We must also reckon among the useful plants 
proper to Mexico the cacomitc, or oceloxochiti , a 
species of tigridia, of which the root yielded a 
nutritive flour to the inhabitants of the valley of 
Mexico ; the numerous varieties of love-apples, 
or tomall (solatium li/copersicum), which was for 
merly sown along with maize; the earth-pistachio, 
or mani (arachis hypogea}) of which the root is 
concealed in the earth, and which appears to have 
existed in Cochin China (see JLoitreiro, Flora 
Cochin chinensiS) p. 522) long before the disco 
very of America ; lastly, the different species of 
pimento (capsicum baccatum, c. annuitm, and c. 
frutescens), called by ihe Mexicans chilli, and the 
Peruvians uchu, of which ihe fruit is as indispen 
sably necessary to the natives as salt to the whites. 
The Spaniards call pimento chile or axi (ahi). 
The first word is derived from quaiifi-chilli, the 
second is a Haitian word that we must not eon- 

2 



found with axe, which, as we have already ob 
served, designates the dioscorca alata. 

The topinambours {helianthus tuberosMs), which, 
according to M. Correa, are not even to be found 
in the Brazils, are not known to be cultivated else 
where on this continent, though in all our works 
on botany they are said to be natives of the coun 
try of the Brazilian Topinarnbas. The chimalatlj 
or sun with large flowers (hdianthus annuus)^ came 
from Peru to Nueva Espana. It was formerly sown 
in several parts of Spanish America, not only to 
extract oil from its seed, but also for the sake of 
roasting it and making it into a very nutrititive 
bread. 

Rice (oryza saliva) was unknown to the people 
of the new continent, as well as the inhabitants of 
the S. sea islands. Whenever the old historians 
use the expression small Peruvian rice (arroz pe- 
queno), they mean the chenopodium qumoa, which 
is found very common in Peru and the beautiful 
valley of Bogota. The cultivation of rice, intro 
duced by the Arabs into Europe, and by the Spa 
niards into America, is of very little importance in 
JNueva Espafia. The great drought which prevails 
in the interior of the country seems hostile to its 
cultivation. At Mexico they are not agreed as 
to the utility with which the introduction of the 
mountain rice might be attended, which is com. 
mon to China, Japan, and known to all the Spa 
niards who have lived in the Philippine islands. 
It is certain that the mountain rice, so much ex 
tolled of late, only grows on the slopes of hills, 
which are watered either by natural torrents or by 
canals of irrigation cut at very great elevations. 
On the coast of Mexico, especially to the s. e. of 
Vera Cruz, in the fertile and marshy grounds si 
tuated between the mouths of the rivers Alvarado 
and Goasacualco, the cultivation of the common 
rice may one day become as important as it has 
long been for the province of Guayaquil, for 
Louisiana, and the s. part of the United States. 

It is so much the more to be desired that this 
branch of agriculture should be followed with 
ardour, as from the great droughts and premature 
frosts the grain and maize harvests frequently 
fail in the mountainous region, and the Mexican 
people suffer period ic;Uy from the fatal effects of 
a general famine. The rice contains a great deal 
of alimentary substance in a very small volume. 
In Bengal, where 40 kilogrammes may be pur 
chased for three francs, (viz. 881b. avoird. for 
2s. 6d.) the daily consumption of a family of five 
individuals consists of two kilogrammes of rice, 
two of pease, (4-&amp;gt; 5 lb. rice and 4 T ^lb. pease), and 
two ounces of salt. (BockforcTs Indian Recrea-~\ 



MEXICO. 



901 



[lions. Calcutta, 1807, p. 18. The frugality of 
the indigenous Aztec is almost equal to that of the 
Hindoo ; and the frequent scarcities in Mexico 
might be avoided by multiplying the objects of 
cultivation, and directing the industry to vegetable 
productions easier to be preserved and transported 
than maize and farinaceous roots. At Louisiana, 
in the basin of the Mississippi, they compute that 
an acre of land commonly produces in rice 18 bar 
rels, in wheat and oats 8, in maize 20, and in 
potatoes 26. In Virginia they reckon, according 
to M. Blodget, that an acre yields from 20 to 30 
bushels of rice, while wheat only yields from 15 to 
16. We are aware that in Europe rice grounds 
are considered very pernicious to the health of the 
inhabitants ; but the long experience of e. Asia 
seems to prove that the effect is not the same in 
every climate. However this may be, there is 
little room to fear that the irrigation of the rice 
grounds will add to the insalubrity of a country 
already filled with marshes and paletuviers (rhizo- 
phora mangle), which forms a true delta between 
the rivers Alvarado, San Juan, and Goasacualco. 

The Mexicans now possess all the garden-stuffs 
and fruit-trees of Europe. It is not easy to indi 
cate which of the former existed in the new conti 
nent before the arrival of the Spaniards. The 
same uncertainty prevails among botanists as to 
the species of turnips, sallads, and cabbage culti 
vated by the Greeks and Romans. We know 
with certainty that the Americans were always 
acquainted with onions (in Mexican xonacatL), 
haricots (in Mexican ayacotli, in the Peruvian or 
Quichua language purutu), gourds (in Peruvian 
capallu), and several varieties of cicer. Cortes, 
speaking of the eatables which were daily sold in 
the market of the ancient Tenochtitlan, expressly 
says, that every kind of garden-stuff (legume) 
was to be found there, particularly onions, leeks, 
garlic, garden and water cresses (mastuerzo y 
berro), borrage, sorrel, and artichokes (cardo y 
tagarnwas). it appears that no species of cab 
bage or turnip (brassica et raphanus) was culti 
vated in America, although the indigenous are 
very fond of dressed herbs. They mixed together 
all sorts of leaves, and even flowers, and they 
called this dish iraca. It appears that the Mexi 
cans had originally no pease ; and this fact is so 
much the more remarkable, as our pisum salivum 
is believed to grow wild on the n. w. coast of 
America. 

In general, if we consider the garden-stuffs of 
the Aztecs, and the great number of farinaceous 
roots cultivated in Mexico and Peru, we see that 
America was by no means so poor in alimentary 

VOL. III. 



plants as has been advanced by some learned men 
from a false spirit of system, who were only ac 
quainted with the New World through the works 
ofHerreraand Solis. The degree of civilization 
of a people has no relation with the variety of pro 
ductions which are the objects of its agriculture or 
gardening. This variety is greater or less, as the 
communications between remote regions have been 
more or less frequent, or as nations separated from 
the rest of the human race in very distant periods 
have been in a situation of greater or less insula 
tion. We must not be astonished at not finding 
among the Mexicans of the JGth century the vege 
table stores now contained in our gardens. The 
Greeks and Romans even neither knew spinach nor 
cauliflowers, nor scorzoneras, nor artichokes, nor 
a great number of other kitchen vegetables. 

The central table-land of Nueva Espana produces 
in the greatest abundance cherries, prunes, peaches, 
apricots, figs, grapes, melons, apples, and pears. 
In the environs of Mexico, the villages of San Au- 
gustin de las Cuevas and Tacubaya, the famous 
garden of the convent of Carmelites at San Angel, 
and that of the family of Fagoaga at Tanepantla, 
yield in the months of June, July, and August, 
an immense quantity of fruit, for the most part of 
an exquisite taste, although the trees are in gene 
ral very ill taken care of. The traveller is asto 
nished to see in Mexico, Peru, and New Granada, 
the tables of the wealthy inhabitants loaded at once 
with the fruits of temperate Europe, ananas, dif 
ferent species of passi flora and tacsonia, sapotes, 
mameis, goyavas, pnonas, chilimoyas, and other 
valuable productions of the torrid zone. This va 
riety of fruits is to be found in almost all the coun 
try from Guatemala to New California. In study 
ing the history of the conquest, we admire the ex 
traordinary rapidity with which the Spaniards of 
the 16th century spread the cultivation of the Eu 
ropean vegetables along the ridge of the cordil.. 
terns, from one extremity of the continent to the 
other. The ecclesiastics, and especially the reli 
gious missionaries, contribu ed greatly to the rapi 
dity of this progress. The gardens of the con 
vents and of the secular priests were so many 
nurseries, from which the recently imported vege 
tables were diffused over the country. The con- 
quisladores even, all of whom we ought by no 
means to regard as warlike barbarians, addicted 
themselves in their old age to a rural life. These 
simple men, surrounded by Indians, of whose lan 
guage they were ignorant, cultivated in preference, 
as if to console them in their solitude, the plants 
which recalled to them the plains of Estramadura 
and the Castilles. The epoch a at which an Eu-1 
D o 



202 



MEXICO. 



[ropean fruit ripened for the first time was distin 
guished by a family festival. It is impossible to 
read without being warmly affected what is related 
by the Inca Garcilasso as to the manner of living of 
these first colonists. He relates, with an exquisite 
nahete, how his father, the valorous Andres de la 
Vega, collected together all his old companions in 
arms to share with them three asparaguses, the first 
which ever grew on the table-land of Cuzco. 

Before the arrival of the Spaniards, Mexico and 
the cordilleras of S. America produced several 
fruits, which bear great analogy to those of the 
temperate climates of the old continent. The phy 
siognomy of vegetables bears always a great mutual 
resemblance where the temperature and humidity 
are the same. The mountainous part of S. Ame 
rica has a cherry (padus capuli), nut, apple, mul 
berry, strawberry, rubus, and gooseberry, which 
are peculiar to it. Cortes relates that he saw, on 
his arrival at Mexico, besides the indigenous cher 
ries, which are very acid, prunes, cinielas. He 
adds, that they entirely resemble those of Spain. 
We doubt the existence of these Mexican prunes, 
although the Abbe Clavigero also mentions them. 
Perhaps the first Spaniards took the fruit of the 
spondias, which is a drupa ovoide, for European 
prunes. 

Although the w. coast of Nueva Espaiia be washed 
by the Great ocean, and although Mendana, Gae- 
tauo, Quiros, and other Spanish navigators, were 
the first who visited the islands situated between 
America and Asia, the most useful productions of 
these countries, the bread-fruit, the flax of New 
Zealand (phormium tenax\ and the sugar-cane of 
Otaheite, remained unknown to the inhabitants of 
Mexico. These vegetables, after travelling round 
ihe globe, Avill reach them gradually from the 
W. India islands. They were left by Captain 
Bligh at Jamaica, and they have propagated ra 
pidly in the island of Cuba, Trinidad, and on 
the coast of Caracas. The bread-fruit (artocnrpus 
mcisa), of which are to be seen considerable plan 
tations in Spanish Guayana, would vegetate vigo 
rously on the humid and warm coasts of Tabasco, 
Tustla, and San Bias. It is very improbable that 
this cultivation will ever supersede among the na 
tives that of bananas, which, on the same extent of 
ground, furui.sh more nutritive substance. It is 
true that the aitocarpus, for eight months in the 
year, is continually loaded with fruits, and that 
three trees are sufficient to nourish an adult indi 
vidual. (Gtorg Former vom Brodbaume, 1784, 
s. xxiii). iiut an arpent or demi-hectare of 
ground can only contain from 35 to 40 bread 
fruit trees ; for when they are planted too near one 



another, and when their roots meet, they do not 
bear so great a quantity of fruit. 

The extreme slownes of the passage from the 
Philippine islands and Mariana to Acapuko, and 
the necessity in which the Manilla galleons are 
under of ascending to higher latitudes to get the 
n. w. winds, render the introduction of vegetables 
from oriental Asia extremely difficult. Hence, on 
the w. coast of Mexico we find no plant of China 
or the Philippine islands, except the triphasia au- 
ronliola (limonia trifoliata)^ an elegant shrub, of 
which the fruits are dressed, and which, accord 
ing to Lourciro, is identical with the citrus tri- 
foliata, or karatats banna of Kampfer. As to 
the orange and citron trees, which in the s. of Eu 
rope support, without any bad consequences, a 
cold for five or six days below 0, (32 of Fahren 
heit), they are now cultivated throughout all Nueva 
Espaiia, even on the central table-land. It has fre 
quently been discussed, if these trees existed in the 
Spanish colonies before the discovery of America, 
or if they were introduced by the Europeans from 
the Canary islands, the island of St. Thomas, or 
the coast of Africa. It is certain that there is an 
orange-tree, of a small and bitter fruit, and a very 
prickly citron, yieldmg a green, round fruit, with 
a singularly oily bark, which is frequently hardly 
of the size of a large nut, growing wild in the 
island of Cuba and on the coast of Ticrra Firme. 
ButHumboldt, notwithstanding all his researches, 
could never discover a single individual in the in 
terior of the forests of Guayana, between the Ori 
noco, the Cassiquiarc, and the frontiers of Brazil. 
Perhaps the small green citron (liinoncito verde) 
was anciently cultivated by the natives ; and per 
haps it has only grown wild when the population, 
and consequently the extent of cultivated territory, 
were most considerable. We are inclined to be 
lieve that only the citron-tree, with large yellow 
fruit (Union sutil), and the sweet orange, were in 
troduced by the Portuguese and Spaniards. Hurn- 
boldt saw them on the banks of the Orinoco, where 
the Jesuits had established their missions. The 
orange, on the discovery of America, had only 
existed for a few centuries even in Europe. If 
there had been any ancient communication be 
tween the new continent and the islands of the 
S. sea, the true citrus auranliurn might have ar 
rived in Peru or Mexico by the way of the w. ; 
for this tree was found by M. Forster in the lie- 
brides islands, where it was seen by Quiros long 
before him. 

The great analogy between the climate of the table 
land of Nueva Espaiia and that of Italy, Greece, 
and the s. of France, ought to invite the Mexi-J 



MEXICO. 



203 



[cans to the cultivation of the olive. This cultiva 
tion was successfully. attempted at the beginning of 
the conquest, but the government, from an unjust 
policy, far from favouring, endeavoured rather 
indirectly to frustrate it. As far as we know, there 
exists no formal prohibition ; but the colonists 
have never ventured on a branch of national in 
dustry which would have immediately excited the 
jealousy of the mother country. The court of 
Madrid has always seen with an unfavourable eye 
the cultivation of the olive and the mulberry, 
hemp, flax, and the vine, in the new continent ; 
and if the commerce of wines and indigenous oils 
has been tolerated in Peru and Chile, it is only 
because those colonies, situated beyond cape 
Horn, are frequently ill provisioned from Europe, 
and the effect of vexatious measures is dreaded in 
provinces so remote. A system of the most odious 
prohibitions has been obstinately followed in all 
the colonies of which the coast is washed by the 
Atlantic ocean. During Humboldt s stay at 
Mexico the viceroy received orders from the court 
to pull up the vines (arancar las cepas) in the n. 
provinces of Mexico, because the merchants of 
Cadiz complained of a diminution in the consump 
tion of Spanish wines. Happily this order, like 
many others given by the ministers, was never 
executed. It was judged that, notwithstanding 
the extreme patience of the Mexican people, it 
might be dangerous to drive them (o despair by 
laying waste their properties and forcing them to 
purchase from the monopolists of Europe what the 
bounty of nature produces on the Mexican soil. 

The olive-tree is very rare in all Nueva Espana ; 
and there exists but a single olive plantation, the 
beautiful one of the archbishop of Mexico, situated 
two leagues s. e. from the capital, Tlrisolivar del 
Arzobispo annually produces 200arrobas, 5500 Ib. 
avoird. of an oil of a very good quality. We 
have already spoken of the olive cultivated by the 
missionaries of New California, especially near the 
village of San Diego. The Mexican, when at 
complete liberty in the cultivation of his soil, will 
in time dispense with the oil, wine, hemp, and 
flax of Europe. The Andalusian olive introduced 
by Cortes sometimes suffers from the cold of the 
central table-land ; for although the frosts are not 
strong, they are frequent and of long duration. 
It might be useful to plant the Corsican olive in 
Mexico, which is more than any other calculated 
to resist the severity of the climate. 

In terminating the list of alimentary plants, we 
shall give a rapid survey of the plants which fur 
nish beverages to the Mexicans. We shall see 
that in this point of view the history of the Aztec 



agriculture presents us with a trait so much the 
more curious, as we find nothing analogous among 
a great number of nations much more advanced 
in civilization than the ancient inhabitants of 
Anahuac. 

There hardly exists a tribe of savages on the 
face of the earth who cannot prepare some kind 
of beverage from the vegetable kiriodom. The 
miserable hordes who wander in the forests of 
Guayana make as agreeable emulsions from the 
different palm-tree fruits as the barley water pre 
pared in Europe. The inhabitants of Easter 
island, exiled on a mass of arid rocks without 
springs, besides the sea-water, drink the juice of 
the sugar-cane. The most part of civilized na 
tions draw their drinks from the same plants which 
constitute the basis of their nourishment, and of 
which the roots or seeds contain the sugary prin 
ciple united with the amylaceous substance. Rice 
in s. and e. Asia, in Africa the igname root with a 
few arums, and in the n. of Europe ccreaiia, fur 
nish fermented liquors. There are few nations 
who cultivate certain plants merely with a view to 
prepare beverages from them. The old continent 
affords us no instance of vine plantations but to the 
w. of the Indus. In the better days of Greece this 
cultivation was even confined to the countries si 
tuated between the Oxus and Euphrates, to Asia 
Minor, and w. Europe. On the rest of the globe 
nature produces species of wild vitis ; but nowhere 
else did man endeavour to collect them round him 
to ameliorate them by cultivation. 

But in the new continent we have the example 
of a people who not only extracted liquors from 
the amylaceous and sugary substance of the maize, 
the manioc, and bananas, or from the pulp of se 
veral species of mimosa, but who cultivated ex 
pressly a plant of the family of the ananas, to 
convert its juice into a spirituous liquor. On the 
interior table-land, in the intendancy of Puebla, 
and in that of Mexico, AVC run over vast extents of 
country, where the eye reposes only on fields 
planted with pities or maguey. This plant, of a 
coriaceous and prickly leaf, which with the cactus 
opuntia has become wild since the sixteenth cen 
tury throughout all the s. of Europe, the Canary 
islands, and the coast of Africa, gives a particular 
character to the Mexican landscape. What a 
contrast of vegetable forms between a field of 
grain, a plantation of agava, and a group of ba 
nanas, of which the glossy leaves are constantly of 
a tender and delicate green ! Under every zone, 
man, by multiply ing certain vegetable productions, 
modifies at will the aspect of the country under 
cultivation.] 

D 1)2 



204 



MEXICO. 



[In the Spanish colonies there are several species 
of maguey which deserve a careful examination, 
and of which several, on account of the division of 
their corolla, the length of their stamina, and the 
form of their stigmata, appear to belong to different 
genus! The maguey or mcll cultivated in Mexico 
are numerous varieties of the agave Americana, 
which has become so common in our gardens, with 
yellow fasciculated and straight leaves, and sta 
mina twice as long as the pinking of the corolla. 
We must not confound this metl with the agave 
Cubensis of Jacquen, ( (loribus ex albo xirentibus, 
longe paniculatis, pendulis, staminibus corolla du- 
plo brcvioribus), called by M. Lamarck a. Mexi- 
ana, and which has been believed by some bota 
nists, for what reason we know not, the principal 
object of the Mexican cultivation. 

The plantations of the maguey de pulque extend 
as far as the Aztec language. The people of the 
Otomite, Totonac, and Mistec race, are not ad 
dicted to the octli, which the Spaniards call 
pulque. On the central plain we hardly find the 
maguey cultivated to the n. of Salamanca. The 
finest cultivations are in the valley of Toluca and 
on the plains of Cholula. The agaves are there 
planted in rows at a distance of 15 decimetres, or 
58 inches, from one another. The plants only 
begin to yield the juice, which goes by the name of 
honey, on account of the sugary principle with 
which it abounds, when the hampe is on the point 
of its development. It is on this account of the 
greatest importance for the cultivator to know ex 
actly the period of effloresence. Its proximity is 
announced by the direction of the radical leaves, 
which arc observed by the Indians with much at 
tention. These leaves, which are till then inclined 
towards the earth, rise all of a sudden ; and they 
endeavour to form a junction to cover the hampe 
which is on the point of formation. The bundle 
of central leaves (el corazon} becomes at the same 
time of a clearer green, and lengthens perceptibly. 
It is said by the Indians that it is difficult to be 
deceived in these signs, but that there are others of 
no less importance which cannot be precisely des 
cribed, because they have merely a reference to the 
carriage of the plant. The cultivator goes daily 
through his agave plantations to mark those plants 
which approach efflorescence. If he has any 
donbt, he applies to the experts of the village, old 
Indian^, who, from long experience, have a judg 
ment, or rather tact, more securely to be relied on. 

Near Choluia, and between Toluca and Caca- 
numacan, a maguey of eight years old gives al 
ready signs of the development of its hampe. 
They then begin to collect the juice, of which the 



pulque is made. They cut the corazon, or bundle 
of central leaves, and enlarge insensibly the 
wound, and cover it with lateral leaves, which they 
raise up by drawing them close, and tying them 
to the extremities. In this wound the vessels ap 
pear to deposit all the juice which would have 
formed the colossal hampe loaded with flowers. 
This is a true vegetable spring, which keeps run 
ning for two or three months, and from which the 
Indian draws three or four times a day. We may 
judge of the quickness or slowness of the motion 
of the juice by the quantity of honey extracted 
from the maguey at different times of the day. 
A foot commonly yields, in 24 hours, four cubic 
decimetres, or 200 cubic inches, (242 cubic inches 
English), equal to eight quartillos. Of this total 
quantity they obtain three quartillos at sun-rise, 
two at mid-day, and three at six in the evening. 
A very vigorous plant sometimes yields 15 quar 
tillos, or 375 cubic inches (454 cubic inches Eng 
lish), per day, for from four to five months, which 
amounts to the enormous volume of more than 
1100 cubic decimetres, or 67,130 cubic inches. 
This abundance of juice produced by a maguey 
of scarcely a metre and a half in height, or 4^ 
feet, is so much the more astonishing, as the agave 
plantations are in the most arid grounds, and fre- 
quent y on banks of rocks hardly covered witli ve 
getable earth. The value of a maguey plant near 
its efflorescence is at Pachuca five piastres, or II. 
2.?. 4ft. In a barren soil the Indian calculates the 
produce of each maguey at 150 bottles, and the 
value of the pulque furnished in a day at from 10 
to J2 sols. The produce is unequal, like that of 
the vine, which varies very much in its quantity 
of grapes. 

The cultivation of the agave has real advantages 
over the cultivation of maize, grain, and potatoes. 
This plant, with firm and vigorous leaves, is 
neither aflected by drought nor hail, nor the ex 
cessive cold which prevails in winter on the higher 
cordil eras of Mexico. The stalk perishes after 
efflorescence. If we deprive it of the central 
leaves, it withers, after the juice which nature ap 
pears to have destined to the increase of the hampe 
is entirely exhausted. An infinity of shoots then 
spring from the root of the decayed plant ; for no 
plant multiplies with greater facility. An arpent 
of ground contains from 12 to 1300 maguey plants. 
If the field is of old cultivation, we may calculate 
that a 12th or J 4th of these plants yields honey 
annually. A proprietor who plants from 30 to 
40,000 maguey is sure to establish the fortune of 
his children ; but it requires patience and courage 
to follow a species of cultivation which only begins] 

At 



MEXICO. 



205 



[to grow lucrative at the end of 15 years. In a 
good soil the agave enters on its efflorescence at the 
end of five years ; and in a poor soil no harvest can 
be expected in less than 18 years. Although the 
rapidiiy of the vegetation is of the utmost conse 
quence for the Mexican cultivators, they never at 
tempt artificially to accelerate the development of 
the hampe by mutilating the roots or watering 
them with warm water. It has been discovered 
that by these means, which weaken the plant, the 
confluence of juice towards the centre is sensibly 
diminished. A maguey plant is destroyed, if, 
misled by false appearances, the Indian makes 
the incision long before the flowers would have na 
turally developed themselves. 

The honey or juice of the agave is of a very 
agreeable sour taste. It easily ferments, on ac 
count of the sugar and mucilage which it contains. 
To accelerate this fermentation they add, how 
ever, a little old atid acid pulque. The operation 
is terminated in three or tour days. The vinous 
beverage, which resembles cider, has an odour of 
putrid meat extremely disagreeable; but the Eu 
ropeans who have been able to get over the aver 
sion which this fetid odour inspires, prefer the 
pulque to every other liquor. They consider it 
as stomachic, strengthening, and especially as 
very nutritive ; and it is recommended to lean per 
sons. Whites also have been known, like the 
Mexican Indians, totally to have abstained from 
water, beer, and wine, and to have drunk no other 
liquor than the juice of the agave. The connois 
seurs speak with errthusiasm of the pulque prepared" 
in the village of Hocotitlan, situated to the n. of 
Toluca, at the foot of a mountain almost as ele 
vated as the Nevado of this name. They affirm 
that the excellent quality of this pulque does not 
altogether depend on the art with which the liquor 
is prepared, but also on a taste of the soil com 
municated to the juice, according to the fields in 
which the plant is cultivated. There are planta 
tions of maguey near Hocotitlan (haciendas de 
pulque) which bring in annually more than 40,000 
livres, or WG61. sterling. The inhabitants of the 
country differ very much in their opinions as to the 
true cause of the fetid odour of the pulque. It is 
generally affirmed that this odour, which is analo 
gous to that of animal matter, is to be ascribed to 
the skins in which the first juice of the agave is 
poured. But several well informed individuals 
pretend that the pulque when prepared in vessels 
has the, same odour, and that if it is not found in 
that of Toluca, it is because the great cold there 
modifies the process of fermentation. Perhaps 
this odour proceeds from the decomposition of a 



vegeto-animal matter, analogous to the gluten 
Contained in the juice of the agave. 

The cultivation of the maguey is an object of 
such importance for the revenue, that the entry 
duties paid in the three cities of Mexico, Toluca, 
and Puebla, amounted, in 1793, to the sum of 
817,739 piastres, or 178,880*. sterling. The ex- 
pences of perception were then 56,608 piastres, or 
J2,383/f. sterling ; so that the government drew 
from the agave juice a nett revenue of 761,131 
piastres, or 166,497/. or more than 3,800,000 
francs. The desire of increasing the revenues of" 
the crown occasioned latterly a "heavy tax on the 
fabrication of pulque, equally vexatious and incon 
siderate. It is time to change the system in this 
respect, otherwise it is to be presumed that this 
cultivation, one of the most ancient and lucrative, 
will insensibly decline, notwithstanding the decided 
predilection of the people for the fermented juice 
of the agave. 

A very intoxicating brandy is formed from the 
pulque, which is called mexical, or aguardiente 
de maguey. We have been assured that the plant 
cultivated for distillation differs essentially from the 
common maguey, or maguey de pulque. The 
sugar-cane has also a particular variety, with a 
violet stalk, which came from the coast of Africa 
(cano de Guinea), and which is preferred in the 
province of Caracas for the fabrication of rum to 
the sugar-cane of Otaheite. The Spanish govern- 
ment, and particularly the real hacienda, lias been 
long very severe against the mtxica/, which is 
strictly prohibited, because the use of it is pre 
judicial to the Spanish brandy trade. An enor 
mous quantity, however, of this maguey brandy 
is manufactured in the intendances of Valladolid, 
Mexico, and Durango, especially in the new king 
dom of Leon. We may judge of the value of 
this illicit traffic by considering the disproportion 
between the population of Mexico and the annual 
importation of European brandy into Vera Cruz. 
The whole importation only amounts to 32,000 
barrels! In several parts of the kingdom, for ex 
ample in i\\e provincias internas and the district of 
Tuxpan, belonging to the intendaney of Gnada- 
laxara, for some time past the mexical has been 
publicly sold on payment of a small duty. This 
measure, which ought to be general, has been both 
profitable to the revenue, and has put an end to 
the complaints of the inhabitants. 

But the maguey is not only the vine of the 
Aztecs, it can also supply the place of the hemp of 
Asia, and the papyrus (cypcrus papyrus) of the 
Egyptians. The paper on which the ancient 
Mexicans painted their hieroglyphical figures was] 



206 



MEXICO. 



[made of the fibres of agave leaves, macerated in 
water, and disposed in layers like the fibres of the 
Egyptian cy penis, and the mulberry (broussone- 
tia) of the S. sea islands. Humboldt brought 
with him several fragments of A/tec manuscripts 
written on maguey paper, of a thickness so differ 
ent that some of them resemble pasteboard, while 
others resemble Chinese paper. These fragments 
were so much the more interesting, as the only 
hieroglyphics which exist at Vienna, Home, and 
Veletri, are on Mexican stag-skins. The thread 
which is obtained from the maguey is known in 
Europe by the name of pite thread, and it is pre 
ferred by naturalists to every other, because it is 
less subject to twist. It does not, however, resist 
so well as that prepared from the fibres of the 
phormium. The juice (xugo de cocuyza) which 
the agave yields when it is still far from (he period 
of efflorescence is very acrid, and is successfully 
employed as a caustic in the cleaning of wounds. 
The prickles which terminate the leaves served 
formerly, like those of the cactus, for pins and 
nails to the Indians. The Mexican priests pierced 
their arms and breast with them in their acts of 
expiation, analogous to those of the buddists of 
Hindostan. 

We may conclude from all that we have related 
respecting the use of the different parts of the 
maguey, that next to the maize and potato, this 
plant is the most useful of all the productions with 
which nature has supplied the mountaineers of 
equinoctial America. 

When the fetters which the government has 
hitherto put on several branches of the national 
industry shall be removed, when the Mexican 
agriculture shall be no longer restrained by a 
system of administration, which, while it impove 
rishes the colonies, does not enrich the mother 



country, the maguey plantations will be gradually 
succeeded by vineyards. The cultivation of the 
vine will augment with the number of the whites, 
who consume a great quantity of the wines of 
Spain, France, Madeira, and the Canary islands. 
But in the present state of things, the vine can 
hardly be included in the territorial riches of 
Mexico, the harvest of it being so inconsiderable. 
The grape of the best quality is that of Zapotitlan, 
in the intendancy of Oaxaca. There are also 
vineyards near Dolores and San Luis de la Paz to 
the n. of Guanaxuato, and in the promncias in- 
ternas near Parras, and the Passo del Norte. The 
wine of the Passo is in great estimation, especially 
that of the estate of the Marquis de San Miguel, 
which keeps for a great number of years, although 
very little care is bestowed on the making of it. 
They complain in the country that the must of 
the table-land ferments with difficulty ; and they 
add arope to the juice of the grape, that is to say, 
a small quantity of wine in which sugar has been 
infused, and which by means of dressing has been 
reduced into a syrup. This process gives to the 
Mexican wines a flavour of must, which they. t 
would lose if the making of wine was more studied 
among them. When in the course of ages the new 
continent, jealous of its independence, shall wish 
to dispense with the productions of the old, the 
mountainous and temperate parts of Mexico, Gua 
temala, New Granada, and Caracas, will supply- 
wine to the whole of N.America; and they will 
then become to that country what France, Italy, 
and Spain have long been to the n. of Europe. 

CHAP. VIII. 

Table of the geographical positions of the kingdom 
of Nueva Espana; for which see the end of the 
general preface to this work. 



CHAP. IX. 

Table of the most remarkable elevations measured in the interior of Nueva Espana, 

The work published with the title of Nixellement barometrique fait dans /&amp;lt;* Regions Equinoxiales du 
Nouvean Continent, in 1799 1804, contains more than 200 points in the interior of Nueva Es 
pana, of which Mr. Humboldt determined the elevation above the level of the sea, either by the 
barometer, or by trigonometrical methods. We have merely inserted in the following table the abso 
lute heights of the most remarkable mountains and cities. The points marked with an asterisk are 
doubtful. The Recueil d Observations astronomiqucs et de Mesures barometriques of Mr. Iluraboldt, 
edited by M. Oltmanns, may also be consulted, (vol. i. pages 318 to 334).] 



MEXICO. 



207 



Names of places of observation. 


Height above the level of the sea, 
according to the formula of M. 
Laplace. 


lu metres. 


Iu toises. 


In Eng. feet. 


Volcan de Popocatepetl, volcan grande de Mexico 6 de Puebla 


5400 


2771 


17716 


Pic d Onzaba or Citlaltepetl - 
Nevado d lztaccihuatl, Sierra Nevada of Mexico 


5295 
4786 


2717 
2456 


17371 
15700 


Nevado de Toluca, at the rock of Frailes ... 


4621 


2372 


15159 


CofTre de Perote or Nauhcampatepetl 


4089 


2098 


13514 


Cerro de Axusco, six leagues to the s. s. w. of Mexico 


3674* 


1885* 


12052 


Pic de Tancitaro - - - - - - 


3200* 


1642 


10498 


El Jacal, summit of the Cerro de las Nabajas - 


3124 


1603 


10249 


Mamanchota or Organos d Actopan, n. e. from Mexico .* 


2977 


1527 


9766 


Volcan de Colima - - 


2800* 


1437 


9186 


Volcan de Jorullo, in the intendancy of Valladolid * " " 


1301 


667 


4267 


Mexico, at the convent of St. Augustin - " - 


2277 


1168 


7470 


Pachuca - - - - 


2484 


1274 


8149 


Moran, mine near the Real del Monte - - * 


2595 


1331 


8513 


Rt-al del Monte, mine . . - 


2781 


1427 


9057 


Tula, city - *. &amp;gt; - -, ^ 


2053 


1053 


6735 


Toluca, city -" - &amp;lt; : - - 


2688 


1379 


8818 


Cuernavaca, city i" 1 ^ " . " : - u 


1656 


849 


5433 


Tasco, city - - * 


1784 


915 


5852 


Chilpansingo, city - " 


1380 


708 


4527 


Puebla de los Angeles, city - 


2194 


1126 


7198 


Perote, town - *^ . ??&amp;gt; 


2354 


1208 


7723 


Xalapa, city ;T - * - - 


1321 


678 


4333 


Valladolid, city ^M; 


1952 


1001 


6404 


Pazcuaro, city - - * 


2202 


1130 


7224 


Charo, city .... - 


1907 


978 


6256 


Villa de Islahnaca, in the intendancy of Valladolid - " - 


2585 


1326 


8481 


San Junn del Rio, town - - - *-" 


1978 


1015 


6489 


Qtierctaro, city : - v "* * - 


1940 


995 


6364 


Ctlaya, city ;v . "Z . 


1835 


941 


6020 


Salamanca, city "* - *- - - - 


1757 


902 


5763 


Guanaxiiato, city 


2084 


1069 


6836 


Mine de la Valenciana - - - 


2328 


1194 


7637 


\ Durango, city 


2087* 


1071 


6847 



CHAP. X. 

General considerations on the possibility of writ 
ing the So2ith sea and Atlantic ocean, viz. By 
the rivers of Peace and Tacoutche Tesse 
Sources of the }lio Bravo and Rio Colorado 
Isthmus of Tchuanlepec Lake of Nicaragua 
Isthmus of Panama Hay of Cupica 
Canal of C/ioco Rio Cualldgu Gulf of St. 
George. 
THE part of Mexico in which the two oceans, 

the Atlantic and the S. sea, approach the nearest 



to one another, is unfortunately not that part 
which contains the two ports of Acapulco and 
Vera Cruz, and the capital of Mexico. There 
according to Mr. Hmnboldt s astronomical 



are 



observations, from Acapulco to Mexico an oblique 
distance of 2^ 40 19", or 155,885 toises, or 
997,664 feet ; from Mexico to Vera Cruz 2 57 9" 
or 158,572 toises, or 1,014,860 feet; and from 
the port of Acapulco to the port of Vera Cruz, in 
a direct line, 4 10 1". It is in these distances 
that the old maps are most faulty. From the ob-] 



208 



MEXICO. 



[servations published by M. de Cassirii, in the 
account of the voyage of Chappe, the distance 
from Mexico to Vera Cruz appears 5 10 of long, 
instead of 2 57 , the real distance between these 
two great cities. In adopting for Vera Cruz the 
longitude given by Chappe, and for Acapulco 
that of the map of the Depot drawn up iu 1784, 
the breadth of the Mexican isthmus betwixt the 
two ports would be 175 leagues, 75 leagues be 
yond the truth. 

The isthmus of Tehuantepec, to the s. e. of the 
port of Vera Cruz, is the point of Nueva Espaila in 
which the continent is narrowest. From the At 
lantic ocean to the S. sea the distance is 45 leagues. 
The approximation of the sources of the rivers 
Huasacualo and Chimalapa seems to favour the 
project of a canal for interior navigation ; a pro 
ject with which the Count of Rcvillagigedo, one 
of the most zealous viceroys for the public good, 
has been for a long time occupied. When we 
come to speak of the intendancy ofOaxaca, we 
shall return to this object, so important to all 
civilized Europe. \Ve must confine ourselves 
here to the problem of the communication between 
the two seas, in all the generality of which it is 
susceptible ; and although it may appear that the 
nature of the question of which we are about to 
treat, does not exclusively apply to the article 
MEXICO, yet as it is in this kingdom that the two 
oceans, the Atlantic and the S. sea, as we have be 
fore observed, approach the nearest to each other; 
and as it is consequently to this point that the eyes 
of the inquirer will be naturally bent; we shall 
endeavour to present in one view nine points, 
several of which are not sufficiently known in Eu 
rope, and all offering a greater or less probability 
either of canals or interior river communications. 
At a time when the new continent, profiting by the 
misfortunes and perpetual dissensions of Europe, 
advances rapidly towards civilization; and when 
the commerce of China, and the n.w. coast of 
America, becomes yearly of greater importance, 
the subject which we here summarily discuss is of 
the greatest interest for the commerce and political 
preponderancy of nations. 

These nine points, which at different times have 
fixed the attention of statesmen and merchants in 
the colonies, present very different advantages. 
We shall range them according to their geogra 
phical position, beginning with the most . part 
of the new continent, and following the coasts to 
the s. of the island of Chiloe. It can only be after 
having examined all the projects hitherto formed 
for the communication of the two seas, that the 
government can decide which of them merits the 



preference. Before this examination, exact mate- 
rials for which are not yet collected, it would be 
imprudent to cut canals in the isthmuses of Gua- 
sacualco or Panama. 

I. Under the 54 37 of . lat. in the parallel 
of Queen Charlotte s island, the sources of the river 
of Peace, or Ounigigah, approach to within seven 
leagues of the sdurces of the Tacoutche Tesse, 
supposed the same with the river of Colombia. 
The first of these rivers discharges itself into the 
N. ocean, after having mingled its waters with 
those of the Slave lake, and the river Mackenzie. 
The second river, Colombia, enters the Pacific 
ocean, near cape Disappointment, to the s. of 
Nootka sound, according to the celebrated voyager 
Vancouver, under the 4619 oflaf. The cordil* 
/era, or chain of the stony mountains, abounding 
in coal, was found by M. Fiedler to be elevated 
in some places 3520 English feet, or 550 toises, 
above the neighbouring plains. It separates the 
sources of the rivers of Peace and Colombia. Ac 
cording to Mackenzie s account, who passed this 
cordillera in the month of August J793, it is prac 
ticable enough for carriages, and the mountains 
appear of no very great elevation. To avoid the 
great winding of the Colombia, another communi 
cation still shorter might be opened from the 
sources of the Tacoutche Tesse to the Salmon 
river, the mouth of which is to the e. of the Prin 
cess Royal islands, in the 52 26 of lat. Mac 
kenzie rightly observes, that the government which 
should open this communication between the two 
oceans, by forming regular establishments in the 
interior of the country, and at the extremities of 
the rivers, would get possession of the whole fur 
trade of N. America, from the 48 of lat. to the 
pole, excepting a part of the coast which has been, 
long included in Russian America. Canada, 
from the multitude and course of its rivers, pre 
sents facilities for internal commerce similar to 
those of oriental Siberia. The mouth of the river 
Colombia seems to invite Europeans to found a fine 
colony there ; for its banks afford fertile land in 
abundance, covered with superb timber. It must 
be allowed, however, that notwithstanding the 
examination by Mr. Broughton, we still know 
but a very small part of Colombia, which, like the 
Severn and the Thames, appears of a dispropor 
tionate contraction as it leaves the coast. Every 
geographer who carefully compares Mackenzie s 
maps with Vancouver s, will be astonished that 
the Colombia, in descending from these stony 
mountains, which we cannot help considering as a 
prolongation of the Andes of Mexico, should tra 
verse the chain of mountains which approach the] 



MEXICO. 



201) 



[shore of the Great ocean, whose principal.summits 
arc mount St. Helen and mount Rainier. But M. 
Maltp-Brun. lias started important doubts concern 
ing the identity of the Tacoutclie Tesse and the 
Rio Colombia. He even presumes, (as may be 
seen in the Geogr. Mathem. vol. xv. p. 117), that 
the former discharges itself into the gulf of Cali 
fornia ; a bold supposition, which would give to 
the Tacoutche Tesse a course of an enormous 
length. It must be allowed that all that part of 
the w. of N. America is still but very imperfectly 
known. 

In the 50 of lat. the Nelson river, the Saska- 
shawan,and the Missoury, which may be regarded 
as one of the principal branches of the Mississippi, 
furnish equal facilities of communication with the 
Pacific ocean. All these rivers take their rise at 
the foot of the stony mountains. But we have not 
yet sufficient acquaintance with the nature of the 
ground through which the communication is pro 
posed to be established, to pronounce upon the 
utility of these projects. The journey of Captain 
Lewis, at the expence of the Anglo-American 
government, on the Mississippi and the Missoury, 
has thrown considerable light on this interesting 
problem. 

2. The next projection is through the Rio del 
Norte, or Rio Bravo ; the sources of which are 
only separated from the sources of the Rio Colo 
rado by a mountainous tract of from 12 to 13 leagues 
in breadth. See article BRAVO. 

3. The isthmus of Tehuantepec comprises, un 
der the 16 of lat. the sources of the Rio Huasa- 
cualco, which is discharged into the gulf of 
Mexico, and the sources of the Rio de Chimalapa. 
The waters of this last river mix with those of the 
Pacific ocean near the Barra de S. Francisco. 
We consider here the Rio del Passo as the prin 
cipal source of the river Huasacualco, although 
the latter only takes its name at the Paso de la 
Fabrica, after one of its arms, which comes from 
the mountains De los Mexes, unites with the Rio 
del Passo. We shall examine afterwards the pos 
sibility of cutting a canal, of from six to seven 
leagues, in the forests of Tarifa. We shall merely 
observe here, that since, in 1798, a road has been 
opened which leads by land from the port of Te 
huantepec, to the Embarcadero de la Cruz, the 
same road having been completed in 1800; the 
Rio Huasacualco forms, in reality, a commercial 
communication between the two oceans. During 
the course of the war with the English, the indigo 
of Guatemala, the most precious of all known 
indigos, came by the way of this isthmus to the 
port of Vera Cruz, and from thence to Europe. 

4. The great lake of Nicaragua communicates 

VOL. III. 



not only with the lake of Leon, but also on the 
e. by the river of San Juan, with the sea of the 
Antilles. The communication with the Pacific 
ocean would be effected in cutting a canal across 
the isthmus which separates the lake from the gulf 
of Papaga3 o. On this strait isthmus are to be 
found the volcanic and isolated summits of Bom- 
bacho, at 11 T of lat., of Granada, and of the 
Papagayo, at 10 50 of lat. The old maps point 
out a communication by water as existing across 
the isthmus from the lake to the Great ocean. 
Other maps, somewhat newer, represent a river 
under the name of Rio Partido, which gives one of 
its branches to the Pacific ocean, and the other to 
the lake of Nicaragua ; but this divided stream 
does not appear on the last maps published by the 
Spaniards. 

There are in the archives of Madrid several 
French and English memoirs on the possibility 
of the junction of the lake of Nicaragua v/ith the 
Pacific ocean : viz. Memoire sur le passage de la 
nier du Suda la nier du Nord, par AJ . la Bastide, 
en 1791. Voyage de JWarchand, vol. i. p. 565. 
Mapa del Golfo de Mexi(o por Thomas Lopez ?/ 
Juan de la Ch/s, 1755. The commerce carried 
on by the English on the coast of Mosquitos has 
greatly contributed to give celebrity to this project 
of communication between the two seas. In none 
of the memoirs which have come to our knowledge 
is the principal point, the height of the ground in 
the isthmus, sufficiently cleared up. 

From the kingdom of New Granada to the en 
virons of the capital of Mexico, there is not a sin 
gle mountain, a single level, a single city, of which 
we know the elevation above the level of the sea. 
Does there exist an uninterrupted chain of moun 
tains in the provinces of Veragua and Nicaragua ? 
Has this cordillera, which is supposed to unite 
the Andes of Peru to the mountains of Mexico, its 
central chain to the w. or the e. of the lake of Ni 
caragua ? Would not the isthmus of Papagayo 
rather present a hilly tract than a continued cor- 
dillera? These are problems whose solution is 
equally interesting to the statesman and the geo 
graphical naturalist! 

There is no spot on the globe so full of volcanoes 
as this part of America, from lat. 11 or 13 ; but 
do not these conical summits form groups which, 
separately from one another, rise from the plain 
itself? We ought not to be astonished that we are 
ignorant of these very important facts; we shall 
soon see that even the height of the mountains 
which traverse the isthmus of Panama ,is not yet 
known. Perhaps the communication of the lake 
of Nicaragua with the Pacific ocean could be car 
ried on by the lake of Leon, by means of the river] 



210 



MEXICO. 



[Tosta, which, on the road from Leon to Realexo, 
descends from the volcano of Telica. In fact, the 
ground appears there very little elevated. The 
account of the voyage of Dampier leads us even to 
suppose that there exists no chain of mountains 
between the lake of .Nicaragua and the S. sea. 
" The coast of Nicoya," says this great naviga 
tor, " is low, and covered at full tide. To arrive 
from Realexo to Leon, we must go 20 miles across 
a country flat and covered with mangle-trees." 
The city of Leon itself is situated in a savanna. 
There is a small river which, passing near Realexo, 
might facilitate the communication between the 
latter port and that of Leon. (See Collection of Dam- 
pier s and Wafer s Voyages, vol. i. p. 113, 119, 
218). FrorrTthe w. bank of the lake of Nicara 
gua there are only lour marine leagues to the bot 
tom of the gulf of Papagayo, and seven to that of 
Nicoyo, which navigators call La Caldera. Dam- 
pier says expressly that the ground between La 
Caldera and the lake is a little hilly, but for the 
greatest part level and like a savanna. 

The coast of Nicaragua is almost inaccessible in 
the months of August, September, and October, 
on account of the terrible storms and rains ; in 
January and February, on account of the furious 
n. e. and e. n. e. winds called Papagayos. This 
circumstance is exceedingly inconvenient for navi 
gation. The port of Tehuantepec, on the isthmus 
of Guasacualco, is not more favoured by nature ; 
it gives its name to the hurricanes which blow from 
the n. w. and which frighten vessels from landing 
at the small ports of Sabinas and Ventosa. 

5. The isthmus of Panama was crossed for the 
first time by Vasco Nunez dc Balboa, in 1513. 
Since this memorable epocha in the history of 
geographical discoveries, the project of a canal 
has occupied every mind ; and yet at this day, 
after the lapse of 300 years, there neither exists a 
survey of the ground, nor an exact determination 
of the positions of Panama and Portobello. The 
longitude of the first of these two porls has been 
found with relation to Carthagena ; the longitude 
of the second has been fixed from Guayaquil. 
The operations of Fidalgo and Malaspina are un 
doubtedly deserving of very great confidence ; but 
errors are insensibly multiplied, when by chrono- 
metiical operations from the isle of Trinidad to 
Portobello, and from Lima to Panama, one posi 
tion becomes dependent on another. It would be 
important to carry the time directly from Panama 
to Portobello, and thus to connect the operations 
in the S. sea with those which the Spanish govern 
ment has carried on in the Atlantic ocean. Per- 
* haps MM. Fidalgo, Tiscar, and Noguera, may 
(one day advance with their instruments to the 5. 



coast of the isthmus, while MM. Colmearrs, 
Irasvirivill, and Quartara, shall carry their opera 
tions to the . const. The expedition of Fidalgo 
was destined for the coast shunted between the isle 
of Trinidad and Portobello, the expedition of Colo- 
menares for the coast of Chile, and the expedition 
of Moraleda and Quartara for the part between 
Guayaquil and Realexo. To form an idea of 
the uncertainty which still prevails as to the form 
atid breadth of the isthmus (for example towards 
Nata), we have only to com pare the maps of Lo 
pez with those of Arrowsmith, and with the more 
recent ones of the Deposito Hydrografico of Ma 
drid. The river Chagre, which flows info the sea of 
the Antilles to the a?, of Portobello, presents, not 
withstanding its sinuosities and its rapid;-, great faci 
lity for commerce ; its breadth is J20 toises at its 
mouth, and 20 toises near Cruces, where it begins to 
be navigable. It requires four or five days at pre 
sent to ascend the Rio Chagre from its mouth to 
Cruces. If the waters are very high, the current 
must be struggled with for 10 or 1^ d;iys. From 
Cruces to Panama merchandizes are transported on 
the backs of mules, for a space of five small leagues. 
The barometrical heights related in the travels of 
Ulloa, in his Observations AstronomiqHes, p. 97, 
lead us to suppose that there exists in the Rio 
Chagre, from the sea of the Antilles to the Enibar- 
cadero, or Venta de Cruces, a difference of level 
of from 35 to 40 toises. This must appear a very 
small difference to those who have ascended the 
Rio Chagre ; they forget that the force of the cur 
rent depends as much on a great accumulation of 
water near the sources, as on the general descent of 
the river ; that is to say, of the descent of the 
Rio Chagre above Cruces. On comparing the 
barometrical survey of Ulloa with that made by 
Humboldt in the river of Magdulena, we perceive 
that the elevation of Cruces above the ocean, far 
from being small, is, on the contrary, very consi 
derable. The fall of the Rio de la Magdelena from 
Honda to the dike of Mahates, near Barrancas, 
is nearly 170 toises, or 1088 feet; and this distance, 
nevertheless, is not, as we might suppose, four time*, 
but eight times, greater than that of Cruces, at the 
fort of Chagre. 

The engineers in proposing to the court of 
Madrid that the river Chagre should serve for 
establishing a communication between the two 
oceans, have projected a canal from the Venta de 
Cruces to Panama. This canal would have to 
pass through a hilly tract, of the height of which 
we are completely ignorant. We only know that 
from Cruces the ascent is at first rapid, and that 
there is then a descent for several hours towards 
the S. sea. It is very astonishing, that in cross-] 



MEXICO. 



211 



[ing llic isthmus neither La Condaraine nor Don 
George Juan and Ulloa had the curiosity to ob 
serve their barometer, for the sake of informing us 
what is the height of the most elevated point on the 
route of the castle of Chagre at Panama. These 
illustrious savans sojourned three months in that 
interesting region for the commercial world ; but 
their stay has added little to the old observations 
which we owe to Dampier and to Wafer. How 
ever, it appears beyond a doubt that we find the 
principal cordillera, or rather a range of hills that 
may be regarded as a prolongation of the Andes 
of New Granada, towards the S. sea, between 
Cruces and Panama. It is from thence that the 
two oceans are said to be discernible at the same 
time, which would only require an absolute height 
of 290 metres, or 947 English feet. However, 
Lionel Wafer complains that he could not enjoy 
this interesting spectacle. He assures us, more 
over, that the Tiills which form the central chain 
are separated from one another by valleys which 
allow free course for passage of the rivers. (See 
Description of the Isthmus of America, 1729, p. 
297.) Ulloa also asserts, vol. i. p. 101, that near 
the town of Panama, a little to the n. of the port, 
is the mountain of L Ancon, which, according to 
a geometrical measurement, is 101 toises (646 feet) 
in height. If these assertions be well founded, we 
might believe in the possibility of a canal from 
Cruces to Panama, of which the navigation would 
only be interrupted by a very few locks. 

There are other points where, according to me 
moirs drawn up in 1528, the isthmus has been pro 
posed to be cut ; for example, in joining the sources 
of the rivers called Caicnito and Rio Grande, with 
the Rio Trinidad. The e. part of the isthmus is 
the narrowest, but the ground appears to be also 
most elevated there. This is at least what has been 
remarked in the frightful road travelled by the cou 
rier from Portobello to Panama, a two days jour 
ney, which goes by the village of Pequeni, and 
is full of the greatest difficulties. 

In every age and climate, of two neighbouring 
seas, the one has been considered as more elevated 
than the other. Traces of this common opinion are 
to be found among the ancients. Strabo relates, 
that in his time the gulf of Corinth near Lechjeuin 
was believed to be above the level of the sea of 
Cenchreas. He is of opinion, (Lib. i. td. Sieben- 
kees t v. i. p. 146,) that it would be very danger 
ous to cut the isthmus of the Peloponnesus in the 
place where the Corinthians, by means of particu 
lar machines, had established a portage. In Ame 
rica, the S. sea is generally supposed to be higher 
at the iithmus of Panama than the Atlantic ocean. 



After a struggle of several days against the current 
of the Rio Chagre, we naturally believe the ascent 
to be greater than the descent from the hills near 
Cruces to Panama. Nothing, in fact, can be 
more treacherous than the estimates which we are 
apt to form of the difference of level on a long and 
easy descent. Humboldt could hardly believe his 
own eyes at Peru, when he found, by means of a 
barometrical measurement, that the city of Lima 
was 91 toi.ses, or 582 feet, higher than the port of 
Callao. An earthquake must cover entirely the 
rock of the isle San Lorenzo with water before the 
ocean can reach the capital of Peru. The idea of 
a difference of level between the Atlantic and S. 
sea has been combated by Don George Juan, who 
found the height of the column of mercury the 
same at the mouth of the Chagre and at Panama. 

The imperfection of the meteorological instru 
ments then in use, and the want of every sort of 
thermometrical correction of the calculation of 
heights, might also give rise (o doubts. These 
doubts have acquired additional force since the 
French engineers, in the expedition to Egypt, 
found the Red sea six toises, or 38 feet, higher 
than the Mediterranean. Till a geometrical sur 
vey be executed in the isthmus itself, we can only 
have recourse to barometrical measurements. Those 
made by Humboldt at the mouth of the Rio Sinn in 
the Atlantic sea, and on the coast of the S. sea in 
Peru, prove, with every allowance for temperature, 
that if there is a difference of level between the two 
seas, it cannot exceed six or seven metres, or 19 
or 22 feet. 

When we consider the effect of the current of 
rotation, (that is to say, the general motion from 
e. to w. observed in the part of the ocean com 
prised in the torrid zone), which carries the waters 
from e. to w. and accumulates them towards the 
coast of Costa Rica and Veragua, we are tempted 
to admit, contrary to the received opinion, that 
the Atlantic is a little higher than the S. sea. 
Trivial causes of a local nature, such as the con 
figuration of the coast, currents and winds (as in 
the straits of Babelmandel), may trouble the equi 
librium which ought necessarily to exist between 
all the parts of the ocean. As the tides rise at Por 
tobello to a third part of a metre, or 13 inches, 
and at Panama to four or five metres, or 13 or 16 
feet, the levels of the two neighbouring seas ought 
to vary with the different establishments of the 
ports. But these trivial inequalities, far from ob 
structing hydraulical operations, would even be 
favourable for sluices. 

We cannot doubt that if the isthmus of Panama 
were once burst by some similar catastrophe to] 

E E 2 



MEXICO. 



[that which opened the columns of Hercules, (see 
Diodorus Siculus, lib. iv. p. 226. lib. xvii. p. 533. 
edit. Rhodom.) the current of rotation in place of 
ascending towards the gulf of Mexico, and is 
suing through the canal of Bahama, would follow 
the same parallel from the coast of Paria to the 
Philippine islands. The effect of this opening, 
or new strait, would extend much beyond the 
banks of Newfoundland, and would either occa 
sion the disappearance or diminish the celerity of 
the Hotwater river, known by the name of Gulf 
Stream, which leaving Florida on the n. e. flows 
in the 43 of latitude to the e. and especially the 
s. e. towards the coast of Africa. Such would be 
the effects of an inundation analogous to that of 
which the memory has been preserved in the tra 
ditions of the Sarnolhracians. But shall we dare 
to compare the pitiful works of man with canals 
cut by Nature herself, with straits like the Helles 
pont and the Dardanelles ! 

Strabo, (Strabo, ed. Siebenkees, t. i. p. 156), 
appears inclined to believe that the sea will one 
day open the isthmus of Suez. No such catas 
trophe can be expected in the isthmus of Panama, 
unless enormous volcanic convulsions, very im 
probable in the actual state of repose of our 
planet, should occasion extraordinary revolutions. 
A tongue of land lengthened out from e. to w. in 
a direction almost parallel to that of the current of 
rotation escapes, as it were, the shock of the waves. 
The isthmus of Panama would be seriously threat 
ened, if it extended from s. to n. and was situated 
between the port of Carthago and the mouth of 
the Rio San Juan, if the narrowest part of the 
new continent lay between the 10 and the 11 of 
latitude, 

The navigation of the river Chagre is difficult, 
both on account of its sinuosities and the celerity 
of the current, frequently from one to two metres 
per second, or from 3.28 to 6.56 feet. These si 
nuosities, however, afford a counter current, by 
means of which the small vessels called bongos , 
and chains, ascend the river, either with oars, 
poles, or towing. Were these sinuosities to be 
cut, and the old bed of the river to be dried up, 
this advantage would cease, and it would be infi 
nitely difficult to arrive from the N. sea to Cruces. 
From all the information which Hnmboldt could 
procure relating to this isthmus, while he remained 
at Carthagena and Guayaquil, it appeared to him 
that the expectation of a canal of seven metres, or 
22 feet 11 inches, in depth, and from 22 to 28 
metres, or from 72 feet 2 inches, to 91 feet 10 
inches, in breadth, which, like a pass or a strait, 
should go from sea to sea, arid admit the vessels 



which sail from Europe to the East Indies, ought 
to be completely abandoned. The elevation of 
the ground would force the engineer to have re 
course either to subterraneous galleries, or to the 
system of sluices ; and the merchandizes destined 
to pass the isthmus of Panama could only, there 
fore, be transported in flat-bottomed boats un 
able to keep the sea. Entrepots at Panama and 
Portobello would be requisite. Every nation 
which wished to trade in this way would be de 
pendent on the masters of the isthmus and canal ; 
and this would be a very great inconvenience for 
the vessels dispatched from Europe. Supposing 
then that this canal were cut, the greatest number 
of these vessels would probably continue their 
voyage round cape Horn. We see that the pas 
sage of the sound is still frequented, notwithstand 
ing the existence of the Kyder canal, which con 
nects the ocean with the Baltic sea. 

It would be otherwise with the productions of 
w. America, or the goods sent from Europe to 
the coast of the Pacific ocean. These goods would 
cross the isthmus at less expence, and with less 
danger, particularly in time of war, than in doub 
ling the s. extremity of the new continent. In the 
present state of things, the carriage of three quin 
tals on mule-back from Panama to Portobello 
costs from three to four piastres (from J2s. 6d. to 
165. Sd.) But the uncultivated state in which the 
government allows the isthmus to remain is such, 
that the carriage of the copper of Chile, the quin 
quina of Peru, and the 60 or 70,000 nanegns of 
cacao (the vanega weighing llOCastilian pounds), 
annually exported by Guayaquil, across this neck 
of land, requires many more beasts of burden than 
can be procured, so that the slow and expensive 
navigation round cape Horn is preferred. 

In 1802 and 1803, when the Spanish commerce 
was every where harassed by the English cruisers, 
a great part of the cacao was carried across the 
kingdom of Nueva Espaila, and embarked at Vera 
Cruz for Cadiz. They preferred the passage from 
Guayaquil to Acapulco and a land journey of 100 
leagues from Acapulco to Vera Cruz, to the danger 
of a long navigation by cape Horn, and the diffi 
culty of struggling with the current along the 
coasts of Peru and Chile. This example proves, 
that, if the construction of a canal across the isth 
mus of Panama, or that of Guasacualco, abounds 
with too many difficulties from (lie multiplicity of 
sluices, the commerce of America would gain the 
most important advantages from good causeways, 
carried from Tehuantepec to the Embarcadero de 
la Cruz, and from Panama to Portobello. It is 
true that in the isthmus, tlie pasturage to this day] 



MEXICO. 



213 



is very unfavourable to the nourishment and multi 
plication of cattle ; but it is no less true that the 
assertion of Raynal (t. iv. p. 150), that domestic ani 
mals transported to Portobello lose their fecundity, 
should be considered as totally destitute of truth. 
The fact is, that it would be easy, in so fertile a soil, 
to form savannas by cutting clown forests, or to 
cultivate the paspalum pnrpureum, the milium ni- 
gricans, and particularly the medicago saliva, which 
grows abundantly in Peru in the warmest districts. 
The introducion of camels would be still a surer 
means of diminishing the expence of carriage. 
These land-ships, as they are called by the orien 
tals, hitherto exist only in the province of Cara 
cas, and were brought there from the Canary 
islands by the Marquis de Toro. 

Moreover, no political consideration should op 
pose the progress of population, agriculture, com 
merce, and civilization, in the isthmus of Panama. 
The more this neck of land shall be cultivated, the 
more resistance will it oppose to the enemies of the 
Spanish government. The events which took 
place at Buenos Ayres prove the advantages of a 
concentrated population in the case of an invasion. 
If any enterprising nation wished to become pos 
sessed of the isthmus, it could do so with the 
greatest ease at present, when good and numerous 
fortifications are destitute of arms to defend them. 
The unhealthiness of the climate, though now 
much diminished at Potobello, would alone op 
pose great obstacles to any military undertaking in 
the isthmus. It is from St. Charles de Chiloe,and 
not from Panama, that Peru can be attacked. It 
requires from three to five months to ascend from 
Panama to Lima. But the whale and cachalot 
fishery, which in 1803 drew 60 English vessels to 
the S. sea, and the facilities for the Chinese com 
merce and the furs of Nootka sound, are baits of a 
very seductive nature. They will draw, sooner 
or later, the masters of the ocean to a point of the 
globe destined by nature to change the face of the 
commercial sj stem of nations. 

6. To the s. c. of Panama, following the coast 
of the Pacific ocean, from cape S. Miguel to cape 
Coricntes, we find the small port and bay of Cu pica, 
which has acquired celebrity, on account of a new 
plan of communication between the two seas. 
See this article, (CupicA). 

7. In the interior of the province of Choco, the 
small ravine (quebrada) DC la lluspadura, unites 
the neighbouring sources of the Rio de Nonnama, 
called also Rio San Juan, and the small river 
Quito. The latter, the Rio Andageda, and the 
Rio Zitara, form the Rio d Alrato, which dis 
charges itself into the Atlantic ocean, while the 



Rio San Juan flows into the S. sea. A monk of 
great activity, cure of the village of Novita, em 
ployed his parishioners to dig a small canal in the 
ravine De la Raspadura, by means of which, when 
the rains are abundant, canoes loaded with cacao 
pass from sea to sea. This interior communica 
tion has existed since 1788, unknown in Europe. 
The small canal of Raspadura unites, on the coasts 
of the two oceans, two points 75 leagues distant 
from one another. 

8. In lat. 10 s. two or three days journey from 
Lima, we reach the banks of the Rio Guallaga (or 
Huallaga), by which we may without doubling 
cape Horn arrive at the banks of tin; Grand Para 
in Brazil. The sources even of the Rio llnanuco, 
which runs into the Guallaga, arc only four or five 
leagues distant from the source of the Rio Huaura, 
which flows into the Pacific ocean. The Rio 
Xauxa, also, which contributes to form the 
Apuremac and the Ucayale, has its rise near the 
source of the Rio Rimac. The height of the 
cordillera, and the nature of the ground, render the 
execution of a canal impossible ; but the construc 
tion of a commodious road, from the capital of 
Peru to the Rio de Huanuco, would facilitate the 
transport of goods to Europe. The great rivers 
Ucayale and Guallnga would carry in five or six 
weeks the productions of Peru to the mouth of the 
Amazons, and to the neighbouring coasts of Europe, 
while a passage of four months is requisite to con 
vey the same goods to the same point, in doubling 
cape Horn. The cultivation of the fine regions 
situated on the e. declivity of the Andes, and the 
prosperity and wealth of their inhabitants, depend 
on a free navigation of the river of the Amazons. 
This liberty, denied by the court of Portugal to the 
Spaniards, might have been acquired in the sequel 
to the events which preceded the peace of 1801. 

9. Before the coast of the Patagonians was suf 
ficiently known, the gulf of St. George, situated 
between the 45 and the 47 of*, lat. was supposed 
to enter so far into the interior of the country, as 
to communicate with the arms of the sea which 
interrupt the continuity of the w. coast, that is to 
say, with the coast opposite to the archipelago of 
Chayamapu. Were this supposition founded on 
solid bases, the vessels destined for the S. sea might 
cross S. America 7 to the n. of the straits of Magel 
lan, and shorten their route more than 700 leagues. 
In this way, navigators might avoid the dangers 
which, notwithstanding the perfection of nautical 
science, still accompany the voyage round cape 
Horn and along the Patagoniau coast, from cape 
Pilares to the parallel of the Chonos islands. 
These ideas, in 1790, occupied the attention of] 



MEXICO. 



[the court of Madrid. M. Gil JLemos, viceroy of 
Peru, an upright and zealous administrator, equip 
ped a small expedition under the orders of M. 
Moraleda, to examine the 5. const of Chile. The 
aforesaid person visited the archipelagos of Chiloe 
and Chonos, and the TO. coast of the Patagonians, 
from 1787 down to 1796. Two very interesting 
manuscripts, drawn up by M. Moraleda, are to 
be found in the archives of the viceroy alty of 
Lima : the title of the one is, Viage id Recono- 
cimiento de /as Islas de Chiloe , 1786; the other 
comprehends the Reconocimlento dd Archipelago 
de los Chonos y Costa occidental Patagonica, 
1792 1796. Curious and interesting extracts 
might be published from these journals, which 
contain details regarding the cities De los Cesares 
and De 1 Arguello, which are said to have been 
founded in 1554, and are placed by apocryphal 
accounts between 42 and 49 of 5. lat. Ilumboldt 
saw the instructions the above person received at 
Lima, which recommended to him the greatest 
secrecy in case he should be happy enough to 
discover a communication between the two seas. 
But M. Moraleda discovered in 1793, that the 
Estero de Aysen, visited before him in 1763 by 
the Jesuits, Fathers Jose Garcia and Juan Vicuna, 
was, of all the arms of the sea, that in which the 
waters of the ocean advance the farthest towards 
the e. Yet it is but eight leagues in length, and 
terminates at the isle De la Cruz, where it receives 
a small river, near a hot spring. Hence the canal 
of Aysen, situated in the 45 28 of lat. is still 88 
leagues distant from the gulf of St. George. This 
gulf was exactly surveyed by the expedition of 
Malaspina. In the year 1746 a communication was, 
in the same manner, suspected in Europe between 
the bay of St. J ulien(lat. 50 53 )and the Greatocean. 
M. Humboldt has sketched in one plate the 
nine points which appear to afford means of com 
munication between the two oceans, by the junc 
tion of neighbouring rivers, either by canals or 
carriage-roads between the places where the rivers 
become navigable. These sketches are not of equal 
accuracy, astronomically considered ; but he 
wished to save the reader the labour of seeking in 
several maps what may be contained in one ; and 
it is the duty of* the government which possesses 
the finest and most fertile part of the globe to 
perfect what he has merely hinted at in this dis 
cussion. Two Spanish engineers, MM. Le Maur, 
drew up superb plans of the canal De los Guines, 
projected for traversing the whole island of Cuba, 
from Batabano to the Havanab. A similar sur 
vey of the isthmus of Gunsacualco, the lake Nica 
ragua, of the country between Cruces and Panama, 



and between Cupica and the Rio Naipi, would 
direct the statesman in his choice, and enable him 
to decide, if it is at Mexico or Darien that this 
undertaking should be executed ; an undertaking 
calculated to immortalize a government occupied 
with the true interests of humanity. 

The long circumnavigation of S. America would 
then be less frequent ; and a communication would 
be opened for the goods which pass from the At 
lantic ocean to the S. sea. The time is past (as 
observes M. de Fleurieu, in his learned notes on 
the Voyage de Marchand, t. i. p. 566) " \?hen 
Spain, through a jealous policy, refused to other 
nations a thoroughfare through the possessions of 
which she so long kept the world in ignorance." 
Those who are at present at the head of the 
government are enlightened enough to give a 
favourable reception to the liberal ideas proposed 
to them ; and the presence of a stranger is no 
longer regarded as a danger for the country. 

Should a canal of communication be opened be 
tween the two oceans, the productions of Nootka 
sound and of China will be brought more than 
2000 leagues nearer to Europe and the United 
States. Then only can any great changes be ef 
fected in the political state of e. Asia, for this 
neck of land, the barrier against the waves of the 
Atlantic ocean, has been for many ages the bulwark 
of the independence of China and Japan. 

CHAP. XI. 
Glance on the coast of the Great ocean, which 

extends from the port of San Francisco and from 

cape Mendocino to the Russian establishments 

in Prince William s sound. 

THE whole of this coast has been visited since 
the end of the 16th century by Spanish naviga 
tors ; but it has only been carefully examinedliy 
order of the viceroys of New Spain since 1774. 
Numerous expeditions of discovery have followed 
one another up to 1792. The colony attempted to 
be established by the Spaniards at Nootka fixed 
for some time the attention of all the maritime 
powers of Europe. A few sheds erected on the 
coast, and a miserable bastion defended by swivel 
guns, and a few cabbages planted within an enclo 
sure, were very near exciting a bloody war be 
tween Spain and England ; and it was only by the 
destruction of the establishment founded at the 
island of Quadra and of Vancouver, that Macuina, 
the toys or prince of Nootka, was enabled to 
preserve his independence. Several nations of 
Europe have frequented these latitudes since 1786, 
for the sake of the trade in sea otter skins ; but 
their rivalry has had the most disadvantageous] 



MEXICO. 



215 



[consequences both for themselves and the natives 
of the country. The price of the skins as they 
rose on the coast of America fell enormously in 
China. Corruption of manners has increased 
among the Indians ; and by following the same 
policy by which the African coasts have been 
laid waste, the Europeans endeavoured to take 
advantage of the discord among the tays. Several 
of the most debauched sailors deserted their ships 
to settle among the natives of the country. At 
Nootka, as well as at the Sandwich islands, the 
most fearl ul mixture of primitive barbarity with 
the vices of polished Europe is to be observed. It 
is difficult to conceive that the few species of roots 
of the old continent transplanted into these fertile 
regions by voyagers, which figure in the list of the 
benefits that the Europeans boast of having bestow 
ed on the inhabitants of the S. sea islands, have 
proved any thing like a compensation for the real 
evils which they introduced among them. 

At the glorious epochu in the lulli century, when 
the Spanish nation, favoured by a combination of 
singular circumstances, freely displayed the re 
sources of their genius and the force of their 
character; the problem of a passage to the n. w. 
and a direct road to the E. Indies, occupied the 
minds of the Castilians with the same ardour dis 
played by some other nations within these 30 or 
40 years. We do not allude to the apocryphal 
voyages of Ferrer Maldonado, Juan de Fuca, and 
Bartolome Fonte, to which for a long time only 
too much importance was given. The most part 
of the iui postures published under the names of 
these three navigators were destroyed by the labo 
rious and learned discussion of several officers of the 
Spanish marine. (See Memoirs of Don Ciriaco 
Cevallos. Researches into the Archives of Seville, 
by Don Augustin Cean. Historical Introduction 
to the Voyage of Galiano and Valdes, p. xlix. Ivi. 
and Ixxvi. Ixxxiii.) In place of bringing for 
ward names nearly fabulous, and losing ourselves 
in the uncertainty of hypotheses, we shall confine 
ourselves to indicate here what is incontestibly 
proved by historical documents. The following 
notices, partly drawn from the manuscript memoirs 
of Don Antonio Bonillaand M. Casasola, preserved 
in the archives of the viceroyalty of Mexico, pre 
sent facts which, combined together, deserve the 
attention of the reader. These notices displaying, 
as it were, the varying picture of the national 
activity, sometimes excited and sometimes palsied, 
will no doubt be interesting. 

The names of Cabrillo and Gali are less cele 
brated than Fuca and Fonte. The true recital of 
a modest navigator has neither the charm nor the 



power which accompany deception. Juan Ro 
driguez Cabrillo visited the coast of New California 
to the 37 10 , or the Punta del Arlo Nuevo, to the 
w. of Monterey. He perished (on the 3d January 
1543) at the island of San Bernardo, near the chan 
nel of Santa Barbara, according to the manuscript 
preserved in the Archivo-general de Indias at Ma 
drid. But Bartolome Ferrelo, his pilot, continued 
his discoveries n. to the 43 of lat. when he saw 
the coast of cape Blanc, called by Vancouver cape 
Orford. 

Francisco Gali, in his voyage from Macao to 
Acapulco, discovereed in 1582 the n. w. coast of 
America under the 57 30 . He admired, like all 
those who since his time have visited New Cornwall, 
the beauty of those colossal mountains, of which the 
summit is covered with perpetual snow, while their 
bottom is covered with the most beautiful vegeta 
tion. On correcting the old observations bj the 
new, in places of which the identity is ascertained, 
we find that Gali coasted part of the archipelago 
of the Prince of Wales, or that of King George. 
Sir Francis Drake only went as far as the 48 of 
lat. to the n. of cape Grenville in New Georgia. 

Of the two expeditions undertaken by Sebastian 
Viscayno in 1596 and 1602, the last only was 
directed to the coast of New California. Thirty- 
two maps, drawn up at Mexico by the cosmogra- 
pher Henry Martinez, prove that Viscayno surveyed 
those coasts with more care and more intelli 
gence than was ever done by any pilot before him. 
The diseases of his crew, the want of provision, 
and the extreme rigour of the season, prevented 
him, however, from ascending higher than cape 
S. Sebastian, situated under the 42 of lat. a little 
to the n. of the bay of the Trinity. One vessel of 
Viscayno s expedition, the frigate commanded by 
Antonio Florez, alone passed cape Mendocino. 
This frigate reached the mouth of a river in the 
43 of lat. which appears to have been already 
discoved by Cabrillo in J543, and which was be 
lieved by Martin de Aguilar to be the w. extremity 
of the straits of Anian. We must not confound 
this entry or river of Aguilar, which could not be 
found again in our times, with the mouth of the 
Rio Colombia (lat. 46 15 ) celebrated from the 
voyage of Vancouver, Gray, and Captain Lewis. 

The brilliant epocha of the discoveries made 
anciently by the Spaniards on the n. w. coast of 
America ended with Gali and Viscayno. The 
history of the navigations of the 17th century, and 
the first half of the 18th, offers us no expedition 
directed from the coast of Mexico to the immense 
shore from cape Mendocino to the confines of e. 
Asia. In place of the Spanish the Russian flag] 



MEXICO. 



[was alone seen to float in these latitudes, waving on 
the vessels commanded by two intrepid navigators, 
Bering and Tschiricow. 

At length, after an interruption of nearly 170 
years, the court or* Madrid again turned its atten 
tion (o the coast of the Great ocean. But it was 
not alone the desire of discoveries useful to science 
which roused the government from its lethargy. 
It was rather the fear of being attacked in its most 
n. possessions in New Spain ; it was the dread of 
seeing European establishments in the neighbour 
hood of those of California. Of all the Spanish 
expeditions undertaken between 1774- and 1792, 
the two last alone bear the true character of 
expeditions of discovery. They were commanded 
by officers whose labours display an intimate 
acquaintance with nautical astronomy. The names 
of Alexander Malaspina, Galiano, Espinosa, V ai 
des, and Vernaci, will ever hold an honourable 
place in the list of the intelligent and intrepid 
navigators to whom we owe an exact knowledge 
of the n. to. coast of the new continent. If their 
predecessors could not give the same perfection 
to their operations, it was because, setting out from 
San Bias or Monterey, they were unprovided with 
instruments and the other means furnished by 
civilized Europe. 

The first important expedition made after the 
voyage of Viscayno was that of Juan Perez, who 
commanded the corvette Santiago, formerly called 
La Nueva Galicia. As neither Cook nor Barring- 
ton, nor M. de Fleurieu, appear to have had any 
knowledge of this important voyage, we shall here 
insert several facts extracted from a manuscript 
journal, which was kept by two monks, Fray 
Juan Crespi, and Fray Tomas de la Peila, and for 
which Humboldt was indebted to the kindness of 
M. Don Guillermo Agirirre, a member of the audi- 
encia of Mexico. Perez and his pilot, Estevan 
Jose Martinez, left the port of San Bias on the 
24th January 1774. They were ordered to exa 
mine all the coast from the port of San Carlos de 
Monterey to the 60 of latitude. After touching 
at Monterey they set sail again on the 7th June. 
They discovered on the 20th July the island De 
la Marguerite (which is the n. ID. point of Queen 
Charlotte s island), and the strait which separates 
this island from that of the Prince of Wales. On 
the 9th August they anchored, the first of all the 
European navigators, in Nootka road, which they 
called the port of San Lorenzo, and which the il 
lustrious Cook four years afterwards called King 
George s sound. They carried on barter with the 
natives, among whom they saw iron and copper. 
They gave them axes and knives for skins and 



otter furs. Perez could not land on account of tho 
rough weather and high seas. His sloop was even 
on the point of being lost in attempting to land ; 
and the corvette was obliged to cut its cables and 
to abandon its anchors to get into the open sea. 
The Indians stole several articles belonging to M, 
Perez and his crew; and this circumstance, re 
lated in the journal of Father Crespi, may serve 
to resolve the famous difficulty attending the Eu 
ropean silver spoons found there by Captain Cook 
in 1778 in the possession of the Indians of Nootka. 
The corvette Santiago returned to Monterey on 
the 27th of August 1774, after a cruise of eight 
months. 

In the following year a second expedition set 
out from San Bias, under the command of Don 
Bruno Heceta, Don Juan de Ayala, and Don Juan 
de la Bodega y Quadra. This voyage, which 
singularly advanced the discovery of the n. w. 
coast, is known from the journal of the pilot Mau- 
relle, published by M. Barrington and joined to 
the instructions of the unfortunate La Perouse. 
Quadra discovered the mouth of the Rio Co 
lombia, called Entrada de Heceta, the Pic of San 
Jacinto (mount Edgecumbe), near Norfolk bay, 
and the fine port of Bucareli (lat. 55 24% which 
from the researches of Vancouver we know to be 
long to the w. coast of the great island of the ar 
chipelago of the Prince of Wales. This port is 
surrounded by seven volcanoes, of which the 
summits, covered with perpetual snow, throw up 
flames and ashes. M. Quadra found there a 
great number of dogs which the Indians use for 
hunting. Humboldt states to have in h is posses 
sion two very curious small maps, engraved in 
1788, in the city of Mexico, which give the bear 
ings of the coast from the 17 to the 58 of lati 
tude, as they were discovered in the expedition of 
Quadra. One of these maps is entitled, u Cart a 
geografica dc la costa occidental de la California, 
situada al Norte de la linea sobre el mar Asiatico 
que se discubrio en los anos de 1769 y 1775, por el 
Teniente de Navio, Don Juan Francisco de Bodega 
y Quadra y por el Alferez de Fragata, Don Jose 
Canizares desdelos 17hastalos58grados." On this 
map the coast appears almost without entradas 
and without islands. In this we remark L Ense- 
nada de Ezeta (Rio Colombia) and L Entrada de 
Juan Perez, but under the name of the port of 
Sari Lorenzo (Nootka), seen by the same Perez in 
1774. The other is called " Plan del gran puerto 
de San Francisco discubierto por Don Jose de 
Canizares en el mar Asiatico." Vancouver dis 
tinguishes the ports of St. Francis, Sir Francis 
Drake, and Bodega, as three different ports, M.] 



M E X I C O. 



217 



[ de Fleuricu considers them as identical. Voyage 
de Marchand, vol. i. p. 54. Quadra believes, as 
we have already observed, that Drake anchored at 
the port De la Bogeda. 

The court of Madrid gave orders in 1776 to the 
viceroy of Mexico, to prepare a new expedition 
to examine the coast of America to the 70 of n. 
latitude. For this purpose two corvettes were 
built, La Princesa and La Favorita ; but this 
building experienced such delay, that the expe 
dition, commanded by Quadra and Don Ignacio 
Arteaga, could not set sail from the port of San 
Bias till the llth February 1779. During this 
interval Cook visited the same coast. Quadra and 
the pilot Don Francisco Maurelle carefully exa 
mined the port De Bucareli, the Mont Sant Elie, 
and the island De la Magdalena, called by Van 
couver Hinchinbrook island (lat. 60 25 ), situ 
ated at the entry of Prince William s bay, and 
the island of Regla, one of the most sterile islands 
in Cook river. The expedition returned to San 
Bias on the 21st November 1779. We find from 
a manuscript procured at Mexico, that the schis 
tous rocks in the vicinity of the port of Bucareli 
in Prince of Wales s island contaia metalliferous 
seams. 

The memorable war which gave liberty to a 
great part of N. America, prevented the viceroys 
of Mexico from pursuing expeditions of discovery 
to the n. of Mendocino. The court of Madrid 
gave orders to suspend the expeditions so long as 
the hostilities should endure between Spain and 
England. This interruption continued even long 
after the peace of Versailles ; and it was not till 
1788 that two Spanish vessels, the frigate La Prin 
cesa, and the packet-boat San Carlos, commanded 
by Don Esteban Martinez and Don Gonzalo Lo 
pez de Haro, left the port of San Bias with the 
design of examining the position and state of the 
Russian establishments on the n. w. coast of Ame 
rica. The existence of these establishments, of 
which it appears that the court of Madrid had no 
knowledge till after the publication of the third 
voyage of the illustrious Cook, gave the greatest 
uneasiness to the Spanish government. It saw 
with, chagrin that the fur trade drew numerous 
English, French, and American vessels towards a 
coast which, before the return of Lieutenant King 
to London, had been as little frequented by Eu 
ropeans as the land of the Nuyts, or that of Eri- 
dracht in New Holland. 

The expedition of Martinez and Haro lasted 
from the 8tli March to the 5th of December 1788. 
These navigators made the direct route from San 
Bias to the entry of Prince William, called by the 

VOL. III. 



Russians the gulf Tschugatskaja. They visited 
Cook river, the Kichtak (Kodiak) islands, Schu- 
magin, Unimak, and Unalaschka (Onalaska). 
They were very friendly treated in the different 
factories which they found established in Cook 
river and Unalaschka, and they even received 
communication of several maps drawn up by the 
Russians of these latitudes. Humholdt found in 
the archives of the viceroyalty of Mexico a large 
volume in folio, bearing the title of Jieconorimiento 
de los quatros establecimienlos Ritssos al Norte de 
la California^ hecho en 1788. The historical ac 
count of the voyage of Martinez contained in this 
manuscript furnishes, however, very few data re 
lative to the Russian colonies in the new conti 
nent. No person in the crew understanding a 
word of the Russian language, they could only 
make themselves understood by signs. They for 
got, before undertaking this distant expedition, to 
bring an interpreter from Europe. The evil was 
without remedy. However, M. Martinez would 
have had as great difficulty in finding a Russian 
in the whole extent of Spanish America as Sir 
George Staunton had to discover a Chinese in 
England or France. 

Since the voyages of Cook, Dixon, Portlock, 
Mears, and Duncan, the Europeans began to con 
sider the port of Nootka as the principal fur 
market of the n. w. coast of N.America. This 
consideration induced the court of Madrid to do 
in 1789 what it could easier have done 15 years 
sooner, immediately after the voyage of Juan 
Perez. M. Martinez, who had been visiting the 
Russian factories, received orders to make a solid 
establishment at Nootka, and to examine carefulty 
that part of the coast comprised between the 50 
and the 55 of latitude, which Captain Cook could 
not survey in the course of his navigation. 

The port of Nootka is on the e. coast of an 
island, which, according to the survey in 1791 by 
MM. Espinosa and Cevallos, is 20 marine miles in 
breadth, and which is separated by the channel of 
Tasis from the great island, now called the island 
of Quadra and Vancouver. It is therefore equally 
false to assert that the port of Nootka, called by 
the natives Yucuatl, belongs to the great island of 
Quadra, as it is inaccurate to say that cape Horn 
is the extremity of Tierra del Fuego. It was 
an extraordinary misconception in the illustrious 
Cook in converting the name of Vucuatl into 
Nootka, this last word being unknown to the na 
tives of the country, and having no analogy to 
any of the words of their language excepting 
noutchi, which signifies mountain. It would ap 
pear, however, from what is said of Captain Cook] 

F F 



218 



MEXICO. 



[by Mr. King, that his ear was by no means very 
accurate in distinguishing sounds. 

Don Esteban Martinez, commanding the frigate 
La Princesa, and the packet-boat San Carlos, 
anchored in the port of Nootka on the 5th May 
1789. He was received in a very friendly man 
ner by the chief Macnina, who recollected very 
well having seen him with M. Perez in 1774, and 
who even shewed the beautiful Monterey shells 
which were then presented to him. Macuina, the 
fays of the island of Yncuatl, has an absolute au 
thority; he is the Monteznrna of these countries ; 
and his name has become celebrated among all 
the nations who carry on the sea-otter skin trade. 
\Ve know not if Macuina yet lives; but it was 
said at Mexico in the end of 1803, that, more 
jealous of his independence than the king of the 
Sandwich islands, who has declared himself the 
vassal of England, he was endeavouring to procure 
fire-arms and powder to protect himself from the 
insults to which he was frequently exposed by Eu 
ropean navigators. See NOOTKA. 

Martinez did not carry his researches beyond 
the 50 of latitude. Two months after his entry 
into the port of Nootka he saw the arrival of an 
English vessel, the Argonaut, commanded by 
James Colnet, known by his observations at the 
Galapagos islands. Colnet showed the Spanish 
navigator the orders which he had received from 
his government to establish a factory at Nootka, 
to construct a frigate and a cutter, and to prevent 
every other European nation from interfering with 
the fur trade. It was in vain Martinez replied, 
that long before Cook, Juan Perez had anchored 
on the same coast. The dispute which arose be 
tween the commanders of the Argonaut and the 
Princesa was on the point of occasioning a rup 
ture between the courts of London and Madrid. 
Martinez, to establish the priority of his rights, 
made use of a violent and very illegal measure : 
he arrested Colnet, and sent him by San Bias to 
the city of Mexico. The true proprietor of the 
Nootka country, the Toys Macuina, declared him 
self prudently Sfor the vanquishing party; but the 
viceroy, who deemed it proper to hasten the recal 
of Martinez, sent out three other armed vessels in 
the commencement of the year 1790 to the n. w. 
coast of America. 

Don Francisco Elisa, and Don Salvador Fi- 
dalgo, the brother of the astronomer who sur 
veyed the coast of S. America, from the mouth 
of the Dragon to Portobello, commanded this new 
expedition. M. Fidalgo visited Cook creek and 
Prince William s sound, and he completed the 
examination of that coast, which was only after 



wards examined by the intrepid Vancouver. 
Under the 60 54 of latitude, at the n. extre 
mity of Prince William s sound, M. Fidalgo was 
witness of a phenomenon, probably volcanic, of 
a most extraordinary nature. The Indians con 
ducted him into a plain covered with snow, where 
he saw great masses of ice and stone thrown up to 
prodigious heights in the air with a dreadful noise. 
Don Francisco Elisa remained at Nootka to en 
large and fortify the establishment founded by 
Martinez in the preceding year. It was not yet 
known in this part of the world, that by a treaty 
signed at the Escurial on the 28th October 1790, 
Spain had desisted from her pretensions to Nootka 
and Cox channel in favour of the court of Lon 
don. The frigate Dedal us, which brought orders 
to Vancouver to watch over the execution of this 
treaty, only arrived at the port of Nootka in the 
month of August 1792, at an epocha when Fi 
dalgo was employed in forming a second Spanish 
establishment to the s. e. of the island of Quadra 
on the continent, at the port of Nunez Gaona, or 
Quinacamet, situated under the 48 20 of latitude, 
at the creek of Juan dc Fuca. 

The expedition of Captain Elisa was followed 
by two others, which, for the importance of their 
astronomical operations, and the excellence of the 
instruments with which they were provided, may 
be compared with the expeditions of Cook, La 
Perouse, and Vancouver. We mean the voyage 
of the illustrious Malaspina in 1791, and that of 
Galiano and Valdes in 1792. 

The operations of Malaspina and the officers 
under him embrace an immense extent of coast 
from the month of the Rio de la Plata to Prince 
William s sound. But this able navigator is still 
more celebrated for his misfortunes than his dis 
coveries. After examining both hemispheres, and 
escaping all the dangers of the ocean, he had still 
greater to suffer from his court; and he dragged 
out six years in a dungeon, the victim of a political 
intrigue. Fie obtained his liberty from the French 
government, and returned to his native country ; 
and he enjoys in solitude on the banks of the Arno 
the profound impressions which the contemplation 
of nature and the study of man under so many 
different climates have left on a mind of great sen 
sibility, tried in the school of adversity. 

The labours of Malaspina remain buried in the 
archives, not because the government dreaded 
the disclosure of secrets, the concealment of which 
might be deemed useful, but that the name of this 
intrepid navigator might be doomed to eternal ob 
livion . Fortu nately the d irectors of theDeposito Hy- 
drograficoof Madrid, (established by a royal order] 



MEXICO. 



219 



[on the 6th August 1797), have communicated to 
the public the principal results of the astronomical 
observations of Malaspina s expedition. The 
charts which have appeared at Madrid since 1799 
are founded in a great measure on those important 
results ; but instead of the name of the chief, we 
merely find tie names of the corvettes La Descu- 
bierta and La Atrevida, which were commanded 
by Malaspina. 

His expedition, which set out from Cadi/ on 
the 30th July 1789, only arrived at the port of 
Acapulco on the 2d February 1791. At this pe 
riod the court of Madrid again turned its attention 
to a subject which had been under dispute in the 
beginning of the 17th century, the pretended straits 
by which Lorenzo Ferrer Maldonado passed in 
1588 from the Labrador coast to the Great ocean. 
A memoir read by M. Buache at the Academy of 
Sciences revived the hope of the existence of such 
a passage ; and the corvettes La Descubierta and 
L Atrevida received orders to ascend to high lati 
tudes on the n. w. coast of America, and to ex 
amine all the passages and creeks which interrupt 
the continuity of the shore between the 53 and 60 
of latitude. Malaspina, accompanied by the bo 
tanists Haenkeand Nee, set sail from Acapulco on 
the 1st May 1791. After a navigation of three 
weeks he reached cape S. Bartholomew, which 
had already been ascertained by Quadra in 1775, 
by Cook in 1778, and in 1786 by Dixon. He 
surveyed the coast from the mountain of San Ja- 
cinto, near cape Edgecurnbe (Cabo Engano), lat. 
57 1 SO 7 to Montagu island, opposite the entrance 
of Prince William s sound. During the course of 
this expedition, the length of the pendulum and 
the inclination and declination of the magnetic 
needle were determined on several points of the 
coast. The elevation of S. Elie and mount Fair- 
weather (or Cerrode Buen Tempo), which are the 
principal summits of the Cordillera of New Nor 
folk, were very carefully measured : the height of 
the former is 17,850, and of the second 14,992 
iect. The knowledge of their height and position 
may be of great assistance to navigators when 
they are prevented by unfavourable weather from 
seeing the sun for whole weeks ; for by seeing 
these pics at a distance of 80 or 100 miles, they 
may ascertain the position of their vessel by simple 
elevations and angles of altitude. 

After a vain attempt to discover the straits men 
tioned in the account of the apocryphal voyage of 
Maldonado, and after remaining some time at 
port Mulgrave, in Bering s bay, (lat. 59 34 20 ), 
Alexander Malaspina directed his course s. He 
anchored at the port of Nootka on the IStb August, 



sounded the channels round the island of Yucuatl, 
and determined by observations purely celestial 
the positions of Nootka, Monterey, and the island 
of Guadeloupe, at which the galleon of the Philip 
pines (La Nao de China), generally stops, and 
cape San Lucas. The corvette La Atrevida en 
tered Acapulco, and the corvette La Descubierta 
entered San Bias in the month of October 1791. 

A voyage of six months was no doubt by no 
means sufficient for discovering and surveying an 
extensive coast with that minute care which we 
admire in the voyage of Vancouver, which lasted 
three years. However, the expedition of Malas 
pina has one particular merit, which consists not 
only in the number of astronomical observations, 
but also in the judicious method employed for at 
taining certain results. The longitude and latitude 
of four points of the coast, cape San Lucas, Mon 
terey, Nootka, and port Mulgrave, were ascer 
tained in an absolute manner. The intermediate 
points were connected with these fixed points 
by means of four sea-watches of Arnold. Tin s 
method, employed by the officers of Malaspina s 
expedition, MM. Espinosa, Cevallos, and Vernaci, 
is much better than the partial corrections usually 
made in chronometrical longitudes by the results 
of lunar distances. 

The celebrated Malaspina had scarcely returned 
to the coast of Mexico, when, discontented with 
not having seen at a sufficient nearness the extent 
of coast from the island of Nootka to cape Mcn- 
docino, he engaged Count de Revillagigedo, the 
viceroy, to prepare a new expedition of discovery 
towards the n. w. coast of America. The viceroy, 
who was of an active and enterprising disposition, 
yielded with so much the greater facility to this 
desire, as new information, received from the 
oiliccrs stationed at Nootka, seemed to give proba 
bility to the existence of a channel, of which the 
discovery was attributed to the Greek pilot, Juan de 
Fuca, in the end of the IGth century. Martinez 
had indeed, in 1774, perceived a very broad open 
ing under the 48 20 of latitude. This openino- 
was successively visited by the pilot of the Gei&amp;gt; 
trudis, by Ensign Don Manuel Quimper, who 
commanded the biiander La Princesa Real, and in 
1791 by Captain Elisa. They even discovered se 
cure and spacious ports in it. It was to complete 
this survey that the galeras Sutil and Mexicana 
left Acapulco on the 8th March 1792, under the 
command of Don Dionisiso Galiano and Don 
Cayetano Valdes. 

These able and experienced astronomers, ac 
companied by MM. Salamanca and Vernaci, 
sailed round the large island which now bears the! 

J 



2*0 



MEXICO. 



[name of Quadra and Vancouver, and they em 
ployed four months in this laborious and danger 
ous navigation. After passing the straits of Fuca 
and Haro, they fell in with, in the channel Del 
Rosario, called by the English the gulf of 
Georgia, the English navigators Vancouver and 
Broughton, employed in the same researches with 
themselves. The two expeditions made a mutual 
and unreserved communication of their labours ; 
they assisted one another in their operations ; and 
there subsisted among them till the moment of 
their separation a good intelligence and complete 
harmony, of which, at another epocha, an example 
had not been set by the astronomers on the ridge 
of the cordilleras. 

Galiano and Valdes, on their return from Noot- 
ka to Monterey, again examined the mouth of the 
Ascencion, which Don Bruno Eceta discovered on 
the 17th August J775, and which was called the 
river of Colombia by the celebrated American na 
vigator Gray, from the name of the sloop under 
his command. This examination was of so much 
the greater importance, as Vancouver, who had 
already kept very close to this coast, was unable to 
perceive any entrance from the 45 of latitude to 
the channel of Fuca ; and as this learned naviga 
tor began then to doubt of the existence of the Rio 
de Colombia, or the Entrada de Eceta. 

Jn 1797 the Spanish government gave orders 
that the charts drawn up in the course of the ex 
pedition of MM. Galiano and Valdes should be 
published, " in order that they might be in the 
hands of the public before those of Vancouver." 
However, the publication did not take place till 
1802 ; and geographers now possess the advan 
tage of being able to compare together the charts 
of Vancouver, those of the Spanish navigators pub 
lished by the Deposito Hydrografico of Madrid, 
and the Russian chart published at Petersburg!! in 
1802, in the depot of the maps of the charts of 
the emperor. This comparison is so much the 
more necessary, as the same capes, the same pas 
sages, and the same islands, frequently bear three 
or four different names ; and geographical syno- 
nomy has by that means become as confused as the 
synonomy of cryptogameous plants has become 
from an analogous cause. 

At the same epocha at which the vessels Sutil 
and Mexicana were employed in examining, in 
the greatest detail, the shore between the parallels 
of 45 and 51, the Count de Revillagigedo des 
tined another expedition for higher latitudes. 
The mouth of the river of Martin de Aquilar had 
been unsuccessfully sought for in the vicinity of 
cape Orford and cape Gregory. Alexander Ma- 



laspina, in place of the famous channel De Maldo- 
nado, had only found openings without any out 
let. Galiano and Valdes had ascertained that the 
strait of Fuca was merely an arm of the sea, 
which separates an island of more than 1700 
square leagues, that of Quadra and Vancouver, 
from the mountainous coast of New Georgia. The 
extent of this island, calculated according to the 
maps of Vancouver, is 1730 square leagues, of 25 
to the sexagesimal degree. It is the largest island 
to be found on this w. coast of America. There 
still remained doubts as to the existence of the 
straits, of which the discovery was attributed to 
admiral Fuentes or Fonte, which was supposed to 
be under the 53 of latitude. Cook regretted his 
want of ability to examine this part of the conti 
nent of New Hanover ; and the assertions of Cap 
tain Colnet, an able navigator, rendered it ex 
tremely probable that the continuity of the coast 
was interrupted in these latitudes. To resolve a 
problem of such importance, the viceroy of New 
Spain gave orders to Lieutenant Don Jacinto Caa- 
mano, commander of the frigate Aranzazu, to ex 
amine with the greatest care the shore from the 
51 to the 56 of n. latitude. M. Caamano set 
sail from the port of San Bias on the 20th March 
1792 ; and he made a voyage of six months. He 
carefully surveyed the n. part of Queen Charlotte s 
island, the s. coast of the Prince of Wales s island, 
which he called Isla deUlloa, the islands of Re 
villagigedo, of Banks (or De la Calamidad), and 
of Aristizabal, and the great inlet of Monino, the 
mouth of which is opposite the archipelago of Pitt.. 
The considerable number of Spanish denomina 
tions preserved by Vancouver in his charts proves 
that the expeditions, of which we have given a 
summary account, contributed in no small degree 
to our knowledge of a coast, which, from the 45 
of latitude to cape Douglas, to the e. of Cook s 
creek, is now more accurately surveyed than the 
most part of the coasts of Europe. 

We have now given all the information which 
we could procure with regard to the voyages 
undertaken by the Spaniards, from J553 to our own 
times, towards the w. coast of Nueva Esparia to 
then, of New California. The assemblageof these 
materials appears to us to be necessary in a work 
embracing whatever concerns the political and 
commercial relations of Mexico. 

The geographers, who are eager to divide the 
world for the sake of facilitating the study of their 
science, distinguish on the n. w. coast an English 
part, a Spanish part, and a Russian part. These 
divisions have been made without consulting the 
chiefs of the different tribes who inhabit these! 
1 



MEXICO. 



221 



fci/mtries! If the puerile ceremonies which the 
Europeans call taking possession, and if astrono 
mical observations made on a recently discovered 
coast, could give rights of property, this portion of 
the new continent would be singularly pieced out 
and divided among the Spaniards, English, Rus 
sians, French, and Americans. One small island 
would sometimes be shared by two or three na 
tions at once, because each might have discovered 
a different cape of it. The great sinuosity of the 
coast between the parallels of 55 and 60 embraces 
the successive discoveries of Gali, Bering, and 
Tschirekow, Quadra, Cook, La Perousc, Malas- 
pina, and Vancouver ! v- 

No European nation has yet formed a solid 
establishment on the immense extent of coast from 
cape Memlocino to the 59 of latitude. Beyond 
this limit the Kussian factories commence, the most 
part of which are scattered and distant from one 
another, like the factories established by European 
nations for these last 300 years on the coast of 
Africa. The most part of these small Russian co 
lonies have no communication with one another 
but by sea ; and the new denominations of Rus 
sian America, or Russian Possessions in the New 
Continent, ought not to induce us to believe that 
the coast of the basin of Bering, the peninsula 
Alaska, or the country of the Tscbugatschi, have 
become Russian provinces, in the sense which we 
give to this word, speaking of the Spanish provinces 
of Sonora or New Biscay. 

The w. coast of America affords the only ex 
ample of a shore of 1900 leagues in length, in 
habited by one European nation. The Spaniards^ 
as we have already indicated in the commence 
ment of this work, have formed establishments 
from fort Maullin in Chile to S. Francis in New 
California. To the w. of the parallel of 38 suc 
ceed independent Indian tribes. It is probable 
that these tribes will be gradually subdued by the 
Russian colonists, who, towards the end of the 
last century, passed over from the e. extremity of 
Asia to the continent of America. The progress 
of these Russian Siberians towards the s. ought na 
turally to be more rapid than that of the Spanish 
Mexicans towards the n. A people of hunters, 
accustomed to live in a foggy and excessively 
cold climate, find the temperature of the coast of 
New Cornwall very agreeable ; but this coast ap 
pears an uninhabitable country, a polar region, to 
colonists from a temperate climate, from the fer 
tile and delicious plains of Sonora and New Cali 
fornia. 

The Spanish government since 1788 has begun 
to testify uneasiness at the appearance of the Rus 



sians on the n. w. coast of the new continent. Con 
sidering every European nation in the light of a 
dangerous neighbour, they examined the situation 
of the Russian factories. The fear ceased on its 
being known at Madrid that these factories did not 
extend e. beyond Cook s inlet. When the Em 
peror Paul, in 1799, declared war against Spain, 
it was some time in agitation at Mexico to prepare 
a maritime expedition in the ports of San Bias and 
Monterey against the Russian colonies in Ame 
rica. If this project had been carried into execu 
tion we should have seen at hostilities two nations, 
who, occupying the opposite extremities of Eu 
rope, approach each other in the other hemisphere 
on the e. and w. limits of their vast empires. 

The interval which separates these limits be 
comes progressively smaller ; and it is for the po 
litical interest of Nueva Espana to know accurately 
the parallel to which the Russian nation has al 
ready advanced towards the e. and s. A manu 
script which exists in the archives of the vice- 
royalty of Mexico, and which was seen by Hum- 
boldt, gave him only, vague and incomplete no 
tions. It describes the state of the Russian esta 
blishments as they were 20 years ago. M. Malte 
Brun, in his Universal Geography, gives an inte 
resting article on the n. w. coast of America. He 
was the first who made known the account of the 
voyage of Billings, (entitled, " Account of the 
geographical and astronomical expedition under 
taken for exploring the coast of the Icy sea, the 
land of the Tshutski, and the islands between Asia 
and America, under the command of Captain 
Billings, between the years 1785 and 1794, by 
Martin Sauer, secretary to the expedition. Putet- 
chestwie flota-kapitana Sarytschewa po severowo- 
stochnoi tschasti sibiri, ledowitawa mora, i wos- 
tochnogookeana, 1804,") published by M.Saryts- 
chew, which is preferable to that of M. Sauer. 
The following account of the Russian factories is 
extracted from an official document, being a chart 
of discoveries successively made by Russian navi 
gators in the Pacific ocean, and in the Icy sea, 
published in 1802. It shews the same to be merely 
collections of sheds and huts, that serve, however, 
as emporiums for the fur trade. 

On the coast nearest to Asia, along Bering s 
straits, between the 67 and 64 10 of latitude, 
under the parallels of Lapland and Iceland, we find 
a great number of huts frequented by the Siberian 
hunters. The principal posts, reckoning from n. 
to s. are, Kigiltach, Leglelachtok, Tuguteri, 
Netschich, Tchinegriun, Cliibalech,Topar, Pinte- 
pata, Agulichan, Chavani, and Nugran, near 
cape Rodney (Cap du Parent). These habitations] 



M E X I C O. 



Their small villages are called 



f of the natives of Russian America are only from 
30 to 40 leagues distant from the huts of the 
Tchoutskis of Asiatic Russia. The straits of 
Bering, \vhich separate them, are filled -with desert 
islands, of vvhicli the most n. is called Imaglin. 
The n. e. extremity of Asia forms a peninsula, 
which is only connected with the great mass of the 
continent by a narrow isthmus between the two 
gulfs Mitschigmen and Kaltschin. The Asiatic 
coast which borders the straits of Bering is peopled 
by great numbers of cetaceous mummiferi. On 
this coast the Tchoutskis, who live in perpetual 
\var with the Americans, have collected together 
their habitations. 
Nukan, Tugulan, and Tschigin. 

Following the coast of the continent of America 
from cape Rodney and Norton creek to cape Ma- 
lowodan, cape Littlewater, we find no Russian 
establishment ; but the natives have a great num 
ber of huts collected together on the shore between 
the 63 20 and 60 5 of latitude. The most n. of 
their habitations are Agibaniach and Chalmiagmi, 
and the most s. Kuynegach and Kuyrnin. 

The bay of Bristol, to the n. of the peninsula 
Alaska (or Aliaska) is called by the Russians the 
gulf Kamischezkaia. They in general preserve 
none of the English names given by Captain Cook 
and Captain Vancouver, in their charts, to the w. 
of the 55 of latitude. They choose rather to give 
no names to the two great islands which contain 
the Pic Trubizin (the mount Edgecumbe of Van 
couver, and Cerro de San Jacinto of Quadra), and 
cape Tschiricof (cape San Bartholome), than 
adopt the denominations of King George s Archi 
pelago, and Prince of Wales s Archipelago. 

The coast from the gulf Kamischezkaia to New 
Cornwall is inhabited by five tribes, who form as 
many great territorial divisions in the colonies of 
Russian America. Their names are Koniagi, Ke- 
nayzi,Tschugatschi, Ugalachmiuti, and Koliugi. 

The most n. part of Alaska, and the island of 
Kodiak, vulgarly called by the Russians Kichtak, 
though Kightak, in the language of the natives, in 
general means only an island, belongs to the Ko 
niagi division. A great interior lake of more than 
26 leagues in length, and 12 in breadth, communi 
cates by the river Igtschiagick with the bay of 
Bristol. There are two forts and several factories 
on the Kodiak island (Kadiak), and the small ad 
jacent islands. The forts established by Scheli- 
koff bear the name of Karl uk and the Three Sancti- 
fiers. M. Malte Brun says, that according to the 
latest information, the Kichtak archipelago was 
destined to contain the head place of all the Russian 
settlements. Sarytschew asserts, that there are a bi 



shop and Russian monastery in the island of Umanak 
(Umnak). We do not know whether there has been 
any similar establishment elsewhere ; for the chart 
published in 180^ indicates no factory either at Um 
nak, Unitnak, or Unalaschka. It is, however, 
read at Mexico, in the manuscript journal of Mar 
tinez s voyage, that the Spaniards found several 
Russian houses, and about 100 small barks, at the 
island of Unalaschka in 1788. The natives of the 
peninsula Alaska call themselves the men of the 
east (Kagataya-Koung ns). 

The Kenayzi inhabit the w. coast of Cook creek, 
or the gulf Kenayskia. The Rada factory, 
visited by Vancouver, is situated there under the 
61 8 . The governor of the island of Kodiak, 
a Greek named Ivanitsch Delareff, assured M. 
Saner, that, notwithstanding the rigour of the cli 
mate, grain would thrive well on the banks of 
Cook river. He introduced the cultivation of 
cabbages and potatoes into the gardens at Kodiak. 

The Tschugatschi occupy the country between 
the n. extremity of Cook inlet and the e. of Prince 
William s bay (Tschugatskaia gulf.) There are 
several factories and three small forts in this dis 
trict : fort Alexander, near the mouth of port 
Chatham, and the forts of the Ttik islands, Green 
island of Vancouver), and Tchalca (Hinchinbrook 
island). 

The Ugalachmiuti extend from the gulf of 
Prince William to the bay of Jakutal, called by 
Vancouver Bering s bay ; and here we must not 
confound the bay of Bering of Vancouver, situated 
at the foot of mount St. Elie, with the Bering s 
bay of the Spanish maps, near mount Fairwcather 
(Nevado de Buentiempo.) Indeed, without an ac 
curate acquaintance with geographical synonymy, 
the Spanish, English, Russian, aud French works 
on the n. w. coast of America, are almost unintel 
ligible ; and it is only by a minute comparison of 
the maps that this synonymy can be fixed. The 
factor of St. Simon is near cape Suckling, (cape 
Elie of the Russians). It appears that the central 
chain of the cordilleras of New Norfolk is consi 
derably distant from the coast at the Pic of St. 
Elie ; for the natives informed M. Barrow, who 
ascended the river Madnaja (Copper river) lor a 
length of 500 werst (120 leagues), that it would 
require two days journey n. to reach the high 
chain of the mountains. 

The Koliugi inhabit the mountainous country 
of New Norfolk, and the n. part of New Corn 
wall. The Russians mark Burrough bay on their 
charts (latitude 55 50 ) opposite the Revillagigedo 
island of Vancouver (Isla de Gravina of the Spa 
nish maps), as the most s. and e. boundaries of the] 



MEXICO. 



["extent of country of \vhich they claim the pro- 
j&amp;gt;erty. It appears that the great island of the 
King George archipelago has, in fact, been ex 
amined with more care and more minutely by the 
Russian navigators than by Vancouver. Of this 
we may easily convince ourselves by comparing 
attentively the u\ coast of this island, especially 
the environs of cape Trubizin (cape Edgecumbe), 
and of the port of the Archangel St. Michael, in Sitka 
bay(theNorfolksonnd ol the English, and Tchinki- 
tane bay of Mnrchnnd), on the charts published at 
Petersburg!! in the imperial depot, in 1802, and on 
the charts of Vancouver. The most s. Russian esta 
blishment of this district of the Koliugi is a small for 
tress (crnposl) in the bay of Jakutal, at the foot of 
the cordillera which connects mount Fairweather 
with Mont St. Elie, near port Mulgrave, under the 
59 27 of latitude. The proximity of mountains 
covered with eternal snow, arid the great breadth 
of the continent from the 58 of latitude, render 
the climate of this coast of New Norfolk, and the 
country of the Ugalachmiuti, excessively cold and 
inimical to the progress of vegetation. 

When the sloops of the expedition of Malas- 
pina penetrated into the interior of the bay of Ja 
kutal as far as the port of Desengano, they found 
the n. extremity of the port under the 59 of lati 
tude covered in the month of July with a solid 
mass of ice. We might be inclined to believe that 
this mass belonged to a glacier which terminated 
in high maritime Alps; but Mackenzie relates, that 
on examining the banks of the slave lake, 250 
leagues to the e. under 61 of latitude, he found 
the lake wholly frozen over in the month of June. 
The difference of temperature observable in general 
on the e. and w. coast of the new continent, appears 
only to be very sensible to the s* of the parallel of 
53, which passes through New Hanover and 
the great island of Queen Charlotte. 

There is nearly the same absolute distance from 
Petersburg!! to the most e. Russian factory on 
the continent of America, as from Madrid to the 
port of San Francisco in New California. The 
breadth of the Russian empire embraces under the 
60 of latitude an extent of country of nearly 2400 
leagues ; but the small fort of the bay of Jakutal 
is still more than 600 leagues distant from the most 
n. limits of the Mexican possessions. The natives 
of these n. regions have, for a long time, been 
cruelly harassed by the Siberian hunters. Wo 
men and children were retained as hostages in the 
Russian factories. The instructions given by the 
Empress Catharine to Captain Billings, drawn up 
by the illustrious Pallas, breathe the spirit of phi 
lanthropy, and .the most noble sensibility. The 



present government is seriously occupied in dimi 
nishing the abuses, and repressing the vexations ; 
but it is difficult to prevent these evils at the extre 
mities of a vast empire; and the American is 
doomed to feel every instant his distance from the 
capital. Moreover, it appears more than proba 
ble that before the Russians shall clear the interval 
which separates them from the Spaniards, some 
other enterprising power will attempt to establish 
colonies either on the coast of New Georgia, or 
on the fertile islands in its vicinity.]} 

Chronological series of the Indian Emperors of 
Mexico. 

1. Acamapictli, the first king of the Mexicans; 
elected when tjiey established themselves on the 
lake; he married Jlanqueitl, daughter of the king 
Acolmictli of Cohuetitlan, and having no heir, 
he married a second time with Tezcatiamiahuatl, 
daughter of the noble Tetepnnco ; he reigned 20 
years with much despotism, refused to be tributary 
to the king of Azcapuzalco, and being engaged 
all his life in keeping up a spirit of harmony 
among his vassals, died not without great fame. 

2. Hutzizhuitl, son of the former ; who obtained 
the crown not by hereditary right, but through the 
election of the elders and chiefs of the republic; 
he married Ayanhzihuatl, daughter of the king of 
Azcapuzalco, and following the maxims- of his 
father, took for his second wife Miahuaxochitl, 
daughter of Texcaeahualtzin, king of Quauhna- 
huac, so that these two princes uniting their force 
became the most formidable power of all the other 
nations : this emperor nominated as captain-gene 
ral of his armies Qnatlecohualtzin, his brother; ex 
pressed his abhorrence at the inhumanity of Maxtla, 
in slay ing his infant son, Acolnahucatl ; and reigned 
happily for 22 years. 

3. Chimalpopoca, brother of the former, who 
suffered the greatest indignities from his brother- 
in-law Maxtln, emperor of Azcapuzalco, who, 
after having deceived Chimalpopoca, violated one 
of his wives, and then fled ; Chimalpopoca, irri 
tated at this, sent back to his brother-in-law a pre 
sent of some women s garments, instead of the re 
gular tribute, saying that these were more fitting 
to him than bows and arrows : this conduct, of 
course, irritated the emperor, and knowing that 
Chimalpopoca had made a conspiracy against his 
life, determined to seize him ; when Chimalpo 
poca, not being able to resist the force brought 
against him, had recourse to solicit the protection 
of his god Huitzilopochtli, together with his 
nobles, making a festival on the occasion, which 
he was on the eve of celebrating when the troops 
of Maxtla entered the city and took him prisoner, 



224 



MEXICO. 



He was immediately confined in prison, and very 
scantily supplied with food, and at last, to deprive 
his enemy of the triumph of killing him, put an 
end to his own existence. 

4. Izcohuatl, son of the former king Acamapictli, 
elected on account of the valour and credit he had 
manifested whilst captain-general of the armies ; 
being born of a female slave, he was legitimized 
by his father, and was 46 years old when he took 
the sceptre in his hands ; he governed with great 
prudence, and was one of the happiest of the 
Mexican kings: he conquered many provinces, 
gained many battles, and he revenged the affronts 
offered to his predecessor, destroying the empire 
of the Tapanecas in one battle, through the death 
of Maxtla, who flying before the victors, took re 
fuge in some baths called Tcmascal, and here he 
was killed by means of poles and stones. Izco 
huatl, full of triumphal honours, and after having 
greatly extended the kingdom, built the temple of 
the idol Chihuacohuatl, which means mother- 
snake, and in the year following the famous tem 
ple of Huitzilopochtli, the first god of the Mexi 
cans : shortly afterwards he was attacked with an 
infirmity, and died in a few days. 

5. Moctecuhzuma, the first of this name, which 
means angry man ; he was also called Ilhuicamina, 
or the man who shoots arrows to heaven ; he was 
captain-general of the army, when he was elected 
through his merit and brilliant valour : his first care, 
after he was elected king, was to build a temple and 
a house to the lying deity of the demon in the ward 
called Huitznahuac, and thinking that his domi 
nions were too small, he extended them by the 
conquests of the provinces of Chalco, Tlatilalco, 
Cohuixca, Ozllomantlaca, Cuezalteca, Ichatezi- 
panteca, Teoxahualcas, conquering all the natives 
of these provinces, as well as those of Tlachco and 
Tlachmalac. Returning from the conquests of the 
latter, he enlarged the temple and habitation of 
his chief god Huitzilopochtli, adorning it with the 
spoils of victory, and returned to a campaign 
against the Chihpenecas, the Quauhteopan, 
and Tzumpahuacan, rendering these also sub 
ject to him. Alter this be reigned nine years in 
peace and quietness, when the waters of the lake 
rose to such an height as to run through the whole 
city ; he having then consulted with the king of 
Tezcuco concerning a remedy, had just finished 
surrounding the city with a dry wall when the Spa 
niards arrived. To this misfortune succeeded 
another of a distressing famine, also the rebellion 
of Chalco and some other provinces, which were 
always very jealous of this powerful prince : at 
last he died, crowned with victories, in the 29th 



year of his reign, according to the computation 
of the Mexicans, giving wise regulations respect 
ing the election of his successor. 

6. Axayacatl, Avho exercised the office of cap 
tain-general, and thought worthy from his valour 
of ascending the throne; he was not less prospe 
rous than his predecessor, and although the Father 
Acosla, Herrera, and other historians, do not place 
him in the sixth order of succession as he stands 
here, and make him the son of the former, the 
contrary is the case, according to the Mexican an 
nals, written in their own types and figures, and 
of whose chronology ours is a counterpart. This 
emperor made tributary to him the Tlatelulcos, 
and various other kings and chiefs, and was taken 
in a battle which he was fighting against the Oto- 
mies of the kingdom of Xiquipilco ; he was al 
ways the first in dangers and the last to fly, a 
stranger to fear, and inclined rather to inhumanity 
than to clemency ; he at last died full of glory. 

7. Tizoc, the seventh king of the Mexicans, 
elder brother of Axayacatl, on the election of whom 
to the empire, the present became captain-general, 
and was actually filling this post when chosen to 
the throne. Although he was not so warlike and 
courageous as his predecessors, yet he had a war 
with the Indians of TIacotepec, and came oft vic 
torious; after this he dedicated himself to peace 
and to religious culture, determining to build 
another still more sumptuous temple to Huitzilo 
pochtli ; and for this end had collected immense 
quantities of materials, when his death, which 
happened about three years after he had projected 
this undertaking, put an end to his views ; he died 
by some wounds which were given him by some 
women at the instigation of Tichotlela, a noble of 
Iztapalapan, and who were sent to him for that 
purpose, and not by his vassals on account of 
their being disgusted at his effeminate habits, as 
Acosta pretends ; for, were it so, the women who 
inflicted the murder would not have been put to 
death for their crime, as was, in fact, the case. 

8. AhuizotI, brother of the former ; also graced 
with the title of captain-general ; he -began his 
reign by busying himself in the completion of the 
temple of the god Huitzilopochtli, and afterwards 
declared war against the Mazahuas, who had re 
belled, and having conquered these he turned his 
arms against the Tziuhcoacas and Topacnecas, of 
the province of Xalisco, keeping the prisoners of 
these campaigns and of that of Tlacapan for sacri 
fice in the dedication of the temple, the number of 
them, as it is said, amount ing to 72,000. In the 
4th year of his reign Mexico experienced a dread 
ful earthquake, to which followed an inundation 



MEXICO. 



of the city by the overflowing of the waters of the 
lake ; and in order to guard more effectually against 
a like misfortune, another stone wall was made, 
which also served to divide the salt-water from the 
fresh : he endeavoured to bring to Mexico the 
water of Huitzilopuchco, putting to death Tzut- 
zumatzin for contradicting and telling him that in 
so doing he would drown Mexico; and when this 
proved to be the case, he was so angry at his own 
weakness that he struck himself a blow which he 
had afterwards cause to repent. In the mean time, 
however, he extended his dominions throughout 
nearly the whole of Nueva Espana as far as Gua 
temala ; discovered the quarry of the tezontli- 
stone, of which the houses of the city are built, 
and were then beautified ; and after a reign of 18 
years, and being reputed the greatest monarch that 
had reigned in that kingdom, died from the effects 
of the blow he had struck himself, although three 
years after, to the universal regret of his vassals, 
and was succeeded in the throne by, 

9. Moctecuhzuma, the second of this name, 
the I Oth in the series of the kings, and not the 
Jlth, as we are wrongly informed by the chro- 
nologer Don Antonio de Solis ; he was son of the 
King AxayacatI, and nephew of Tizoc and Ahui- 
zotl ; he was elected r because from his reputation 
he was thought likely to equal his predecessor; 
he was very grave and demure ; it was looked 
upon as a miracle if he spoke, and yet when he 
made a speech in the council of state, of which he 
was a member, his eloquence caused universal 
admiration. He was generally shut up in a great 
caipul or saloon, which he had destined for him 
self in the grand temple of Huitzilopochtli, with 
whom he was said to have frequent commune, and 
to whom he was priest; and when he received 
intelligence of his election to the throne he was 
in the act of sweeping the temple. His first act 
was to sally forth to the punishment of the province 
of Atlixco, which was in a state of rebellion. On 
his return thence, his real character appeared, and 
he manifested a great degree of haughtiness and 
hypocrisy. lie declared war against the republic 
of Tlaxcala, in which he uniformly met with bad 
success ; and, when he had reigned four years, a 
most distressing famine was suffered it) his king 
dom : he renovated tlie aqueduct by which the 
water was conveyed to the city, fortifying and 
enlarging the causeway ; he afterwards had con 
tinual wars, in which he subjected many provinces, 
and extended the limits of his empire as far as the 
provinces of Honduras and Nicaragua ; he was 
looked up to and feared on all sides, and had 
reigned 18 years when he received news of the 

VOL. III. 



arrival of the Spaniards under Hernan Cortes upon 
the coast ; he received them with kindness and 
affection, and died from a wound which he had 
received by a stone throAvn at the Spaniards from 
the Indians, as he was going to a party of the 
latter to order them to lay down their arms. 

10. Ciiitlahuatlan, and not Guatimozin, as the 
Spanish historians have it: this emperor was the 
brother of the former, elected as soon as the death 
of the other was known, and whilst the Mexicans 
were at war with the Sp;iniards ; he followed up 
the war with great eagerness ; but his reign was of 
short duration, for, when the city was in the 
greatest danger, he escaped by the lake with u 
numerous fleet of canoes ; but was soon afterwards 
made prisoner, lost his kingdom, and then his life ; 
since jlernan Cortes ordered him to be strangled 
in his journey to Honduras, having found that he 
had attempted to regain the empire, alter that he 
had acknowledged for its emperor, and sworn 
homage to, Charles V. 

Catalogue of the Archbishops who have pre 
sided in Mexico. 

1. Don Fr. Juan de Zumarraga, of the order of 
San Francisco, native of the town of Durango in 
Vizcaya ; he was guardian of his convent of 
Abrogo, and withdrawn from thence by the Em 
peror Charles V. through the fame of his heroic 
virtues ; presented to be first bishop, and after 
wards archbishop of the holy cathedral of Mexico; 
heat first refused, but afterwards accepted this office 
in 1527 ; his holiness granted him the pall in 1545. 
So great was his piety and his virtue that he haiL 
a vision of the Most Holy Virgin, to whom he 
dedicated the first hermitage ; he died in 1548, at 
the advanced age of 80, having in his life confirm 
ed no less than 14,50.0 Indians. 

2. Don Jr. Alonso de Montufar, of the order of 
preachers, native of the city of Loja in the king 
dom of Granada ; he was prior of his convent of 
Santa Cruz, califirador of the holy office, elevated 
to the dignity of this archbishopric in 155 1 , labour 
ed with indefatigable zeal, celebrated two provincial 
councils, one in 1555, the other in 1561, perfected 
the hermitage of Nuestra Seiiora de Guadalupe^ 
and died, alter a long illness, in 1569. 

3. Don Pedro de Moya y Contreras, native of 
Cordoba, doctor in sacred canons in the university 
of Salamanca, maestre-escuela in the holy church 
of Canaria, inquisitor of Murcia, and founder of 
the church of Mexico, elected archbishop in 1573 , 
he celebrated a third provincial council in 1585, 
and owing to the skill and ability manifested by 
him, the king was induced to charge him with the 
visitation of the whole kingdom, and with the 

G G 



226 



MEXICO. 



office of viceroy ami captainship-general through 
th death of the Count of Coruiia ; he was called 
to Spain to give an account of his visitation, and 
the king being satisfied thereat, conferred on him 
the presidency of the supreme council of the 
Indies : a few months after that he died, in 1591. 

4. Don Alonso Fernandez Bonilla, also native of 
Cordoba, inquisitor, fiscal of the holy tribunal of 
Mexico, dean of its holy church, bishop of Gua- 
dalaxara in Nueva Galicia, nominated visitor- 
general of Peru, .which office he filled with great 
credit ; and presented to the bishopric by King 
Philip II. in 1592 ; after having been consecrated 
in Lima, he received orders to pass over to the 
city of Quito to pacify the disturbances which 
had been raised by the establishment of the Alca- 
bala ; but he died before he had proceeded on his 
journey. 

5. Don Fr. Garcia de Santa Maria y Mendoza, 
of the order of San Geronimo, native of Alcaia de 
Hcnares, of the house of the Dukes of Infijntado ; 
prior of the royal monastery of the Escorial, 
general of his order, executor to King Don Philip 
II. and presented to the archbishopric of Mexico 
by King D. Philip III. in 1600 ; he accepted this 
office rather by compulsion, and manifested such 
zeal in the discharge of his duty, that he under 
went excessive labours during the six years of his 
government, in the reformation of the clergy and 
in the defence of the ecclesiastical immunity ; he 
was a religious, charitable, and pious man, and 
died in apostolic fame in 1606. 

6. Don Fr. Garcia Guerra, of the order of St. 
Domingo, native of the town of Fromesta in the 
bishopric of Palencia ; he was prior and master of 
the province in his convent of Valladolid, and 
presented to this archbishopric in 1607 ; governed 
with singular ability as well in ecclesiastical as 
secular concerns, as he was also nominated viceroy ; 
endowed a monthly charity for persons of decayed 
fortune in the church of JN ucstra Senora de Gua- 
dalupe, and died in consequence of a fall which 
he had in getting into his carriage, in 1611. 

7. Don Juan Perez de la Serna, native of the 
town of Cervcra, in the bishopric of Cuenca, 
collegiate of San Antonio de Sigueriza, and in 
the coleg/o mayor of Simla Cruz de Valladolid, 
professor in the same, and magisterial canon of the 
church of Zamora ; elected archbishop in 1613, 
a charge which he managed with such skill that 
he left behind him the reputation of a most excel 
lent pastor ; he was, accordingly, a great favourite 
with the chief pontiff, who wrote to him many letters 
of endearment. lie had made himself beloved by 
his subjects, and used to give them alms with his 



own hands, removed the body of the venerable 
servant of God, Gregorio Lopez, and published, 
at his own expence, the third provincial council 
that was celebrated by his predecessor ; blessed 
the second chapel which was dedicated to the 
Virgin of Guadalupe in 1622 ; and such were his 
merits, that the king wishing to have him nearer to 
himself, removed him to the bishopric of Zamora, 
where he died in 1631. 

8. Don Francisco Manso y Zuiliga, native of 
the town of Canas in the bishopric of Calahorra, 
collegiate in the colegio mayor of Santa Cruz de 
Valladolid, evening lecturer of sacred canons in that, 
university, cidor of the chancery of Granada ; of the 
council of his Majesty in the real hacienda, or royal 
revenues, and in the supreme council of the Indies ; 
abbot of San Adian, chief priest of La Rioja and 
o f Camero Viejo in that church, and presented 
to this bishopric by Senor Don Felipe IV. in 
1629 ; he manifested his ardent zeal in the succour 
which he afforded at the inundation of Mexico in 
1630, going out himself in a canoe to distribute 
food, nor less anxious for the common good in the 
plague which succeeded ; he was promoted to the 
archbishopric of Badajoz and Cartagena, and to 
the commissariate of the holy crusade, to the 
archbishopric of Burgos, and to a seat in the 
council of the Indies, his Majesty having conferred 
upon him the title of Conde de Ilervias and Viz- 
conde de Ncgueruela. 

9. Don Francisco Verdugo, native of the city 
of Carmona, collegiate of Santa Maria de Jesus 
in Sevilla, morning lecturer in sacred canons, in 
quisitor of Lima, and bishop of Guamanga ; pre 
sented to the archbishopric of Mexico, but he died 
in that city before he received the bulls. 

10. Don Feiiciano de la Vega, native of Lima, 
jubilee morning lecturer in sacred canons, canon 
of that holy church and chanter, prOvisor and 
vicar-general of the archbishopric, judge of the 
appeals of its suffragans ; elected bishop of Popay- 
an and Vera Cruz in 1628, and presented to this 
metropolitan bishopric of Mexico in 1638; he 
was a man of consummate learning, as his works 
testify, and equally great in his apostolic zeal. 
As to his qualifications, it will be enough to ob 
serve, that, of the 4000 opinions that he had given, 
not one of them lias been revoked ; lie did not 
take possession of the bishopric, having died be 
fore he entered it at Mazatlan, 30 leagues from 
Acapulco, in 1610. 

11. The venerable Senor D. Juan de Pa la fox y 
Mendoza, bishop of La Pnebla de los Angeles ; pro 
moted to this bishopric, which he did not accept. 

12. Don Juan de Manozca, native of Marquina 



MEXICO. 



227 



in Vizcaya, collegiate of the royal and most ancient 
college of Bartolome el Viejo of Salamanca, first 
inquisitor of Cartagena cle Irulias, afterwards of 
Lima, and of La Suprerua, and president of the 
chancery of Granada ; presented to this bishopric 
in 1643; he died in 1654. 

13. Don Marcelo Lopez cle Azcona, abbot of 
Roncesvalles ; presented to the archbishopric the 
aforesaid year, 1653, and he died a few days after 
taking possession. 

14. Don Mateo de Sagade Burgueiro, native of 
Pontevedra in Galicia, collegiate in the colegio 
mayor of Santa Cruz de Valladolid, professor of 
arts in that of Durango, and of sacred writings in 
the university there ; magisterial canon in the holy 
churches of Astorga and of Toledo, and elected 
archbishop of Mexico in 1655 ; he was a most 
strenuous defender of the ecclesiastical jurisdiction, 
and was presented by his Majesty to the bishopric 
of Cadiz in 1662; shortly afterwards to that of 
Leon, and lastly to the church of Cartagena ia 
1663, where he died in 1672. 

15. Don Diego Osorio de Escobar y Llamas, 
native of Cortina in Galicia, advocate of the royal 
councils, canonical doctor of the church of Toledo, 
inquisitor-general of its archbishopric ; of the coun 
cil of the government of his most excellent the 
Senor Cardinal of Sandoval j bishop of La Puebla 
de los Angeles in 1656, arid in 1664 viceroy, go 
vernor, and captain-general of Nueva Espana ; 
elected archbishop, which dignity, although he 
refused, he kept till the arrival of a successor. 

16. Don Alonso de Cueva y Davalos, native of 
Mexico, magisterial canon, treasurer, and arch 
deacon of the church of La Puebla, dean of this 
metropolitan church, bishop of Oaxaca, a man of 
illustrious birth and singular virtues ; but who dial 
before he took the pall, in 1665: he was interred 
in the same cathedral in which he was baptized. 

17.. Don Fr. Marcos Ramirez de Prado, of the 
order of San Francisco, native of Madrid ; was 
bishop of Chiapa and Mechoacan, visitor of the 
.tribunal of the holy crusade in Nueva Espafia ; 
promoted to this archbishopric in 1666, entered to 
take possession with universal jubilee, and whilst 
expectation was alive to see the effects of that 
wonderful ability which had graced all his other 
stations, he died in the following year without re 
ceiving the pall. 

18. Don Fr. Payo Enriquez de Rivera, of the 
order of San Agustin, native of Sevilla, son of the 
Duke of Alcala, prior of various convents, and 
rector of the college of Dona Maria de Aragon in 
Madrid, ca/ificador of the holy ofh ce, bishop of 
Guatemalaand of Mechoacan, and presented to this 



bishopric in 1668 : he was a man extremely mo 
dest and charitable, zealous for ecclesiastical disci 
pline, and was elevated to the supreme command 
of viceroy and captain-general in 1673: his disin 
terested, useful, and pacific government lasted for 
sometime, and having passed over to Spain, where 
he was called to fill the bishopric ofCuenca, he re 
tired to the convent of Nucst.ra Sefiora del Risco 
of his order, close to the city of Avila, where 
bringing "himself to an austere religious life, he 
died in 1684. 

19. Don Manuel Fernandez de Santa Cruz Sa- 
hagun, native of Palencia, collegiate of the college 
of Santa Cruz dc Valladolid, magisterial canon of 
Segovia, elected bishop of Chiapa, Guadalaxara, 
and of La Puebla de los Angeles in 1677 ; pro 
moted to the archbishopric of Mexico in 1680, but 
renounced it together with the viceroyship with 
extreme humility. 

20. Don Francisco de Aguiar, native of the 
town of Betanzos in GftUcia, collegiate of the 
colegio mayor ofCuenca in the university of Sa 
lamanca, magisterial canon of Astorga, peniten 
tiary of Santiago ; presented to the bishopric of 
Mechoacan, and to this bishopric in 1681 ; he pre 
served throughout his life an angelic purity, and 
a modesty foreign to all pride, and so zealous was 
lie in the performance of his duty that he visited 
the whole diocese with excessive fatigue, bringing 
many souls to the bosom of the church : he was 
an example for prelates, being charitable, devout, 
edifying, vigilant in the reform of customs, kind 
to all, and severe only to himself. It was he that 
put on foot the establishing of the college for fe 
male children of San Miguel de Belen, and at his 
solicitude was built the college called the Semi- 
n.irio Tridentino ; he also built the house for the 
reception of mad women, there called De Sayagos, 
was a great benefactor to the house of compassion 
for married women, and laid the first stone of the 
magnificent temple of Guadalupe, and died in 
1698. There are som who speak of his beatifica 
tion, since, even in his life-time, he deserved the 
eulogy of the apostolic see, and of the Cardinal 
Aguirre in the catalogue of the bishops of Mexico. 

21. Don Juan, de Ortega Montanes, native of 
Llanes in the principality of Asturias : he arrived 
through his merits to the bishopric of Durango, 
afterwards to that of Mechoacan, to that of Gua 
temala, and the viceroyalty and captainship-gene 
ral of Nueva Espana ; promoted to this arch 
bishopric in 1701. The integrity with which he 
governed induced his Majesty to entrust to him 
the command for the second time, and through a 
great zeal of finishing the temple of the Virgin of 

u G 2 



228 



MEXICO. 



Guadalupe, he went about personally to collect 
alms for the purpose through the city, and just as 
it was finished and ready to be dedicated he died, 
in 1710. 

22. Don Joseph Lanciego y Eguiluz, native of 
the town of Viana in the kingdom of Navarra, of 
the order of Sari Benito, preacher to his Majesty, 
calificatlor of La Suprema, and abbot of his monas 
tery of Naxcra ; presented to the bishopric in 1711: 
lie governed with great prudence, and with equal 
zeal visited the whole of the bishopric ; erected at 
his own ex pence the greater part of the building 
of the college of Belen, was watchful over the 
chapels of the sanctuary of Nuestra Sciiora, and 
obtained the bull for the erection of the church into 
a collegiate ; he died in 1728. 

23. Don Manuel Joseph de Endaya y Haro, 
native of Luzon in the Philippine isles, master in 
philosophy, and doctor in sacred theology in the 
university of Manila, canon of the holy church of 
Plasencia, archdeacon of Alarcon, dignitary of the 
church of Cuenca ; presented to the bishopric of 
Oviedo, from whence he was called to the council 
which was celebrated by the Pontiff Benedict XIII. 
in 1725, and in which he did the office of bishop, 
assistant, and domestic prelate of the apostolic 
chapel : he was elected bishop of Mexico in 1728, 
and, having already in his hands the bull and the 
sacred pall, died at Benaventa, a town of his dio 
cese, in 1729. 

24. Don Juan Antonio de Lardizabal y Elorza, 
native of Segura in Vizcaya, collegiate-major in 
the old college of San Bartolome de Salamanca, 
professor of philosophy at Durango, and of the 
disciples of Scotus, in that university, magisterial 
canon of that holy church, and elected bishop of 
La Pucbla de los Angeles in 1722 ; promoted to 
this holy metropolitan church in 1727, which dig 
nity he immediately renounced. 

25. Don Juan Antonio de Viznrron y Equiar- 
reta, native of the city and port of Santa Maria, 
titular archdeacon of the holy patriarchal church 
of Sevilla, a principal attendant to his Majesty ; 
elected archbishop of Mexico in 1730, was vice 
roy and captain-general of the kingdom, and, in 
cither employ, paid large sums of money for the 
benefit of his flock in various foundations, perpe 
tual monuments of his good name, as were those 
in particular relating to the chapel in the Colegio 
Tridentino, and the pious work of his having en 



dowed 4000 dollars annually for the support of 
such females as were bringing up for a religious life: 
he received and solemnized the oath of the patroness 
Nuestra Senora de Guadalupe, and died in 1747. 
26. Don Manuel Joseph Rubio y Salinas, na 



tive of Colmenar Viejo in Castilla la Nueva, visitor- 
general of the bishopric of Oviedo, and of the 
abbey of Alcala la Real, chaplain of honour to his 
Majesty, fiscal of his royal chapel, house, and 
court, perpetual abbot of regular canons of San 
Isidro de I/eon ; presented to this bishopric by 
Seiior Don Fernando VI. in 1747; a man of singu 
lar parts, charitable, affable, and zealous tor the 
honour of God ; he erected the beautiful royal col 
lege of Nuestra Senora de Guadalupe, obtained for 
it, of the holy see, the confirmation of an universal 
patronage in N. America, and died in 1765. 

27. Don Francisco Antonio de Lorcnzana y 
Bnitron, collegiate in the colcgio mayor of San Sal 
vador de Oviedo, native of Leon, canon of the 
holy church, primate of Toledo, vicar-general of 
the same place, abbot of St. Vicente, and bishop 
of Plasencia, and from thence removed, through 
his merit, in 1766, to the archbishopric of Mexico, . 
where he governed with the greatest skill and bene- 
volence,when his Majesty elected him to the supreme 
dignity of the archbishopric of Toledo in 1771. 

28. Don Alonso Nunez de Haro y Pcralta, na 
tive of Huete, collegiate-mayor of Bolonia, canon 
of Toledo, and archbishop in 1771. 

[Mexico, Gulf of, is that part of the N. At 
lantic ocean which washes the &amp;lt;?. and s. w. coast of 
Florida, the e. coast of New Leon and New Gal- 
licia, in New Mexico, and the n. e. coast of Old 
Mexico, or New Spain, in N. America. It is 
properly bounded on the n. by the Floridas, and 
on the s. by the gulf of Darien, or perhaps still 
more properly by the n. ic. point of the isthmus 
of Darien, supposing a line to be drawn from one 
to the other. The gulf of Mexico is therefore to 
be considered as the w. part of the great gulf be 
tween the n. and s. continents of America. This 
spacious gulf contains a great many islands of va 
rious extent and size ; and it receives several great 
rivers, particularly the Mississippi, the river-of the 
Nxand a multitude of others of comparatively less 
note. Its coasts are so irregular and indented 
that its lesser gulfs and bays are almost innumer 
able ; the chief of these are the gulf of Honduras 
and Guanajos, and the bays of Campechy, Pa- 
laxay, and St. Louis. It is conjectured by some, 
and we think with great reason, to have been for 
merly land ; and that the constant attrition of the 
waters in the Gulf stream has worn it. to its present 
form. See GULF Stream, and Gulf of FLOHIDA : 



also for a table of the longitudes and latitudes of 
the most important places about this bay, see the 
end of the general preface.] 

MEXICO, NUEVO, another extensive kingdom, 
the most n. part of the dominions of Nueva Espana 



MEXICO. 



2*9 



in America ; bounded s. by (lie province of Du- 
rango, e. by Louisiana, n. I)y unknown regions, 
and w. by the great ridge of stony mountains 
which divide N. America ; is included between 
long. 103 and J07 OC 20 w. and from lat. 31 to 
38 15 . Its length is 4^5 miles from n. to s. and 
its average width about 90 from e. to w. 

The first notice of this country was given by 
some Conchos Indians to the Fr. Agustin Ruiz, 
of the order of Sail Francisco, in 1581 : he accord 
ingly went over to discover it with certain people 
that were sent him from Mexico for that purpose, 
under the command of Antonio dc Espejo. The 
natives, who had already been instructed in the 
Catholic religion by Alvar Nunez de Cabeza de 
Vaca, Andres Dorantes, Bernardino del Castillo, 
and the Negro Estebanico, who had been saved 
from being wrecked in the ship of Panfilo de Nar- 
vaez in Florida, and had traversed the country till 
they arrived at Mexico, received Ruiz and his 
party in an amicable manner, and Espejo bore the 
news of this reception back to Mexico. In 1595, 
during the viceroyship of Don Luis dc Velasco, 
Juan de Oiiate entered to reduce these provinces, 
which were then in a state of rebellion, having put 
to death the governor, and many missionaries who 
were amongst them. 

This kingdom enjoys various temperatures, 
cold, hot, and moderate. It is fertile arid plea 
sant, produces abundance of wheat, maize, deli 
cate fruits and vegetables, and peculiarly fine 
grapes. The mountains are covered with firs, 
oaks of different species, savines, and many other 
frees of different qualities, and from which certain 
portions of wood are cut. Here are found a va 
riety of animals, such as deer, wolves, bears, apes, 
mountain sheep, and a species of deer so large as 
to equal a mule in stature, its horn measuring 
nearly two yards in length. Here arc also many 
singular birds, particularly in the snowy parts, 
where they are caught alive the whole year round, 
being held in great estimation. Although some 
mines have been discovered, yet they have proved 
all of tin. 

The population of this kingdom consists of 30 
settlements of Indians, who are reductions from the 
nations of the Piros, Tiguas, Mansos, Qucrcs, 
Sums, Tolonas, Xernes, Xeres, Picuries, Thanos, 
Pecos, Teguas, Thaos, and Sumas, and are very 
numerous. They are of better appearance as to 
colour and proportion than the other Indians, go 
always clothed, and wear goat-skin shoes, are very 
fond of employment ; and the women, in particu 
lar, arc dextrous in weaving mantles of wool and 
cotton for vesture. They are always on horse 



back, and their dwellings deserve particular at 
tention, as being different from those of any other 
Indians. These are a sort of barracks, from three 
to four stories high, well put together, and having 
no door; the inhabitants getting into an upper 
floor by means of a small ladder, which at night 
they draw up after them, to guard themselves 
from the attacks of the nations which are their 
enemies. These huts are erected opposite to each 
other for the purpose of mutual protection. 

This kingdom has many rivers and streams, but 
the principal and largest is that called Del Norte, 
which passes through the middle of it. The monks 
of the order of San Francisco have converted the 
natives to the Catholic faith, and they have esta 
blished some extensive missions since the year 1660. 
The capital is Santa Ft . 

( Several geographers confound the kingdom, or, 
as Ilumboldt designates it, the province of New 
Mexico with the provincias internets; and they 
speak of it as a country rich in mines, and of vast 
extent. The celebrated author of the Philosophic 
History of the European Establishments in the Two 
Indies has contributed to propagate tins error. Its 
territorial extent has already been accurately given, 
and is much less than people of no great informa 
tion in geographical matters are apt to suppose 
even in that country. The national vanity of the 
Spaniards loves to magnify the spaces, and to re 
move, if not in reality, at least in imagination, the 
limits of the country occupied by them to as great 
a distance as possible. In the memoirs which 
Humboldt procured on the position of the Mexi 
can mines, the distance from Arispetothe Rosario is 
estimated at 300, and from Arispc to Copala*at 400 
marine leagues, without reflecting that the whole 
intendancy of Sonora is not 280 marine leagues in 
length. From the same cause, and especially for 
the sake of conciliating the favour of the court, 
the conquistadors, the missionary monks, and the 
first colonists, gave weighty names to small things. 
We have elsewhere described one kingdom, that 
of Leon, of which the whole population does not 
equal the number of Franciscan monks in Spain. 
Sometimes a few collected huts take the pompous 
title of Villa. A cross planted in the forests of 
Guayana figures on the maps of the missions sent 
to Madrid and Rome, as a village inhabited by 
Indians. It is only after living long in the Spa 
nish colonies, and after examining more narrowly 
these fictions of kingdoms, towns, and villages, 
that the traveller can form a proper scale for the 
reduction of objects to their ju.st value. 

The Spanish conquerors, shortly after the de 
struction of the Aztec empire, set on foot solid] 



230 



MEXICO. 



[establishments in the n. of Anahuac. The town 
of Durango was founded under the administra 
tion of the second viceroy of New Spain, Ve- 
lasco el Primero, in 1559. Jt was then a mili 
tary post against the incursions of the Cliichimec 
Indians. Towards the end of the ]6th century, 
the viceroy, Count de Monterey, sent the valorous 
J nan de Onate to New Mexico. It was this gene 
ral who, after driving off the wandering Indians, 
peopled the banks of the great Rio del Norte. 

From the town of Chihuahua a carriage can go 
to Santa Fe of New Mexico. A sort of caleche is 
generally used, which the Catalonians call volan- 
tes. The road is beautiful and level ; and it 
passes along the e. bank of the Great river (Rio 
Grande), which is crossed at the Paso del Nortc. 
The banks of the river arc extremely picturesque, 
and are adorned with beautiful poplars, and other 
trees peculiar to the temperate zone. 

It is remarkable enough to see that, after the 
lapse of two centuries of colonization, the province 
of New Mexico does not yet join the intendancy 
of New Biscay. The two provinces are separated 
by a desert, in which travellers are sometimes 
attacked by the Cumanches Indians. This desert 
extends from the Paso del Norte towards the town 
of Albuquerque. Before 1680, in which year 
there was a general revolt among the Indians of 
New Mexico, this extent of uncultivated and un 
inhabited country was much less considerable than 
it is now. There were then three villages, San 
Pascual, Semillete, and Socorro, which were si 
tuated between the marsh of the Muerto and the 
town of Santa Fe. Bishop Tarnaron perceived 
the rmns of them in 1760 ; and he found apricots 
growing wild in the fields, an indication of the 
former cultivation of the country. The two most 
dangerous points for travellers are the defile of 
Robledo, w. from the Rio del Norte, opposite the 
Sierra de Dona Ana, and the desert of the Muerto, 
where many whites have .been assassinated by 
wandering Indians. 

The desert of the Muerto is a plain 30 leagues 
in length, destitute of water. The whole of this 
country is in general of an alarming state of 
aridity ; for the mountains De los Mansos, situated 
to the e. of the road from Durango to Santa Fe, 
do not give rise to a single brook. Notwithstand- 
in&amp;lt;r the mildness of the climate, and the progress 
of industry, a great part of this country, as well 
as Old California, and several districts of New 
Biscay, and the intendancy of Guadalaxara, will 
never admit of any considerable population. 

New Mexico, although under the same latitude 
with Syria and central Persia, has a remarkably 
1 



cold climate. It freezes there in the middle of 
May. Near Santa Fe, and a little farther n. 
(under the parallel of the Morea), the Rio del 
Norte is sometimes covered, for a succession of 
several years, with ice thick enough to admit the 
passage of horses and carriages. We are igno 
rant of the elevation of the soil of the province of 
New Mexico ; but Humboldtdoes not believe that, 
under the 37 of lat. the bed of the river is more 
than 7 or 800 metres, or 2296 or 2624 feet, 
of elevation above the level of the ocean. The 
mountains which bound the valley of the Rio del 
Norte, and even those at the foot of which the 
village of Taos is situated, lose their snow towards 
the beginning of the month of June. 

The grcat river of the N. rises in the Sierra 
Verde, which is the point of separation between 
the streams which flow into the gulf of Mexico, 
arid those which flow into the S. sea. It has its 
periodical rises (crecientes) like the Orinoco, the 
Mississippi, and a great number of rivers of both 
continents. The waters of the Rio del Norte be 
gin to swell in the month of April; they are at 
their height in the beginning of May ; and they 
fall towards the end of June. The inhabitants can 
only ford the river on horses of an extraordinary 
size during the drought of summer, when the 
strength of the current is greatly diminished. 
These horses in Peru are called cauallos chimb a- 
dores. Several persons mount at once ; and if the 
horse takes footing occasionally in swimming, this 
mode of passing the river is called passar el rio a 
vofapie. 

The water of the Rio del Norte, like that of 
the Orinoco, and all the great rivers of S. America, 
is extremely muddy. In New Biscay they con 
sider a small river, called Rio I ucrco (nasty river), 
the mouth of which lies s. from the town of Albu 
querque, near Valencia, as the cause of this phe 
nomenon; but M. Tamaron observed that its 
waters were muddy far above Santa Fe and the 
town of Taos. The inhabitants of the Paso del 
Norte have preserved the recollection of a very 
extraordinary event which took place in 1752. 
The whole bed of the river became dry all of a 
sudden for more than 30 leagues above, and 20 
leagues below the Paso ; and the water of the river 
precipitated itself into a newly-formed chasm, and 
only made its re-appearance near the Presidio dc 
San Eleazario. This loss of the Rio del Norte re 
mained for a considerable time ; the fine plains 
which surround the Paso, and which are inter 
sected with small canals of irrigation, remained 
without water; and the inhabitants dug wells in 
the sand, with which the bed of the river was filled.] 



MEXICO. 



231 



|"At length, after the lapse of several weeks, the 
water resumed its ancient course, no doubt be 
cause the chasm and the subterraneous conductors 
had .filled up. This phenomenon bears some 
analogy to a fact which Huniboldt was told by 
the Indians of Jaen dc Bracamoros during his 
stay at Tornependa. In the beginning of the 18th 
century the inhabitants of the village of Puy ay a 
saw, to their great terror and astonishment, the 
bed of the river Amazonas completely dried up 
for several hours. A part of the rocks near the 
cataract (pongo) of Rentema had fallen down 
through an earthquake ; and the waters of the 
Maraiion had stopt in their course till they could 
get over the dike formed by the fall. In the n. 
part of New Mexico, near Taos, and to the n. of 
that city, rivers take their rise which run into the 
Mississippi. The Rio de Pecos is probably the 
same with the Red river of the Natchitoches, aird 
the Rio Napestla is, perhaps, the same river which, 
farther e. takes the name of Arkanas. 

The colonists of this province, known for their 
great energy of character, live in a state of perpe 
tual warfare with the neighbouring Indians. It is 
on account of this insecurity, of the country life 
that we find the towns more populous than we 
should expect in so desert a country. The situa 
tion of the inhabitants of New Mexico bears, in 
many respects, a great resemblance to that of the 
people of Europe during the middle ages. So 
long as insulation exposes men to personal danger, 
we can hope for the establishment of no equili 
brium between the population of towns and that of 
the country. 

However, the Indians who live on an intimate 
footing with the Spanish colonists are by no means 
nil equally barbarous. Those of the e. are war 
like, and wander about from place to place. If 
they carry on any commerce with the whites, it is 
frequently without personal intercourse, and ac 
cording to principles of which some traces are to 
be found among some of the tribes of Africa. The 
savages, in their excursions to the n. of the Bolson 
de Mapimi, plant along the road between Chihua 
hua and Santa Fe small crosses, to which they 
suspend a leathern pocket, with a piece of stag 
flesh. At the foot of the cross a buffalo s hide is 
stretched out. The Indian indicates by these 
signs that he wishes to carry on a commerce of 
barter with those who adore the cross. He offers 
the Christian traveller a hide for provisions, of 
which he does not fix the quantity. The soldiers 
of the presidios, who understand the hieroglyphi- 
cal language of the Indians, take away the buffalo 
hide, and leave some salted flesh at the foot of the 



cross. ( Diario del Jllmo. Set/or Tamaron, MS.) 
This system of commerce indicates at once an 
extraordinary mixture of good faith and distrust. 

The Indians to the w. of the Rio del Norte, be 
tween the rivers Gila and Colorado, form a con 
trast with the wandering and distrustful Indians 
of the savannas to the e. of New Mexico. Father 
Garces is one of the latest missionaries who in 1773 
visited the country of the Moqui, watered by the 
Rio de yaquesila. He was astonished to find 
there an Indian town with two great squares, 
houses of several stories, and streets well laid out, 
and parallel to one another. Every evening the 
people assembled together on the terraces of which 
the roofs of the houses are formed. The construc 
tion of the edifices of the Moqui is the same with 
that of the Casas Grandes on the banks of the Rio 
Gila, of which we have already spoken. The 
Indians who inhabit the n. part of New Mexico 
give also a considerable elevation to their houses, 
for the sake of discovering the approach of their 
enemies. Every thing in these countries appears 
to announce traces of the cultivation of the ancient 
Mexicans. We are informed even by the Indian 
traditions, that 20 leagues n. from the Moqui, near 
the mouth of the Rio Zaguananas, the banks of 
the Nabajoa were the first abode of the Aztecs after 
their departure from Aztlan. On considering the 
civilization which exists on several points of the 
n. w. coast of America, in the Moqui, and on the 
banks of the Gila, we are tempted to believe that 
at the period of the migration of the Toltecs, the 
Acolhues, and the Aztecs, several tribes separated 
from the great mass of the people to establish 
themselves in these n. regions. However," the 
language spoken by the Indians of the Moqui, the 
Yabipais, who wear long beards, and those who 
inhabit the plains in the vicinity of the Rio Colo 
rado, is essentially different from the Mexican 
language; in proof of which assertion, see the tes 
timony of several missionary monks well versed in 
the knowledge of the Aztec language. (Chronica 
Serqfica del Collegia de Queretaro, p. 408.) 

In the 17th century several missionaries of the 
order of St. Francis established themselves among 
the Indians of the Moqui and Nabajoa, who were 
massacred in the great revolt of the Indians in 1680. 
Humboldt states that he had seen in manuscript 
maps drawn up -before that period the name of the 
Provincia del Moqui. 

The province of New Mexico contains three 
rillas or towns, (Santa Fe, Santa Cruz de la Ca 
nada y Taos, and Albuquerque y Alameda), 26 
pueblos or settlements, three parroquias or parishes, 
19 missions, and no solitary farm (rancho).~\ 



232 



M E X- 



[The population in 1803 amounted to 40,200, and 
tlie extent of surface in square leagues is 5709 ; 
the number of inhabitants to the square league be 
ing seven.] 

[MEXICO, a township in Herkemer counly, New 
York, incorporated in 1796, lying on Canada and 
Wood creeks, and Oneida lake.] 

MEXILLONES, a port of the coast of the S. 
sea, in the province and corregimitnlo of Atacama 
and kingdom of Peru. 

MEXILLOKES, an island of the S. sea, situate 
near the coast of the kingdom of Chile, in the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Coquirnbo. It is in 
lat. 29 20 . 

MEXISTLAN, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Chichicatepec, and a/caldia 
mm/or of Villalla, in Nueva Espana. It contains 
62 families of Indians, and is eight leagues s. w. 
of its capital. 

MEXORADA. SeeCoTUY. 
MEXT1TLAN DE LA SIEKIIA, a jurisdic 
tion and akuldia mayor of the kingdom of Nneva 
Espana. Its territory is covered with sierras, 
mountains, and barrancas, and such is its rough 
ness and asperity as to deny all cultivation. This 
sierra is so lofty and extensive that it is known 
throughout the kingdom by the name of Sierra 
Madre de Mextitlan, and is in fact one of the 
largest to be found in those vast regions, and serv 
ing as a boundary to many neighbouring jurisdic 
tions. The productions of this country, and those 
in which a traffic is carried on, are seeds and cot 
ton ; but it is sometimes much in want of water, 
which, as supplied only by a river which runs here, 
is at times so scarce as to put the inhabitants to 
very serious inconvenience. The population con 
sists of 10 principal settlements or head settlements 
of districts, and upon these the following are de 
pendent. 

Mextitlan, Santiago Tepehuacan, 

Sta. Maria Molango, San Lorenzo Ixtacayotla 
Colotlan, Tianguistengo, 

Chapuluacan, Tlanchinol, 

Mextitlan, Zizicaxtla. 

The capital is of the same name, of a mild tempe 
rature, and situate in a fertile and pleasant glen, 
by which runs a river descending from the sierrii, 
its waters being used in irrigating the fields which 
are cultivated on its banks, whenever there may be 
a deficiency of rain. This town contains 2000 
families of Mexican Indians, and 15 or 20 of Spa 
niards, blustees, and Mulattoes ; with a good con 
vent of monks of the order of San Agustin. It is 
f)5 miles e. n. c. of Mexico, in long. 98 2 w. and 
lat. 20 37 n. 



MIA 

MEXTITLAN, another settlement, of the head 
settlement and a/caldia mayor of Compostcla in the 
kingdom of Nueva Galicia ; situate in the island 
of San Sebastian. 

MEYOPONTE, a settlement and real of gold 
mines of the Portuguese, in the kingdom of JSrazil, 
and country of the Guayazas Indians; situate on 
the shore of the river of its name; although Mr. 
D Anville places it on the side of the river Pa- 
ran a iba. 

MLYOPONTE. The above river of the same 
name, which rises in the territory of the Guayazas 
Indians, runs n. and enters the sources of the river 
Tocantines. 

MEZTITLAN, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district and alcafdia mayor of Mex 
titlan in Nueva Espana, annexed to the curacy of 
Molango. It contains 163 families of Indians, and 
lies seven leagues to the e. n. e. of its capital. 

MEZTLA, a small settlement or \\ard of the 
alcaldia mayor of Guauchinango in Nneva Es 
pana, annexed to the curacy of the settlement of 
Tlaola. 

M1ACATLAN, SAN SALVADOR E, a settle- 
men* of the head settlement of the district of Maza- 
catepec, and alcaldia mayor of Cuernavaca, in 
Nueva Espana. It contains 20 families of Indians 
and 19 of Mustees and Mulattoes, who live by 
sowing maize, this being the only produce of the 
place. It is eight leagues w. of its head settle 
ment. 

MIAHUATLAN, a jurisdiction and akatdia 
mayor of Nueva Espana in the province and 
bishopric of Oaxaca ; bounded w. by the corre 
gimiento of this city, and n. by the jurisdiction of 
Cimatlan ; by that of Nexapa on the e. and that 
of Theozaqualco on the s. Its length between e. 
and s. is more than 40 leagues, and its width some 
what less. It consists of 73 settlements without 
those of the smaller wards, and its territory is very 
fruitful, especially in cochineal, which is its prin 
cipal commerce, and which makes it one of the 
best and most desirable atcaldias of the kingdom. 

The capital is a settlement of the same name, 
with the dedicatory title of San Andres. It is of 
a mild and pleasant temperature, inhabited by 615 
families of Indians, including those of the wards 
of its district, and some Spaniards, Mustees, and 
Mulattoes, who live in various estates and farms of 
its district. It abounds in cochineal, in the com 
merce of which there are many rich merchants. 
The flesh of the cattle here, and especially that of 
the sheep, is very delicious, nor are there want 
ing plenty of seeds and fruit. It is 108 leagues 
*. e. of Mexico, in long. 275 15 , and lat. 18 35 . 



MIA 

The principal or head settlements of the district 

arc ns follows : 

S. Luis dc A mat Ian, S. Justo Ot/olotepec, 

Losicha, S. Vicente, 

S. MateodelasS. Pinas, S. Miguel Zuchitepec, 

S. Pablo Coatlan, Santa Catalina, 

Santa Maria Otzolotepec, Seneguia. 

MIAHUATLAN, with the dedicatory title of San 
Joseph, another settlement of the head settlement 
of the district of Naulingo, and alcoldia mayor of 
Xalapa, in the same kingdom ; situate in a moun 
tainous tract, the temperature of which is cold, 
owing to its being near the sierra which lies to the 
n. It is inhabited by 140 families of Indians, de 
dicated to the cultivation of the land, and with the 
productions of this consists the commerce of the 
place. It is one league to the n. n. w. of its head 
settlement. 

MIAHUATLAN, another settlement, of the same 
head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor 
as the former, which in the Mexican tongue sig 
nifies a long ear of maize, from the abundance 
which this soil yields. It contains 72 families of 
Indians, and is two leagues to the n. of its head 
settlement. 

MIAHUATLAN, another, a small settlement or 
ward of the head settlement of the district of Aca- 
tepec, and alcaldia mayor of Thehuacan, in the 
same kingdom. It is close to its head settlement. 

MIALILU, or MAULU, a river of the king 
dom of Chile, being a large arm of the river Dia 
mante, formed by that of the Tennyan and others. 
It runs s. s. e. and enters the Como-Leuvu or 
Gran Desaguadero de los Sauces. 

[MIAMI River, LITTLE, in the N.W. territory, 
has a s. w. course, and empties into the Ohio, on 
the e. side of the town of Columbia, 20 miles e. of 
the Great Miami, in a straight line, but 27 taking 
in the meanders of the Ohio. It is too small for 
batteaux navigation. Its banks are good land, 
and so high as to prevent in common the overflow 
ing of the water. At the distance of 57 miles from 
the Ohio, the Miamis approximate each other 
within eight miles and a half. On this river are 
several salt springs.] 

[MIAMI River, GREAT, or GREAT MINEAMI, 
calkd also ASSEUENIDT, or ROCKY River, in the 
N. W. territory, has a s. by w. course, and empties 
into the Ohio by a mouth 200 yards wide, 32| miles 
from Big Bones, 63 miles from the Rapids, and 
233 from the mouth of the Ohio. It is one of the 
most beautiful streams in the territory, and is so 
clear and transparent, at its highest state, that a 
pin may very plainly be seen at its bottom. It has 
a very stony channel, a swift stream, but no falls. 
VOL. in. 



M I C 



233 



At the Picquc or Pickawee towns, above 75 miles 
from its mouth, it is not above 30 yards broad, 
yet loaded battcaux can ascend 50 miles higher. 
The portage from the navigable waters of its e. 
branch to Sandusky river is nine miles, and from 
those of its w. branch to the Miami of the lakes, 
only five miles, ll also interlocks with the Scioto.] 
[MIAMI, or MEAMES OF THE LAKES, a navi 
gable riveroftheN. W. territory, which falls into 
lake Erie, at the s. w. corner of the lake. As. bra rich 
of this river communicates with the Great Miami 
by a portage of five miles. This river is called by 
some writers Mawmee, also Omee, and Manmick. 
See TEIUUTORY N. W. of the Ohio.] 

[MIAMI, or MEAME, a village on the Miami of 
the Lake near the Miami fort. Large canoes can 
come from Quiatanon, a small French settlement on 
the w. side of the Wabash, SO miles below the 
Miami carrying-place, which last is nine miles 
from this village.] 

[MIAMIS, or MEAMES, an Indian nation who 
inhabit on the Miami river, and the s. side of lake 
Michigan. They can raise about 300 warriors. 
In consequence of lands ceded to the United States 
by the treaty of Greenville, August 3d, 1795, go 
vernment paid them a sum in hand, and engaged 
to pay them annually for ever, to the value of 1000 
dollars in goods.] 

[MIAMIS Bay, at the mouth of the Miami of 
the Lakes.] 

MIAMIS, a fort in the same country; situate 
on the shore of the river of its name, near lake Erie, 
built by the French in 1750. 

MIAMIS, a small river of the same country, which 
runs n. e. and enters the lake Erie. 

AH the above take their names from a nation 
of Indian savages, who dwell at the source of the 
lake Michigan, where in a place called Chicagou 
they have a village, in which resides their chief or 
cazique, who can bring into the field 4 or 5000 
fighting men ; never going abroad himself without 
a guard of 40 men, the same number keeping 
watch day and night by his cabin ; this chief sel 
dom appears in public, and communicates his 
orders through his officers. 

MIAMO, a settlement of the province of Gua- 
yana, and government of Cumana ; one of those 
of the missions which were held thereby the Cata- 
lonian Capuchin fathers. 

[MIATA Island, one of the Society islands in 
the S. Pacific ocean. Lat. 17 40 a. Long. 148 
3 z0.1 

MICANI, SAN FRANCISCO DE, a settlement 
of the province and corregimiento of Chayanta or 
Charcas in Peru. 

ii H 



234 



MIC 



[MICHAEL. See S. MIGUEL and S. MICHEL.] 
[MICHAEL, ST. or FOND DKS N EG RES, a town 
on the s. peninsula of St. Domingo island, 10 
leagues n. e. of St. Louis.] 

[MICHAKL, ST. or ST. MIGUEL River, is also 
on tlies. coast of the isthmus between N. and S. 
America, and on the N. Pacific ocean, and 18 
leagues to the o&amp;gt;. of port Martin Lopez, and three e. 
of Guibaltigue. It has three fathoms water at flood. 
Within the river to the n. e. is the burning mountain 
of St. Miguel, in the midst of an open plain.] 

MICHAEL, ST. a small island of the N. sea, 
near the coast of the province and colony of Geor 
gia, at the entrance of port Royal, and one of 
those called the Georgian. 

[MICHAEL S Bay, ST. on thee. side of the island 
of Barbadoes, in the W. Indies, a little n. of 
Foul s bay, n. e. of which last bay are Cobler s 
rocks, in the shape of a horn.] 

[MICHAEL S Bay, ST. in Tierra Firme, in the 
S. sea.] 

[MICHAEL S, ST. a parish in Charlestown dis 
trict, S. Carolina.") 

[MICHAEL S, ST. a town in Talbot county, 
Maryland, eight miles w. of Easton, and 21 s. e. 
of Annapolis.] 

M1CHAPARU, a small river of the province 
and government of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia. 
It runs from s. to n. and enters the Orinoco to the 
w. of the rapid stream of Camiseta. 

M1CHARDS, a small island of the N. sea ; 
situate near the coast of N. Carolina, at the en 
trance or mouth of the strait of Albemarle. 

MICHATOYATL, a large river of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Chiquimula in the king 
dom of Guatemala. It rises from a lake which 
is about four leagues from the spot where the capi 
tal stood. It gives such a great fall, that, accord 
ing to Fr. Juan de Torquemada, a musket-shot 
fired from the bottom will not reach its top ; and 
forming an immense cavity in the rock in which it 
falls, so that in it breed bats of an enormous size, 
and which, if they find a person or any animal sleep 
ing, will suck their blood : in this cave they are 
as thick as leaves, and are of the size of a hen : 
moreover, from the great mischief they do to the 
calves, the breed of cattle has greatly decreased in 
these parts. 

MICHAU, a port of the s. coast of the Royal 
island or Cape Breton, between ?he port Tou 
louse and the island of St. Esprit. 

MICHAU, a small island, situate near the coast 
of the same province as the former port, and at the 
entrance of the same. 

MICHEL, S. a small island, situate in lake 



M 1C 

Superior, of New France or Canada in N. Ame 
rica, and in the point of Chagovamigon. 

[MICHEL, S. See S. MIGUEL, and S. MI 
CHAEL.] 

MICHICANI, a settlement and asiento of the 
silver mines of the province and government of 
Chucuito in Peru, annexed to the curacy of its 
capital ; situated on the shore of the lake Uma- 
marca on the s. 

MICHIGAN, Lake, one of the five of New 
France or Canada, of N. America, between a point 
of the continent, close to Michillimakinak ; an 
establishment of the Huron Indians, stretching 
towards the s. and the other point which is opposite 
and looks to the n. the two points forming a strait, 
by which the lake Huron communicates with this n 
Its vicinity is very unpleasant for an establishment, 
from its excessive coldness, the which no doubt 
arises from the continual agitation of the lakes by 
the n. wind. This lake, of which we treat, is 
the least, although it is no less th in 300 leagues in 
circumference, without reckoning the bay of Puants, 
which runs inland for 28 leagues. The inequality 
of the tides greatly affects the navigation of this 
lake ; their irregularity has been frequently marked, 
and it has been found that they observe no rule 
whatever, being in some places extremely high. 
Near the island of Michillimakinak they rise 
during the full of the moon in 24 hours, so as to run 
completely into the interior of the lake, and it is 
not less certain, however wonderful, that besides 
these tides there is another current always running 
from lake Huron to the adjoining lake, and which 
is common to both, although it does not impede the 
natural course of the lake Michigan, which, the 
same as lake Superior, discharges its waters into 
the lake Huron. The first of these t\ro currents, 
that is to say, that which runs frorrt lake Huron to 
Michigan, is more perceptible when the wind blows 
a contrary way to it, that is from the s. ; and then 
may be seen pieces of ice floating from the former 
lake to the latter with the same velocity as a ship 
sailing before the wind ; and, indeed, the same is 
the case in the Bahama channel. 

In the channel by which lake Superior empties 
itself into the Huron, are many streams or currents 
below the surface of the water, and which are at 
times so strong as to break the fishermen s nets ; 
from which we may judge that this great lake 
throws a certain part of its waters into the lake 
Michigan, by means of subterranean courses, by 
the same means as it is alleged that the Caspian 
unites with the Euxiae sea, and this with the 
Mediterranean. 

Ln what relates to lake Superior, this presumption 



MIC 

is well founded, in as much that it receives at least 
40 large rivers, of the which 10 or 12 are nearly 
as wide as the strait itself, from whence it would 
follow, that were there no other egress for the waters 
than this channel, it would send out much less 
water than it received. The same may be asserted 
of lake Michigan, which also receives a great 
number of rivers, many of them very large ; from 
which it is remarkable to judge that, besides the 
outlet afforded to its waters into lake Huron, it 
must have other subterraneous channels, as we 
have said of lake Superior. This conjecture is 
corroborated by a discovery that all the rocks 
that have been found at a certain depth near the 
strait called St. Mary s Falls, are as porous as a 
&amp;ponge, and that many of them are washed into 
large hollows, which must arise from the currents 
before mentioned. 

In the navigation from Michillimakinak to the 
river St. Joseph, it is found that although the 
wind is against the course of the vessel, she will 
make no less than eight or 10 leagues a day, 
proving that the current must contribute to her 
course, the same also being the case at the entrance 
of the bay of Puants. It is not to be doubted but 
that the waters of this bay, which have no other 
egress than through one part, run into lake Mi 
chigan ; and that this, being in the same situation, 
empties itself into Huron, both of them, besides 
these waters, receiving, the one and the other, 
different rivers, some of which are not less than the 
Seine in France. These currents are not percepti 
ble, save in the middle of the channel, by a kind of 
reflux or reaction of the waters along either shore, 
which is very advantageous for the coasting of 
the small canoes, here made of the trunks of trees, 
and which first run five leagues to the w. to enter the 
lake Michigan, and afterwards to the s. the same 
being the only course which vessels have for 100 
leagues, being the extent of this lake from n. to.?, 
and from whence they continue their passage till 
they reach fort St. Joseph. The part of the land 
which divides the two lakes Huron and Michigan, 
is a country the most fertile and charming that one 
can possibly imagine. 

[Michigan Lake is the largest and most conside 
rable lake which is wholly within the United States, 
and lies between lat. 42 JO and 45 40 n. and 
between 84 30 and 87 30 w. long. Jt is navi 
gable for shipping of any burden, and communi 
cates with lake Huron, at the w. e. part, through the 
straits of Michillimakinak. The strait is six miles 
broad, and the fort ot its name stands on an island 
at the mouth of the strut. In this lake are several 
kinds of fiih ; particularly trout of an excellent 



MIC 



235 



quality, weighing from 20 to 60 pounds, and 
some have been taken in the strait which weigh 90 
pounds. On the n. w. part of this lake, the waters 
push through a narrow strait, and branch out into 
two bays ; that to the n. is called Noquet s bay, 
the other to they. Puants, or Green bay, which last, 
with the lake, forms a long peninsula, called cape 
Townsend, or Vermillion point. About 30 miles 
s. of bay de Puants, is lake Winnebago, which 
communicates with it: and a very short portage 
interrupts the water communication, s. w. from 
Winnebago lake through Fox river, then through 
Ooisconsin, into the river Missisippi. Chicago river, 
also at the s. w. extremity of lake Michigan, 
furnishes a communication interrupted by a still 
shorter passage with Illinois river. See all these 
places mentioned under their respective names. 
Lake Michigan receives many small rivers from the 
w. and e. some 150 and even 250 yards broad at 
their mouths. See GRAND, MASTICON, MA- 
K.AME, ST. JOSEPH, &amp;c.] 

[MICHIGAN, a newly erected territorial govern 
ment of the United States, bounded s. by a line 
drawn from the s. part of lake Michigan to the 
bay of Miamis which is the most w. bay of lake 
Erie, w. by the lake of its name, n. by the straits 
of S. Mary s, and e. by lake Huron, the river and 
lake St. Clair and part of lake Erie. It is well 
watered on the w. side by a number of rivers which 
empty into Jake Michigan, and in the midst of 
this territory is a rather fine elevated plain. 

The population of this government amounted 
by the census of 1810 to 4762 souls."] 

MICHILLIMAKINAK, a small island of lake 
Huron in New France or Canada, in N. America, 
situate in 45 45 n. lat. It has a moderate-sized 
town, in which used to be carried on a trade in 
skins, owing to its being resorted to by, and being 
very convenient for the" meeting of, several savage 
nations of Indians : this traffic is, at the present 
day transferred to Hudson s bay by the river 
Borbori. The situation of the island is very 
advantageous, from lying between the three great 
lakes, the Michigan, which is 300 lengurs in cir 
cumference, exclusive of the great bay of Pi. ants 
into which it empties itself; the Huron, which isS5o| 
and of a triangular figure; and the last, (he lake 
Superior, which is 500 ; the whole of them being 
navigable for large vessels, and the t\vo first bein? 
divided only by a small strait, in the which there is 
sufficient water for the same vessels, without any 
obstruction through the whole of the lake Erie to 
Niagara. Between the lakes Huron and Superior 
is a communication by means of a canal 2:^ leagues 
long, but which is interrupted by many cascade* 
H H 2 



236 



MIC 



or falls, which impede the canoes from arriving 
to disembark at Michillimakinak whatever they 
might bring from lake Superior. [This island, 
within the line of the United States, was delivered 
to them bj the British, by treaty, in 1794, and 
retaken in the present year, 1812.] 

MICHIMALOYA, a settlement of the alcaldia 
mayor of Tula in Nueva Espaiia ; annexed to the 
curacy of its capital, from whence it lies a quarter 
of a league to the n. w. Jt contains 60 families. 

[MICHIPlCOTON,ariver which empties into 
lake Superior, on the n. c. side of the lake. It 
has its source not far distant from Moose river, a 
water of James s bay. It forms at its mouth a bay 
of its own name : and on the w. part of the bay, 
is a large island so called, close to the land ; a small 
strait only separates it from Otter s head on the w.] 

[MicHiPicoxoN House, in Upper Canada, is. 
situated on the e. side of the mouth of the above 
river, in lat 47 56 w.] 

[M1CIIISCOUI is the Indian and present name 
of the mostw. river in Vermont. It rises in Belvi- 
dere, and runs nearly w. e . until it has crossed into 
Canada, where it runs some distance ; it turns w. 
then s. re-enters the state of Vermont, in Richford, 
and empties into lake Champlain, at Michiscoui 
bay at Highgate. Jt is navigable for the largest 
boats to the falls at Swan town, seven miles from 
its mouth. Michiscoui, La Moelie, and Onion 
rivers, are nearly of the same magnitude."] 

[MICHISCOUI Tongue or Bay, a long point of 
land which extends s. into lake Champlain from 
the n. e. corner of the state of Vermont, on the w. 
side of the bay of this name, and forms the town 
ship of AI!burgh.] 

MICH1UILCA, a settlement of the province 
and corrfgimiento of Tarma in Peru, annexed to 
the curacy of Tapu. 

MICIMP II CHU, a settlement of the province and 
government of Venezuela; situate on the shore of the 
river Tncnyo, to the n. | to the n. e. of the city. 

M1CKLON, a small island, situate near the 
.. coa^t of Newfoundland, at the mouth or entrance 
of the gulf of St. Lawrence. 

[MICKMACKS, an Indian nation which inhabit 
the country between the Shapody mountains, and 
the gulf of St. Lawrence in Nova Scotia, opposite 
to St. John s Island. This nation convey their 
sentiments by hieroglyphics marked on the rind of 
the birch and on paper, which the Roman mis 
sionaries perieetly understand. Many of them 
reside at the heads of the rivers in King s and 
Hants counties.] 

[MICOYA Bay is situated on the s. w?. coast of 
Rlexico. or New Spain, on the N. Pacific ocean. 



MID 

In some charts it is laid down in lat. 10 15 n. and 
having cape Blanco and Chira island for its s. e. 
limit. 

MICTLAN, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district of Tequantepec in Nueva Espaiia ; 
its name meaning hell. It was thronged with 
inhabitants in the time of the Indians, and adorned 
with very superb edifices ; amongst the most cele 
brated of which was a temple dedicated to the 
devil, with dwellings for its priests, and having an 
hall adorned with stones and curiosities with great 
ingenuity. The doors, which were extremely 
lofty, were composed of only three pieces of stone, 
one on each side and one above. It had also 
another saloon, supporte&amp;lt;0with pillars so thick that 
two men could scarcely make their arms meet 
round them, and yet of one solid block of stone. 
The first Spaniards who discovered this temple 
aflirmed that these pillars were SO feet high, and 
that they were very like those in the great church 
of St. Mary s at Rome. The Emperor Mocthe- 
cutzuma had centinels from amongst the people of 
this settlement, who might give him intelligence 
of what was going on at sea ; and these were the 
people who gave intelligence of the arrival of Cortes. 

MJCULAPAYA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Porco in Peru. 

MIDDLE, some small islands of the lake Ontario 
in New France or Canada, of N. America. They 
are three, and are situated close to the n. coast. 

[MIDDLE Bunk, a fishing ground in the Atlan 
tic ocean, which lies from n. e. to s. w. between 
St. Peter s bank and that of Sable island, and 
opposite to and s. e. of Cape Breton island; laid 
down in some charts between lat. 44 32 and 45 
34 n. and between long. 57 37 and 59 32 .] 

[MIDDLE Cape is to the s. w. of cape Anthony,, 
in Staten Land, on the strait Le Maire, and the 
most w. point of that island, at the extremity of 
S. America.] 

[MioiiLB Islands, or ILHAS DE EN MEDIO, on 
the w. coast of New Mexico, and are between the 
islands of Chira and St. Luke. They are in the 
N. Pacific ocean, in lat 9 30 n. There is only 
from six to seven fathoms from Chira to these 
islands, and all vessels should keep nearer to them 
than (o the main.] 

[MiDDLK States, one of the grand divisions of 
the United States, (so denominated in reference to 
the n. and s. states) comprehending the states of 
New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, 
and the Territory N.W. of the Ohio ; which see."] 

[MIDDLEBERG, a new town of New York 
in Schoharie county, incorporated in 1797 ] 

[MlDDLEBOliOUGH,the Namaskett of the 



M I D 

ancient Indians, a township in Plymouth county, 
Massachusetts, bounded w. by Freetown and 
Taunton, e. by Carver and Warham, and is 35 
miles s. of Boston ; was incorporated in 1669, 
and contains 4526 inhabitants. This town was 
formerly thickly inhabited by Indian natives, 
governed by the noted sachem Tispacan : there are 
now only 60 or 40 souls remaining, who, to supply 
their immediate necessities, make and sell brooms 
and baskets. The town is remarkable for a large 
range of ponds, which produce several sorts of 
fish, and large quantities of iron ore. The bottom 
of Assowamset pond may be said to be an entire 
mine of iron ore. Men go out with boats, and use 
instruments like oyster dredges, to get up the ore 
from the bottom of the pond. It is now so much 
exhausted, that half a ton is thought a good day s 
work for one man ; but tor a number of years one 
man could take up four times the quantity. In an 
adjacent pond there is yet great plenty at 20 feet deep, 
as well as from shoaler water. Great quantities of 
nails are made here. In winter, the farmers and 
young men are employed in this manufacture. 
Here, and at Milton in Norfolk county, the first 
rolling and slitting mills were erected about 40 
years ago, but were imperfect and unproductive, 
in comparison with those of the present time. The 
prints of naked hands and feet are to be seen on seve 
ral rocks in this town, supposed to have been done 
by the Indians. These are probably similar to those 
observed in the states of Tennessee and Virginia.] 

[M IDDLEBOURG Key, asmall islet, separated 
from St. Martin s, in the W. Indies, on the n. e.J 

[MIDDLEBURG, or EOOA, the most s. of 
all the Friendly islands, in the S. Pacific ocean ; 
and is about 10 leagues in circuit."] 

M1DDLEBURGII, NUF.VO, a city of the pro 
vince and government of Guayana, in the part 
possessed by the Dutch. It is situate on the 
shore of the river Poumaron, and near the coast, 
in the point or cape of Nassau. 

MIDDLEBUKGH, a cape or point of land on the 
.&amp;lt;. coast of the straits of Magellan, in the extremity 
which looks to the n. of the island of Luis el 
Grande. 

[M 1 DDLEBURY, a post town of Vermont, and 
capital of Addison county. It is 30 miles n. by w. 
of Rutland, J2 from Vergennes, and 27 s. e. of 
Burlington. Here is a brewery upon a pretty 
Jnrge scale. The township lies on the e. side of 
Otter creek, and contains 395 inhabitants.] 

[M.IJJDLEFIELD, a township in Hampshire 
county, Massachusetts, 30 miles n. zc. of Spring 
field. It was incorporated in 1783, and contains 
COS inhabitants.] 



MID 



237 



[MIDDLfiHOOK, a village in New Jersey, eight 
miles a?, of Brunswick, on the cross post-road from 
Brunswick to Flemington, and on the n. bank of 
Rariton river.] 

[MIDDLESEX, a county of Massachusetts, 
bounded n. by the state of New Hampshire, e. by 
Essex county, .v. by Suffolk, and w. by Worcester 
county. Its figure is nearly equal to a square of 
40 miles on a side ; its greatest length being 52, 
and its greatest breadth 42 miles. It has 42 town 
ships, which contain 42,737 inhabitants. The 
religious societies are, 55 of Congregationalists, six 
of Baptists, and some Presbyterians, It was made 
a county in 1643. It is watered by five principal 
rivers, Merrimack, Charles, Concord, Nashua, 
and Mystick ; besides smaller streams. The chief 
towns are Charlcstown, Cambridge, and Concord. 
Charlestown is the only sea-port in the county ; 
Concord is the most respectable inland town, and 
is near the centre of the county, being 16 miles 
n. w. of Boston. There are in the county 24 
fulling-mills, about 70 tan-yards, four paper-mills, 
two snuff-mills, six distilleries, and about 20 pot and 
pearl ash houses. The s. and n. sides of the county 
are hilly, but not mountainous ; few of the hills 
exceeding 100 feet in height, and are covered with 
wood, or cultivated quite to the summits. The air 
is generally serene, and the temperature mild. 
The extreme variation of Fahrenheit s thermometer 
may be considered as 100 in a year; but it is in 
very few instances, that in the course of a year it 
reaches either extreme ; 92 may be considered as 
the extrerrve summer heat, and 5 or 6 below 0, 
as that of the winter cold. In the winter of 
1796-97, it sunk to 11 below 0. The soil is 
various, in some parts of rich, black loam ; and in 
others it is light and sandy. It produces the tim 
ber, grain, and fruit which are common through 
out the state, either by natural growth or culti 
vation.] 

[MiDDLEsrx, a maritime county of Connecti 
cut, bounded n. by Hartford county, 5. by Long 
island sound, e. by New London county, and w. 
by New haven. Its greatest length is about 30 
miles, and its greatest breadth 19 miles. It is di 
vided into six townships, containing 18,855 inha 
bitants, of whom 221 are slaves. Connecticut 
river runs the whole length of the county, and on 
the streams which flow into it are a number of 
mills. Middletown is the chief town.] 

[MIDDLESEX, a county of New Jersey, bound 
ed n. by Essex, n. w. and a?, by Somerset, s. zo. 
by Burlington, s. e. by Monmouth, e. by Ra 
riton bay and part of Staten island. It contains 
15 ? 956 inhabitants, including 1318 slaves. Fcoav 



238 



M I D 



the mouth of Rariton river up to Brunswick the 
land on both sides is generally good, both for pas 
turage and tillage, producing considerable quan 
tities of every kind of grain and hay.] 

[MIDDLESEX, a county of Virginia, on the s. 
side of Rappahannock river, on Chesapeak bay. 
It is about 35 miles in length, and seven in breadth, 
containing 4 140 inhabitants, including 2558 slaves. 
Urbana is the chief town.] 

[MIDDLESEX, a township in Chittendon county, 
Vermont, on the n. e. side of Onion river. It con 
tains 60 inhabitants.] 

[MIDDLESEX Canal, Massachusetts, it is ex 
pected, will be of great importance to the states of 
Massachusetts and New Hampshire. It is now 
opening at a vast ex pence by an incorporated 
company. The design is to open a water com 
munication from the waters of Merrimack river at 
Chelmsfbrd to the harbour of Boston. The route 
of the canal will be s. through the e. parts of 
Chelmsfbrd and Billcrica, the w. part of Wil 
mington, and the middle of \Voburn ; where it 
comes to some ponds, from which the waters run 
by Mystick river into Boston harbour. The dis 
tance from the Merrimack to these ponds will be 
17niles. The canal will, without meeting with 
any large hills or deep valleys, be straighter than 
the country road near it. The distance from the 
Merrimack to Medford, as the canal will be made, 
is 27, and to Boston 31 miles. The canal is to be 

24 feet wide at the bottom, and 32 at the top, and 
six feet deep. The boats are to be 12 feet wide 
and 70 feet long. The toll is to be six cents a 
mile for every ton weight which shall pass, besides 
pay for their boats and labour.] 

[MIDDLE TON, an interior township in Essex 
county, Massachusetts, 28 miles n. of Boston. It 
was incorporated in 1728, and contains 682 inhabi 
tants.] 

[MIDDLETON, a city and post-town of Connec 
ticut, and the capital of Middlesex county, plea 
santly situated on the w. bank of Connecticut river, 

25 miles from its mouth at Saybrook bar, accord 
ing to the course of the river ; 14 miles s. of 
Hartford, 24 n. e. of Newhaven, 27 n. w. of 
New London, and J56 n. e. of Philadelphia. Its 
public buildings are, a Congregational church, an 
Episcopalian church, a court-house, and naval 
olllce. It contains about- 3OO houses, and carries 
on a considerable trade. Here the river has 10 
feet water at full tides. Lat. 4 l c 34 n. Long. 72 
34 w. This place was culled Mattabesick by the 
Indians, and was settled in 1650 or 1651. Two 
miles from the city is a lead mine which was 
wrought during the war, and was productive ; 



MID 

but it is too expensive to be worked in time of 
peace.~| 

[MiDDLETOWN, a township m Stratford 
county, New Hampshire ; about 30 miles n. n. w. 
of Portsmouth. It was incorporated in 1778, and 
contains 617 inhabitants.] 

[MIDDLETOWN, a township in Rutland county, 
Vermont. It contains 699 inhabitants, and is 39 
miles n. of Bennington.J 

[MIDDLETOWN, a village on Long island, New 
York stale ; 12 miles from Smithtown, and 13 from 
Bridgehampton.] 

[MIDDLETOWN, a township in Ulster county, 
New York, erected from Rochester and Wood 
stock in 1789, and contains 1019 inhabitants, in 
cluding six slaves. In 1796 there were 135 of the 
inhabitants entitled to be electors.] 

[MIDDLETOWN, a township in Newport county, 
Rhode Island state, contains 840 inhabitants, in 
cluding 15 slaves. In this town, which is on the 
island which gives name to the state, and about 
two miles from Newport, is the large and curious 
cavity in the rocks called Purgatory.] 

[MIDDLETOWN, a small post-town in New 
castle county, Delaware, lies on Apoquinimy creek, 
19 miles s. s. w. of Wilmington, and 41 s. zc. of 
Philadelphia.] 

[MIDDLETOWN, in Monmouth county, New 
Jersey ; a township which contains two places of 
worship, one for Baptists and one for the Dutch 
reformed church, and 3226 inhabitants, including 
491 slaves. The centre of the township is 50 
miles e. by n. of Trenton, and 50 s. w. by s, of 
New York city. The light-house built by the ci 
tizens of New York on the point of Sandy Hook, 
is in this township. The high lands of Navesink 
are on the sea- coast near Sandy Hook. They are 
600 feet above the surface of the water, and are 
the lands first discovered by mariners on this part 
of the coast.] 

[MIDDLETOWN, a flourishing town in Dau 
phin county, Pennsylvania ; situated on the 
n. w. side of Swatara creek, which empties into 
the Susquehannah, two miles below. It contains 
a German church and above 100 houses, and car 
ries on a brisk trade with the fanners in the vici 
nity. It is estimated that above 200,000 bushels 
of wheat are brought down these rivers annually 
to the landing place, two mik s from the town. 
Contiguous to the town is an excellent merchant- 
mill, supplied with a constant stream, by a canal 
cut from the Swatara. It is six miles s. of Hum- 
rnelston, and 73 w. by n. of Philadelphia. Lat. 
10 13 n. Long. 76 44 o&amp;gt;. There are also other 
townships of this name in the state; the one in 



M I G 



M I G 



239 



Delaware county, the other in that of Cumber- 
lam!.! 

[MinnLETowN, in Frederick county, Mary 
land, lies nearly eight miles w. n. w. of Frede- 
rickstown.] 

[Mioni-ETcnvN, in Dorchester county, Mary 
land, is about five miles n. of the Cedar lauding- 
p ; ce, on Transqimking creek, i&amp;gt;even w. of Vienna, 
and 8 n. u\ at Cambridge.] 

[MiDDi ETOWN Point, in the above township, 
lies on die s. w. side of the bay, within Sandy 
Hook, seven miles e. by n. of Spotswood, and 
14 n. o&amp;gt;. of Shrewsbury. A post-office is kept 
here ] 

[MIDWAY, a village in Liberty county, 
Georgia, 26 miles s BJ....O/ Savannah, and nine 
miles n, w. of Sunbury. J(s inhabitants are Con- 
gregatipnalists, and are the descendants of emi 
grants from Dorchester near Boston, in New Eng 
land, who migrated as early as 1700/J 

[MIDWAY, a township in Rutland county, Ver 
mont, e. of and adjoining Rutland.] 

MIEL, Rio DE LA, a river in the province and 
government of Mariqnita and Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It rises in the valley of Corpus Christi, 
passes through the city of Los Remedios, and en 
ters the Grande de la Magdalcna. 

MIEL, a settlement of the province and govern 
ment of Venezuela; situate in the road which 
leads down from Bariquishneto, between this set- 
ilement and that of Tucuyo. 

M1ER, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Sierra Gorda, in the bay of Mexico 
and kingdom of Nueva Espana ; founded by the 
count of that tit e, Don Joseph de Escandon, co 
lonel of the militia of Queretaro, in 1750. 

[MIFFLIN, a county of Pennsylvania, sur 
rounded by Lycoining, Franklin, Cumberland, 
Northumberland, Dauphin, and Huntingdon coun 
ties. It contains 1851 square miles, 1,184,960 
acres, and is divided into eight townships. The 
mountains in this county abound with iron ore, for 
the manufacturing of which several forges have 
been erected. It is well watered by the Juniatta, 
and other streams which empty into the Susque- 
hannah. Chief town Lewistown.] 

[MiFFLiN, a smalltown lately laid out in the 
above county, &amp;lt;,n the e. side of the Juniatta, nine 
miles e. of Lewistown, and 109 from Philadel 
phia."] 

[MiFFLiN, Fort, in Pennsylvania, is situated 
on a small island at the mouth of Schuylkil! river, 
about six miles s. of Philadelphia. ] 

MIGUEL, S. called El Grande, a town and 



capital of the jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor of 
its name in the kingdom of Nueva Espana, and 
bishopric of Mechoacan ; situate on the skirt of 
a mountain-plain. It is of a mild temperature, of 
a large population, fertile, and abound ing greatly 
in commerce. It was founded by the Spaniards 
and the Tlaxcaltecas, who assisted in conquering 
the country, and was at that time inhabited by 
Chichirnecas Indians. Its population is composed 
of 3000 families of Spaniards, and the Indians 
live in the rich and fertile grazing lands for large 
and small cattle, as well as amongst the cultivated 
estates "which abound in its district, some being 
employed as labourers, and others living as renters 
of the lands. 

In its parish church is venerated an image of 
Christ, represent ing that period of his divine mis 
sion of " Ecce Homo," and very great is the re 
verence in which it is held by the whole jurisdic 
tion, from the advantages procured by it. It has a 
convent of the religious order of San Francisco, 
which has been a seminary for studies, a congre 
gation of clergy of San Felipe Neri, of exem 
plary virtues, employed in the teaching of the 
first rudiments, as also the profounder studies; 
the same body having been founded by the Father 
Juan Antonio Perez de Espinosa, and the temple 
here being entitled De Nuestra Seiiora de la So- 
ledad. Contiguous to this is the chapel of La 
Santa Casa de Loreto, of beautiful architecture 
and sumptuous ornaments, the same having been 
given by the zealous and devout Don Manuel de 
la Canal. There are in this town many salutary 
waters, and especially those of a fountain which 
runs from some rocks close to the settlement, and 
which is called the Chorillo, and from which the 
public reservoirs are provided. The principal 
commerce consists in cattle, of the skins of which 
are made many saddles for riding, beautifully 
worked; also in white arms, such as stilettos,, 
swords, knives, spurs, stirrups, and other useful 
and curious articles ;n steel. The women employ 
themselves in making quilts. [Humboldt bears 
testimony to the great industry of the inhabitants, 
and he mentions cotton cloth as the chief of their 
manufactures]. This alcaldia mayor has only one 
other head settlement of the district, which is the 
town of San Felipe. The capital is 51 leagues to 
the n. $ to the n. w. of Mexico, in lat. 21 45 . 
Long. 273 46 . 

MIGUEL, S. a city of the province and alcaldia 
mayor of San Salvador in the kingdom of Guate 
mala ; situate two leagues from the coast of the S. 
tea and bay of Fonseca, the same serving it as a 



240 



M I G 



port. Its population is small, and it has, besides 
the parish church, which is very decent, some 
convents of monks of the religious orders of San 
Francisco and La Merced, as also one of nuns. It is 
22 leagues from its capital, and 62 from Guatemala. 
MIGUEL, S. another city, called also Bridge 
town, the capital of the island of Barbadocs ; 
situate in the s. part of the same, with a good, 
convenient, and secure port, and which is capable 
of receiving 500 ships. The population is large, 
the streets straight, and the buildings handsome, es 
pecially the hall of justice and the exchange. It 
has plenty of storehouses and shops, from the great 
number of merchants who reside in it, and 
abounds in every thing imaginable. It is badly 
situated ; for, lying lower than the banks which 
form the boundaries to the sea, it is generally full 
of swamps, which render it unhealthy. It has two 
very good castles at the entrance of the port for 
its defence, furnished with artillery, the principal 
of which is called fort Charles, and is on the point 
Nedham. It has also a magnificent and well en 
dowed college for students, which was founded 
by the Colonel Christoval Codrington, native of 
this city. In lat. 13 24 . Long. 318 40 . 

MIGUEL, S. another city, of the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; founded in the province and corre- 
gimiento of Los Pauches by Anton de Ollala. It 
is of very hot temperature, and has fallen into such 
decay, that of it there remains nothing but a mean 
village. It is 50 miles n. w. from Santa Fe. 

MIGUEL, S. a town of the province of Ostimuri 
in Nueva Espana ; situate between the rivers 
Mayo and Nacari. 

MIGUEL, S. a settlement, with the surname of 
Del Valle, or De la Miel, in the province and cor- 
regimiento of Tunja of the Nnevo Reyno de Gra 
nada. It is of an hot temperature, abounding in 
sugar canes, of which a great portion of sugar 
and honey are made, as also in the other vegetable 
productions of a warm climate. It contains 80 
inhabitants, who are subject to the disorder of 
cotes, or swellings on the neck. It is close to the 
settlement of Capitanejo, and 94 miles to the n. e. 
of its capital. 

MIGTEL, S. another, of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Carangas in Peru, and of the arch 
bishopric of Charcas ; annexed to the curacy of 
the settlement of Colquemar. 

MIGUEL, S. with the surname of Mollearn- 

bato, in the province and corregmicnto of Lata- 

cunga, and kingdom of Quito, in the district of 

which, towards the n. is the great estate called Tasin. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the province and tor- 



M I G 

regimiento of Chimbo, in the same kingdom as the 
former. 

MIGUEL, S. another of the missions that are 
held by the religious order of San Francisco, in the 
territory of the town of San Christoval off he Nuevo 
Reyuo de Granada ; situate on the shore of the 
river Apure. It is of an hot temperature, very- 
scanty population, and produces nothing but 
wheat, barley, and maize. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the head settlement of 
the district of Tholiman, and alcaldia mayor of 
Queretaro, in Nueva lispaiia. It contains 75 fa 
milies of Indians. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Atacames in the kingdom of Quito. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the head settlement of 
the district and alcaldia mayor of Tochimilco in 
Nueva Espafia ; situate on the top of a mountain 
covered with fruit-trees. It is of a mild tempera 
ture, and contains 68 families of Indians, who 
maintain themselves by cutting wood and making 
charcoal. It is four miles to the w. of its capital. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the head settlement of 
Tamazunchale, and alcaldia mayor of Valles, in 
the same kingdom ; annexed to the curacy of Tam- 
pasquin, from whence it is two leagues distant. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the head settlement of the 
district of Amatepec, and alcaldia mayor of Zulte- 
pec, in the same kingdom. It contains 22 families of 
Indians, and is very close to its head settlement. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the head settlement of 
Zumpahuacan, and alcaldia mayor of Marinalco, 
in the same kingdom. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the head settlement of 
the district and alcaldia mayor of Lerma in the 
same kingdom. It contains 281 families of In 
dians, and is three leagues n. e. of its head settle 
ment. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the head settlement and 
alcaldia mayor of Toluca in the same kingdom. 
It contains 100 families of Indians, and lies a little 
to the s. of its capital. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the head settlement 
and alcaldia mayor of Tepeaca in the same king 
dom ; five leagues from its capital. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the jurisdiction and 
alcaldia mayor of Octupan, in the same kingdom 
as the former. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the head settlement of 
Palmar, arid alcaldia mayor of Tepeaca, in the 
same kingdom. It contains 59 families of Indians, 
and is two leagues from its head settlement. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the head settlement of 
Ahuatlan, and alcaldia mayor of Zacatlan, in the 



M I G 



M I G 



same kingdom ; one league from its head settle 
ment. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the head settlement of 
Teutalpan, and former alcaJdia mayor; three 
leagues from its head settlement. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the head settlement of 
Xalazala, and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa, in the 
same kingdom. It contains 38 families of Indians, 
employed in agriculture, and is three leagues from 
its head settlement. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the head settlement of 
Tecali, and alcaldia mayor of this name, with 39 
families of Indians. 

MIGUEL, S. another, a small settlement or ward 
of the head settlement of the district and ulcaldia 
mayor of Juxtlahuaca in the same kingdom. 

MIGUEI/, S. another, of the province and cor- 
regimieuto of Canta in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of San Buenaventura. 

MIGUEL, S. another, a small settlement or ward 
of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia 
mayor of Leon, in the province and bishopric of 
Mechoacan and kingdom of Nueva Espana. It 
contains 100 families of Indians, employed in the 
cultivation of maize and fruit-trees, and as labour 
ers in the estates of its district. It is very close to 
its capital, by the s. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the alcaldia mayor of 
San Luis de Potosi, in the same kingdom and 
bishopric. It contains 53 families of Indians, 
who occupy themselves solely in cutting of fuel 
and making charcoal. It is to the s. of its ca 
pital. 

MIGUEL, S. another, with the surname of Alto, 
of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia 
mayor of Maravatio in the same kingdom. It is 
of a cold temperature, contains 21 families of In 
dians, and is five leagues from its capital. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the head settlement of 
Quiatoni, and alcaldia mayor of Teutitlan, in the 
same kingdom. It contains 52 families of Indians, 
and is two leagues n. e. of its head settlement. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the alcaldia mayor of 
Huamelula in the same kingdom; situate at the 
foot of a lofty mountain, and in its vicinity runs 
a river so large and deep that it is necessary to 
pass it in canoes. It is of an hot temperature, 
and its territory barren in vegetable productions, 
yielding nothing but cochineal, this being the only 
branch of its commerce. Its population consists 
of 54 families of Indians. At two leagues dis 
tance, and on the shore of the river, are seen the 
ruins of the settlement of San Bartolome, which 
was abandoned, owing to all its inhabitants having 

VOL. III. 



perished in an epidemic disorder in 1736. It is 
12 leagues from Pochutla. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the head settlement 
and alcaldia mayor of Juchipila in the same 
kingdom ; live leagues to the n. of the same head 
settlement. 

MIGUEL, S. another, which is the head settle 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Vil- 
lalta in the same kingdom. It contains -26 families 
of Indians, and is eight leagues and an half from 
its capital. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the head settlement and 
alcaJdia mayor of Juchipila, distinct from that of 
which we have already spoken ; six leagues to the 
s. w. of its head settlement. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Quixos y Macas in the kingdom of 
Quito, the capital or the missions of the Sucum- 
bios Indians, which were reduced and held under 
the care of the regulars of the company. It lies 
on the shore of the river Napo. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the province of Barce 
lona, and government of Cumana, in the Nuevo 
Iteyno de Granada ; situate s. of the settlement of 
Piritu. 

MIGUEL, S. another, with the surname of Bo- 
queron, in the district of Chiriqui, of the pro 
vince and government of Veragua, and kingdom 
of Tierra Firme ; situate in the royal road, three 
leagues from its head settlement. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the missions that were 
held by the regulars of the company, in the pro 
vince and government of Mainas in the kingdom of 
Quito. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the missions that were 
held by the same regulars, in the Orinoco. It is a 
reduction of the Guajiva nation, and situate on the 
shore of the river Meta. In 1734, this settlement 
was burnt and destroyed by the Caribes. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the province and corre- 
girniento of Pasto in the kingdom of Quito ; situate 
on the shore of the river Telembi. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the missions that were 
held by the regulars of the company, in the pro 
vince of Guaira and government of Paraguay ; si 
tuate on the shore of the river Curituba ; where 
are seen the ruins that were made by the Portu 
guese of San Pablo at the end of the last century, 
(1600.) 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the province and captain 
ship of lley in Brazil ; situate on the coast oppo 
site the island of Santa Catalina. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the missions that were 
held by the regulars of the company, in the pro- 
i i 



242 



M I G 



vince and government of Paraguay ; situate be 
tween the settlements of San J uaii and San Lo 
renzo. 

MIGUEL, S. another, also of the missions of the 
same regulars, in the country of the Chiquitos In 
dians ; situate on the n. of a lake. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the province and corregi 
miento of Cnyo in the kingdom of Chile; si 
tuate on the shore of one of the lakes of Huana- 
cachc. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the province and alcaldia 
mayor of Zacapula in the kingdom of Guatemala. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres in Peru ; situate on the shore 
of the river Parana, at the mouth where it enters 
the Carcaraiial. 

MIGUEL, S. another, which was once in the pro 
vince and government of Moxos in the kingdom 
of Quito, distinct from that w r e have mentioned, 
but was depopulated by an epidemic disorder. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the province and govern 
ment of Tucuman in Peru ; situate on the shore 
and at the source of the river of its name. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the province and king 
dom of Guatemala. 

MIGU EL, S. another, of the province and govern 
ment of Santa Marta intheNuevoReynode Grana 
da ; situate on a llano or plain to the e. of the Cienega. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the province and govern 
ment of Maracaibo ; situate on the shore of the 
river Masparro, between the cities of Barinas Vieja 
and Nueva. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the province and govern 
ment of Cinaloa; situate on the shore of the river 
Del Fuerte, between the settlements of Ahome and 
of Michicauchi. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the missions that were 
held by the regular company of Jesuits, in the go 
vernment and country of the Chiquitos Indians, 
distinct from that already mentioned. It is situate 
on the bank of a small river, and at a small dis 
tance from the source of the river Capivari. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the province and govern 
ment of Maracaibo, distinct from one already men 
tioned ; situate on the shore of the river Tucuyo, 
and to the w. of this city. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the island of Curazao, 
one of the Antilles ; situate on the n. coast. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the kingdom undcorregi- 
miento of Quito, in the district of Las Cinco 
Leguas ; situate w. of the settlement of Canzacoto. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the same kingdom and 
corregimiento as the former ; situate ou the shore 
of the river San Pedro. 



M I G 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the province and govern 
ment of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito, distinct 
from those above mentioned ; situate on the shore 
of the river Baurcs, and one of those over which 
the Portuguese have gained the dominion. 

[MIGUEL, S. a settlement of Indians, of the 
province and government of Buenos Ayres ; situate 
on a small branch of the river Piratiny, in lat. 28 
32 26" s. Long. 54 39 27" a&amp;gt;.] 

[MIGUEL, S. a fort of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayres; situate on a small 
river at the s. end of lake Mini, 90 miles n. e. of 
Maldonado. Lat. 33 44 44" s. Long. 53 35 
30" a, .] 

MIGUEL, S. a river of the same province and 
kingdom as the tx&amp;gt;rmer port. It rises in the coun 
try of the Tcpunacas Indians, arid enters the 
Itenes. On its shores is a beautiful estate called 
Del Frances. 

MIGUEL, S. another river, of the province 
and government of Santa Cruz de la Sierra in 
Peru. It rises from two lakes, runs n. and, turn 
ing as. Avith the name of Sara, enters the Guapaig. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the province and 
corregimiento of Pasto in the kingdom of Quito. 
It rises in the Sierra Nevada, and enters the Pu- 
tumayo, after running many leagues e. 

MIGUI;L, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Tucuman in Peru. It runs e. and 
enters the Rio Dulce. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the province and 
captainship of Pernanbuco in Brazil. It rises in 
the mountains of Itaberaba, runs s. s. e. and enters 
the sea between those of Las Lagunas and Ya- 
queacu. 

MIGUEL, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Atacames or Esmeraldas in the king 
dom of Quito. It enters the Santiago to run into 
the sea in the port of Limones. 

MIGUEL, S. a gulf of the S.sea, in the pro 
vince of Darien, and kingdom of Tierra Firme. 
It is very great and beautiful, having its mouth or 
entrance closed in by a shoal called El Buey, there 
being only a narrow channel left for the course of 
vessels. Within it are many small rocks or reefs, 
and there runs into it a large river which flows 
down from the mountains of the same province. 

MIGUEL, S. a small port of the s. coast of the 
island of Jamaica. 

MIGUEL, S. an island of the N. sea, one of 
the Lesser and most w. of the Antilles. 

MIGUEL, S. a long strip of land or point of 
the coast of the gulf of California or Mar Iloxo de 
Cortes, in the centre of the said coast. It runs 



MIL 

into the sea, and forms a side of the mouth of the 
bay of La Concepcion. 

MIGUEL, S. a fortress or castle of the pro 
vince and captainship of Rey in Brazil. It is 
near the coast, and not far from the lake Imcri or 
Merin. 

MIGUEL, S. another fortress and garrison, in 
the province and government of Paraguay. 

MIGUEL, S. See S. MICHAEL, and S. MI 
CHEL. 

M1GUELITO, S. a settlement of the province 
of Tepeguana, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya ; 
situate on the bank of the river Guanabal, and not 
far from the town of Parras. 

[MILFIELD, in Grafton county, New Ham- 
shire, settled in 1774.] 

[MILFORD, a township in Mifflin county, 
Pennsylvania.] 

[MILFORD, a post-town of the state of Dela 
ware, pleasantly situated on the n. side of Mus- 
pilion creek, about eight miles w. of its mouth in 
Delaware bay, 15 s. by e. of Dover, five s. of 
Frederica, and 65 s. by to. of Philadelphia. It 
contains nearly 100 houses, all built since the war, 
except one. The inhabitants are Episcopalians, 
Quakers, and Methodists.] 

[MILFORD, a town of Northampton county, 
Pennsylvania, lately laid out on the n. w. side of 
the Delaware, on a lofty situation, at Well s ferry, 
85 miles above Philadelphia. In front of the town, 
which contains as yet only a few houses, the river 
forms a cove well fitted for sheltering boats and 
lumber in storms or freshes in the river. A saw 
mill and paper-mill have been erected here ; the 
latter belongs to Mr. Bidclis, who has disco 
vered the method of making paper and paste 
board, by substituting a large proportion of saw 
dust in the composition.] 

[MiLFORn, a post-town of Connecticut, on 
Long island sound, and in New Haven county, 17 
miles s. w. of New Haven, and e. of Stratford. 
The mouth of the creek on which it stands has 
three fathoms water. This town was called Wopo- 
wage by the Indians, and was settled in 1638. It 
contains an Episcopal church, and two Congrega 
tional churches.] 

[MILFORD Haven, a deep bay on the coast of 
Nova Scotia, to the s. a?, round the point of the 
strait of Canso. It receives several rivers from 
the n. w. and s.ta.] 

[MILITARY Townships, in the state of New 
York. The legislature of the state granted 
1,500,000 acres of land, as a gratuity to the officers 
and soldiers of the line of this state. This tract, 
forming the new county of Onondago, is bounded 



243 

zv. by the r. shore of the Seneca lake, and the Mas 
sachusetts lands in the new county of Ontario; n. 
by the part of lake Ontario near fort Oswego ; s. 
by a ridge of the Alleghany mountains and the 
Pennsylvania line ; and e. by the Tuscarora creek 
(which falls nearly into the middle of the Oneida 
lake) and that part of what was formerly Montgo 
mery county, which has been settling by the New 
England people very rapidly since the peace. 
This pleasantjjcounty is divided into 25 townships, 
of 60,000 acres each, which are again subdivided 
into 100 convenient farms, of 600 acres ; making 
in the whole 2500 farms. This tract is well wa 
tered by a multitude of small lakes and rivers.] 

MILL, a river of the province and colony of 
Nova Scotia or Acadia, rising from a small lake 
near lake Rcsignol. It runs n. w. and enters the 
sea in the port of Annapolis Real. 

M1LLALAB, a settlement of Indians, of the 
island of Laxa in the kingdom oi Chile ; situate on 
the shore of the river Bureu. 

MILLAPOA, called by others Millapo, a town 
of the province and corregimienlo of Maule in the 
kingdom of Chile; situate on the shore of the river 
Biobio. In its vicinity is a large estate called 
Toro. 

MILLAQUI, a settlement of Indians, of the 
island of Laxa, in (he same kingdom as the two for 
mer; situate on the shore of the river Tolpan, to 
thee. of the town of Colhue. 

MILLER, a river of the province and colony 
of Massachusetts in New England, of N. America. 
It runs w. forming a curve, and enters the Connec 
ticut. 

MILLER, a paramo or mountain desert of the 
cordillera in the kingdom of Quito; one of those 
which were chosen by the academicians of the 
sciences of Paris in 1738 to fix their instruments 
for astronomical observations. 

MILLEYS, a small river of the province and 
colony of N. Carolina. It runs n. w. and enters 
the Cuiawba. 

MILLS, a settlement of the island of Barbadoes, 
in the district of the parish of San Andres. 

MILLS, a bay on the e. coast of the same island 
of Barbadoes, on the shore of which the former 
settlement is situate. 

M1LLUIIUAI, a settlement of the province 
and corrcgimiento of Cicasica in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of Yanacache. 

M1LOCAN, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district and alcaldia nun/or of Zic;iyan 
in Nueva Espana. It is of a warm and dry tem 
perature, contains 46 families of Indians, and is 
one league to the n. of its head settlement. 
i i 2 



214 



M I N 



MILPA, a small settlement or ward (at the pre 
sent clay in a state of ruin), of the head settlement 
of the district and alcaldia mayor of Autlan in 
Nueva Espana. 

M1LPANDUENAS, a settlement of the pro- 
vince and kingdom of Guatemala ; annexed to 
the curacy of Almolonga. 

MILPAS ALTAS, a settlement of the province 
and kingdom of Guatemala in N.America. It 
has also the dedicatory title of Santo Tomas. Its 
population consists of 678 Indians, in which are 
included those which are in four settlements an 
nexed to its curacy. 

MILPAS, surnamedBaxas, to distinguish it from 
the former, a settlement in the same province and 
kingdom. 

MILP1LLA, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district and alcaldia mayor of Acaponeta in 
Nueva Espana. It is 22 leagues to the n. e. 
of its capital, to the curacy of which it is an 
nexed. 

M1LTEPEC, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor 
of Teotales in Nueva Espaila. it contains 89 fa 
milies of Indians. 

MILTON, a city of the county of Suffolk, in 
the province and bay of Massachusetts ; situate 
on the shore of the river of its name, Avhich enters 
the sea in the bay of Boston. It is seven miles s. 
of this city, two from Dorchester, and six n. w. of 
Braintree. 

MIMBRES, an isle or shoal of the w. head or 
foreland called Del Placer, which is in the island 
of Cuba, to the w. of that of Espiritu Santo. 

MIMBRES, a cape or point, called also De Bar 
rancas, on the coast which lies between the river 
La Plata and the straits of Magellan. 

M1M1ALPA, SAN MIGUEL DE, a settlement 
and head settlement of the district of the alcaldia 
mayor of Metepcc in Nueva Espana. It con 
tains 49 families of Indians. 

M1M1NJ, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimienlo of Arica in Peru ; annexed to the cu 
racy of Camina. 

MIN, a river of the province and corregimienlo 
of Cuenca in the kingdom of Quito. It rises in the 
mountain of El Altar, runs ?/. e. and enters by the 
s. into the Lluzin or De las Nieves, just before this 
joins the Chinchon, in lat. J41 s. 

MINA, a sma41 river of the province and go 
vernment of San Juan de los Llanos in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. It rises between those of 
Sinaruco and Cantanapalo, runs e. and enters the 
Orinoco between the mouths of the former, and of 
the Banahatu. 

MINABAUJOU, a settlement of Indians, of 



MIN 

New France or Canada ; situate on the coast of 
lake Superior. 

M1NAGE, a river of Nova Scotia or Acadia. 
It rises from the lake Mipisigonche, runs e. for 
many leagues, and, inclining afterwards to the s. e, 
enters the sea in the bay of Miramichi. 

MINANGUA, a small river of the province 
and government of Paraguay, which runs into the 
Parana, between the rivers Acaray-piti and Yaperi- 
buy. 

[M IN AS, sometimes also called Le Grand Praye, 
is a gulf on the s. e. side of the bay of Fundy, 
into which its waters pass by a narrow strait, and 
set up into Nova Scotia in an e. and $. direction. 
It is about 30 leagues from the entrance of Anna 
polis, and 10 from the bottom of Bedford bay. It 
is 12 leagues in length, and three in breadth. See 
BASIN OF MINAS. ] 

[MiNAs, or DE LAS MINAS Hill, is the middle 
most of the three hills described as marks within 
land for Bonaventura bay and river, on the a;, 
coast of S. America : these are s. of Panama bay.] 

MINAS, a fort of the English, in the province 
of Nova Scotia ; situate on the shore of the same 
bay. 

MINAS, a settlement of the jurisdiction of the 
town oflbague, and corregimiento of Mariquita, in 
the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of an hot 
temperature, and contains 100 inhabitants, who 
employ themselves in the labour of the copper 
mines, from wher.ca they extract a good quantity 
of metal of excellent quality, and from whence the 
settlement has its name. It is annexed to the cu 
racy of the city of Ibague. 

MINAS, another, with the dedicatory title of 
Santa Catalina, in the head settlement of thedistrict 
of Cuilapa, and alcaldia mayor of Quatro Villas, in 
Nueva Espana. It has this name from i(s vicinity 
to the silver mines of Chichicapa, which were for 
merly worked, but to-day abandoned. It contains 
only 12 families of Indians, who are employed in 
the cultivation and commerce of cochineal, seeds, 
fruit, and in collecting coal and wood. It is a little 
more than six leagues s. w. of its head settlement. 

MINAS, a town of the province and government 
of Buenos Ay res ; situate near the source of the 
river St. Lucia, about 34 miles n. e. of Maldonado. 
Lat. 34 21 30" s. Long. 55 5 34" w. 

MINAS, another, with the addition of Nuevas, 
of the province of Tepeguana, and kingdom of 
Nueva Vizcaya, in N. America. It is a real of 
silver mines, and four leagues to the 20. of the 
settlement of Parral. 

MINAS, another, with the additional title of 
Generates, a town of the Portuguese, in the pro- 



M I N 



245 



vince and captainship of Puerto Scguro in Brazil ; 
situate at the source of the river Maranlao, to the 
w. of the hike Parapitinga. [Mr. Mawe tells us, 
that the province of Minns Generates, or Geracs, 
is from 6 to 700 miles from n. to s. and about 
the same extent from e. to w. ; that it contains a 
population 360,000 persons, 200,000 of which are 
Negroes, or of Negro origin. The number of na 
tive Indians is not at all known ; they neither mix 
with the colonists, nor give them any disturbance. 
Indeed the road seems to be so well guarded by 
those military posts called register houses, where 
all passengers undergo a strict examination, and 
the country is so completely scoured by a corps of 
well mounted cuqadores, that it is more than pro 
bable the poor Indians confine themselves to the 
mountains. Mr. Mawe seldom mentions them 
under any other designation than that of the 
Anthropophagi.] 

MfNAS, another, a settlement of Indians of the 
island ofLaxain the kingdom of Chile; situate 
on the shore of the river of Los Sauces. 

MINAS, a cape or point of land on the coast of 
Nova Scotia or Acadia, within the great bay of 
Fundy. 

M1NCHA, a settlement and asiento of gold 
mines, of the province and corregimiento of Quil- 
lota in the kingdom of Chile ; annexed to the cu 
racy of Hillapel, with two other vice-parishes. 

MINCHA, a bay in the province and corregimi 
ento of Coquimbo in the same kingdom, on the side 
of the river Choapa. 

[MINDA WARCARTON, Indians of N. Ame 
rica, the only band of Sioux who cultivate corn, 
beans, &amp;c. ; though these even cannot properly be 
termed a stationary people. They live in tents of 
dressed leather, which they transport by means of 
horses and dogs, and ramble from place to place 
during the greater part of the year. They are 
friendly to their own traders ; but the inveterate 
enemies of such as supply their enemies, the Chip- 
peways, with merchandise. They also claim the 
country in which they hunt, commencing at the en 
trance of the river St. Peter s, and extending up 
wards, on both sides of the Mississippi river, to the 
mouth of the Crow river. The land is fertile and 
well watered, lies level, and sufficiently timbered. 
Their trade cannot be expected to increase much.] 

M1NDO, a settlement of the corregimiento and 
khigdom of Quito, in the district of the jurisdiction 
of Los Cinco Leguas. 

MINDO, another, in the province and govern 
ment of Esmeraldas of the same kingdom ; situate 
in the district of the Yumbos Indians, on the n. 
shore of the river Pirusay, a little before the union 



of tiiis with the Nambillo. It is of a very hot cli 
mate, but its territory abounds in all kinds of vege 
table productions. In lat. 2 30 s. 

MINE, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Louisiana in N.America. It runs 
s. e. between the rivers Ovisconsin and Paris, and 
enters the Misipi. 

[MiNE AU FEU, (or IRON MINES), on the f. side 
of Mississippi river, is 67| miles n. by e. of Chicka- 
saw river, and 15 s. by e. of the Ohio. Here the 
land is nearly similar in quality to that bordering 
on the Chicaksaw river, interspersed with gradual 
risings or small eminences. There was a post at 
this place, near the former s. boundary of Vir 
ginia.] 

[MINEHEAD, a township in Essex county, 
Vermont, on Connecticut river.] 

MINER, a settlement of the island of Bar- 
badoes. 

MINES, Basin of the, a bay lying in the inte 
rior of the bay of Fundy in Nova Scotia or Aca 
dia. It is very capacious, secure, and sheltered 
from the winds. 

[MJNETARES, are Indians of N. America, 
who claim no particular country, nor even assign 
themselves any limits : their tradition relates that 
they have always resided at their present villages. 
In their customs, manners, and dispositions, they 
arc similar to the Mandans and Ahwahhaways. 
The scarcity of fuel induces them to reside, dur 
ing the cold season, in large bands, in camps, on 
diiferent parts of the Missouri, as high up that 
river as the mouth of the river Yellow Stone, and 
w. of their villages, about the Turtle mountain. 
These people, as well as the Mandans and Ahwah 
haways, might be prevailed on to remove to the 
mouth of Yellow Stone river, provided an esta 
blishment is made at that place. They have as 
yet furnished scarcely any beaver, although the 
country they hunt abounds with them ; the lodges 
of these animals are to be seen within a mile of 
their villages. These people have also suffered 
considerably by the small-pox ; but hrfve success 
fully resisted the attacks of the Sioux. The N. W. 
company have lately formed an establishment on, 
the Missouri, near these people.] 

MINGAN, a small river of the land or country 
of Labrador. It runs s. and enters the river St. 
Lawrence. 

[M1NGO Town, an Indian town on the w. 
bank of the Ohio river, 86 miles n. e. of Will s 
town, by the Indian path, and 33 s. w. of Pit&amp;lt;s- 
burg. It stands a fevy miles up a small creek, 
where there are springs that yield the petral, a bi 
tuminous liquid.] 



216 



M I N 



MINGOS, a settlement of Indians of the pro 
vince and country of the Iroqucesin N. America ; 
situate on the shore of the river Ohio, where the 
English have a fort and establishment ibr their 
commerce. 

[MING UN Islands, on the n. side of the mouth 
of the river St. Lawrence. They have the island 
Anticosti s. distant 10 leagues. Lat. 50 15 n. 
Loner. 63 25 a?.] 

MINI, a settlement of the missions that were 
held by the regulars of the company, in the pro 
vince and government of Paraguay. See SAN 
IGNACIO. 

MINI, another settlement, of the province and 
government of Yucatan in N. America, in the 
which the Spaniards found a cross of sionc, which 
the Indians used to adore in 1527, when they (the 
Spaniards) entered this country under Francisco 
de Montejo. The story of the Indians was, that 
an Indian chief and priest, called Chilaucalcatl 
(and whom the Father Charlevoix wrongly deno 
minates Chilau Combal), a person esteemed for a 
great prophet, once said, that in a few days time 
there would come from that part where the sun 
rises a barbarous and white nation, who would 
carry before them that signal of the cross, and be 
fore which their idols would flee away ; that this 
nation would conquer that land, that they would 
do no injury to its possessors, but that these would 
live in amity with the new-comers, would desert 
their idols, and adore one God. He caused a 
garment to be woven of cotton, and said that in 
that manner they would pay tribute to those peo 
ple ; he then ordered the lord of that settlement, 
whose name was Machauxiuch, to olfer the same 
mantle to (he idols, that it might be safely pre 
served, and he cut out of a piece of stone the sign 
of the cross, placing it also in the court of the tem 
ple, and saying, that that was the true tree of the 
world. Hence it was that the Indians asked the 
Spaniards, who arrived here under Francisco Her 
nandez de Cordoba, if they came from where the 
sun rose : likewise when Montejo arrived here, and 
saw the reverence that the Indians paid to the 
cross, he was assured of the truth of what was said 
to have been told them by their priest Chilaucal 
catl. These Indians looked upon this cross as the 
god of rain, assuring themselves that they would 
never want moisture when they prayed to it de 
voutly. 

MINI, a lake, which is also called by the In 
dians Imeri, in the province and captainship of 
Puerto Seguro in Brazil, near the sea-coast : on 
its shore the Portuguese have various settlements. 
MINIPI, a settlement of the jurisdiction of Las 



M 1 R 

Palmas,and corregimiento of Tunja, in the Nuevo 
lleyno de Granada ; situate in a wild country, 
full of mountains and bogs, but of a benign tem 
perature, abounding in tobacco, cotton, sugar 
cane, plantains, and yucas^ also in pigs, these 
being its principal commerce. It contains 300 in 
habitants and a good number of Indians. 

[MIN1SINK, a village in New Jersey, at the 
ft. w. corner of the state, and on the w. side of De 
laware river ; about five miles below Montague, 
and 57 n. w. of Brunswick, by the road.] 

[MiNisiXK, a township in Orange county, New 
York ; bounded e. by the Wallkill, and s. by the 
state of New Jersey. It contains 2215 inhabi 
tants, of whom 320 are entitled to be electors, and 
51 are slaves.] 

[MIQUELON, a small desert island, eight 
miles w. of cape May in Newfoundland island. 
It is the most to. of what have been called the 
Three Islands of St. Pierre or St. Peter, and is not 
so high as the other two ; but its soil is very indif 
ferent, and it is not more than three-fourths of a 
league in length. There is a passage or channel 
from the w. along by the n. end of this island into 
Fortune bay on the s. coast of Newfoundland. 
Lat. 47 n. Long. 56 4 &amp;. It is sometimes 
called Maguelon.l 

MIRA, SAN NICOLAS DE, a settlement of the 
province of Venezuela, and government of Mara- 
caibo, in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; situate in 
a valley called De los Obispos. It is of a very 
hot temperature, though pleasant and delightful, 
and is surrounded by the copious rivers of the St. 
Domingo, Masparro, and La Yuca. It is very 
healthy, and abounds in every kind of fruit and 
vegetable production, particularly cacao, and to 
bacco of the same quality as that of Barinas, which 
affords a great profit by its commerce, as beitig 
every where much esteemed. It has many ma 
chines for making sugar, abounds in neat cattle 
and horses of good quality, and contains 600 
housekeepers. It is in the boundary which di 
vides the archbishopric of Santa Fe from the bi 
shopric of Caracas. Six leagues from the city of 
Barinas. 

MIRA, another settlement, of the province and 
corregimiento of Ibarra in the kingdom of Quito, 
celebrated for the multitude of asses bred in its 
territory, and from whence the other settlements of 
the jurisdiction are supplied for the purposes of 
commerce. They traverse the country in troops, 
and the masters of the estates in that district allow, 
for a small acknowledgment, the natives to go and 
catch them ; and this they cflect with great faci 
lity, surrounding them by numbers on loot and 



MIR 

horseback, although it costs them great labour af 
terwards to tame them, owing to their natural cou 
rage. These animals never permit a horse to be 
amongst them, and should one join them they bite 
and kick him to death. In the vicinity of this 
settlement is a mountain called Pachon, from 
whence not many years since great riches were ex 
tracted. It lies in a valley so hot that the Indians 
are dispensed from the mita or personal service. 
In lat. 32 30 n. 

Mi HA, another settlement, of the province and 
government of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito, 
called also Mamos ; situate on the shore of the 
river Guayabeno. 

MIRA, a river of the same province and king 
dom as the former settlement, from whence it takes 
its name. It rises in the n. skirt of the mountain 
of Mojanda, of the mountains of Los Cofanes, from 
two large streams which enter the lake of San 
Pablo, out of which it issues; and, collecting the 
waters of the rivers Pisco, Angel, Taguando, Es- 
cudillas, Caguasqui, and Chiles or Mayasqner, 
which flows down from the heights of Pellizo, 
turns its course to the n. e. and receives the rivers 
Camunixi, Gualpi, Nulpe, and Puespi, taking the 
name of the province, and afterwards changing it 
to Mira, till it reaches the spot where it enters the 
Pacific or S. sea by nine mouths, between the 
point of Manglares and the island and port of Tu- 
maco. Its shores in the territory of the town of 
Ibarra are very delightful and pleasant, from being 
full of gardens and sugar-cane plantations. This 
river, after it incorporates itself with the Chiles, 
enters the province of Esmeraldas, and divides it 
from that of Barbacoas. 

MIRA Pon Vos, some reefs or rocky shoals in 
the N. sea, by the s. part of the w. head of the 
island of Cuba, between this island and that of 
Yuma. 

MIRACA, a lake of the province and govern 
ment of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada. It is near the coast, in the cape of San Ro 
man of the peninsula of Paraguana. 

MIRAFLORES, SANTIAGO DE SANA DE, a 
town of the province and corregimiento of Sana in 
Peru, and of the bishopric of Truxillo ; founded 
by order of the viceroy the Count de Nieva, in 
1546, in a pleasant valley on the n. side of the 
river of its name, seven leagues from the sea : 
the valley was separated from the bishopric of 
Truxillo at the time that it was added to the 
district of Chiclayo. It was the capital of its pro 
vince and very opulent, but at the present day re 
duced to a miserable settlement, the greater part of 
its inhabitants having established themselves in the 



M I R 



247 



spttlement of Lambayeque. The English pirate 
Edward David sacked it in 1680, and in 1720 it 
was completely ruined by a deluge of rain which 
lasted several days, and which caused the river to 
swell to such a degree as to inundate it. In this 
town died Santo Toribio, archbishop of Lima, 
whilst upon his visitation, and before the establish 
ment of the bishopric of Truxillo. It has four 
convents of the following religious orders, San 
Francisco, San Agustin, La Merced, and San Juan 
de Dios, all of which are almost in a state of ruin 
and extreme poverty. It is 357 miles from Lima. 

MIRAFLORI;S, with the dedicatory title of San 
Esteban, a settlement of the province and govern 
ment of Tucuman in Peru, and of the district and 
jurisdiction of the city of Salta. It is a reduction 
of the Lulesand Toconotes Indians, of the pujsip 
of Gran Chaco, and of the missions that were held 
by the regulars of the company ; but at present 
under the charge of the monks of San Francisco. It 
is of a benign and agreeable temperature, has very 
large breeds of cattle, formerly contained upwards 
of 600 Indians, and is situate on the shore of the 
river Salla. It lies in the direct and necessary 
way from Buenos Ayres to Lima. In its vicinity 
is the fort of San Joseph to restrain on that side 
the incursions of the infidel Indians. 

MIRAFLORES, another, of the province and cor 
regimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada. It is of an hot temperature, abundant and 
fertile in sugar-cane and cotton, contains 200 in 
habitants, and a multitude of Negroes in the vari 
ous estates of its district. It is half a league from 
its capita!. 

MIRAFLORES, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Popayan, in the same kingdom as the 
former. It is on a fertile, pleasant spot, near the 
river Timbo, and the climate is very healthy. It 
had in former times a considerable population, 
but is at present reduced to a miserable state. It 
lies to the n.e. of the Palo Bobo, in lat. 2 13 n. 

MIRAFLORKS, another, of the province and cor- 
regirnicnto of Guamalies in Peru; annexed to the 
curacy of Llacta. 

MIUAFLOR:;S, another, with the dedicatory title 
of San Marcos, in the province and corregimiento 
of Chayauta in the same kingdom, 

MIKAFLORES, another, of the province and cor- 
regimienlo of Ccrcado in the same kingdom ; an 
nexed to the curacy of La Magdalcna. 

MIRAFLORF.S, a river of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Conchucos. It rises near the settle 
ment of this name, as will be found mentioned 
above, runs n. and enters the Maranon. 

MIIIAFLOJKES, a fort, with the dedicatory title 



* &amp; 



MIS 



of San Esteban, in the province and government of 
Tucuman. 

[M1RAGOANE, a town on the n. side of the s. 
peninsula of the island of St. Domingo, and s. side 
of the bight of Leogane, at the head of a bay of 
its name. It is on the road from Jeremie to Port 
au Prince, about 31 leagues e. by s. of the former, 
and 23 w. by s. of the latter. .Lat. 18 27 .] 

MIRAGUANA, an isle situate near the n. coast 
of the island of St. Domingo, in the part possessed 
by the French, opposite the island Goanava, be 
tween the point of Petez and the Trou Forban. 

[MIRAMICHI, or MIRACHI, a port, bay, and 
river, on the n. e. coast of New Brunswick. The 
port is at the mouth of the river. The entrance 
into the bay is very wide ; it has point Portage for 
its n. entrance, and its s. side is formed by Escu- 
minax point, which is 53 miles n.e. of Shediac 
harbour, and 34 s. e. of the mouth of Nippisighit 
river, which empties into Chaleur bay. There is 
a salmon fishery in Miramichi river.] 

MIRAQUANE, a settlement of the province 
and government of Louisiana in N. America ; si 
tuate on the coast at the entrance of the bay of La 
Mobila. 

[MIRAY Bay, on the coast of the island of 
Cape Breton, is to the s. from Morienne bay. 
Large vessels may go up six leagues, and have 
good anchorage, and lie secure from all winds. 
Lat. 46 5 n. Long. 59 49 a?.] 

[M1REBALAIS, an interior town in the French 
part of the island of St. Domingo ; situated nearly 
12 leagues n. of Port an Prince, on the road from 
that city to Varettes ; from which last it is 14 
leagues s. e.] 

M1RGAS, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Conch ucos in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Llamellin. 

M1RIB1RA, a large island of the river Maranon 
or Amazonas ; situate near its entrance into the sea, 
and almost opposite the city of Para. 

M1R1NA1, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Paraguay. It rises from the lake Iberia, 
runs 5. and then turning e. enters the Uruguay. 

MIRLIGUECHE, Bay of, on the s. coast of 
Nova Scotia or Acadia, between cape Rage and 
the island of La Croix. 

M1SCHAUALL1, a small and reduced settle 
ment of the province and government of Quixos 
y Macas in the kingdom of Quito; situate on the 
shore of the river of its name. 

MISCHAUALLI. This river runs e. and oppo 
site the city of Archidona unites itself with another 
small torrent, and takes this name, afterwards col 
lecting the waters of the rivers Hollin, Tena, and 



MIS 

Pano, until it enters by the n. side into the Napo, 
in lat. 1! 18" s. 

[MISCOTHINS, a small tribe of Indians who 
inhabit between lake Michigan and the Missis 
sippi.] 

[MISCOU, or Misco, an island which forms 
the s. side of the entrance of Chaleur bay, and is 
now called Muscow island. The gut of Chepayan, 
about two or three leagues in length, and in some 
parts near a league wide, separates it from the n. e, 
coast of New Brunswick. It abounds with salt 
marsh hay.] 

MISERICORDIA, a port on the coast of the 
straits of Magellan ; discovered by Admiral Pedro 
Sarmiento in 1579, and then taken possession of 
for the seventh time, for the crown of Spain, after 
that it had been abandoned by Villalobos, with 
whom the aforesaid admiral had established other 
six colonies in the gulf of La Santisima Tri 
nidad. 

[MISERY, an isle between Salem and cape 
Ann in Massachusetts.] 

MISHUM, a river of the province and colony 
of New England in N.America. 

MISINA, a small river of the country or land 
of Labrador. It runs s. between the Ovatessaou 
and the Esquimaux, and enters the sea in the gulf 
of St. Lawrence. 

M1SION GRANDE, a settlement of the missions 
that were held by the French regulars of the com 
pany, in New France or Canada ; situate on the 
shore of the river St. Lawrence, between the city 
of Tadoussac and the point ofOcramane. 

MISION, another settlement, of the province and 
corregimiento of Maule in the kingdom of Chile ; 
situate on the shore of the river Biobio, to the w. 
of the town of Millapoa. 

MISION, another, with the surname of Nueva, 
in the province and country of Las Amazonas, 
and in the territory which is occupied by the Por 
tuguese, being a reduction of the missions which 
were held by the Carmelite fathers of this nation ; 
situate on the shore of the river Guatuma. 

MISIPINAC, ariver of New France or Canada 
in NC America. It rises from a lake in the coun 
try of the Papinachois Indians, runs s. e. and en 
ters the grand river St. Lawrence at its mouth or 
entrance. 

M1SISAGAN, or BUADE, a lake of the pro 
vince and government of Luisiana, formed of va 
rious rivers. It runs into a river which is called 
the river o! the Lake, to enter the Mississippi. 

MIS1SAGUES, formerly a settlement of In 
dians of New France or Canada in N.America; 
situate on the shore of the strait of its name, but 



M I S 



1 



MIS 



249 



which is now called the river St. Clair. In it the 
French buijf a fort and establishment for their 
commerce. 

MISISAGUES. The aforesaid strait or river is a 
large canal of water which runs from lake Huron, 
on the s. side, and communicates with lake Erie, 
forming in the middle the lake of St. Clair. 

[M1SKO, an island on the s. w. side of Chaleur 
bay, at its mouth.] 

MISKOUAK1MINA, a settlement of the same 
province and country as the former lake ; situate 
on the shore of the lake Michigan, and at the mouth 
of the river Mellaki. 

M1SKOUASKANE, a lake of New France or 
Canada in N. America; situate between the lakes 
Beauharnois and Begon in the territory of the 
Chemonchovanistes Indians. 

MISOA, a settlement of the government of Ma- 
racaibo, and province of Venezuela, in the JNuevo 
Reyno de Granada : situate on the e. coast of the 
great lake of that name. 

MISP1L1ON, a river of the province and colony 
of Pennsylvania in N.America. 

MISQU1T1C, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district and alculdia mayor of Tecpa- 
titlan in Nucva Galicia; nine leagues to the n. e. 
of its capital. 

[MISS1NABE Lake is situated in the n. part 
of N.America, in lat. 48 29 42" n. and long. 84 
2 42" a&amp;gt;.] 

[MISSIMABE House is situated on the e. side of 
Moose river, eight miles from Missinabe lake, and 
80 w. by s. of Frederic house ; and is a station be 
longing to the Hudson bay company.] 

MISSISSIPPI, a large and abundant river in 
N. America. It rises at the high land which se 
parates the waters running into the Hudson s bay 
from those running into the bay of Mexico : its 
origin is Turtle lake, from whence it traverses this 
spacious country till it disembogues itself in the 
sea at the gulf of Mexico. It is navigable, and 
its course is very winding and irregular for the 
space of more than 2000 miles, including its wind 
ings. The French took possession of it in 1712 ; 
and at the peace of Versailles, in 1763, it was stipu 
lated that its navigation should be free to the Eng 
lish and French, and that a line being drawn down 
the middle of its course, a frontier of division 
should be marked between the possessions of the 
one and the other; expressing further that all the 
continent to the w. of this river should remain to 
the French, and the country to the e. to the Eng 
lish. In the soundings which were made at its 
entrance there were found 16 feel water, and im 
mediately a French ship 5 the Neptune, which had 

VOL. III. 



just arrived from France, entered the river, and 
sailed up as far as New Orleans. Mr. Decan and 
the Father Hennepin of the company of the Jesuits 
also entered this river from the fort of Creveceur, 
and navigate^ up as far as lat. 44 10 n. where 
their course was impeded by a very lofty cascade 
of water, occupying the whole width of the river 
called Antonio de Padua. 

This river traverses nearly the whole of N. Ame 
rica. The Baron Touti, who navigated it in 
1C80, dwells much on the pleasantness of the 
countries that it irrigates, and says that it is 300 
leagues from its origin to where it is entered by 
the Ilines or Ilinois ; and, until it enters the sea in 
the bay of Mexico, 800. The French, under the 
regency of the duke of Orleans, flattered themselves 
they should accumulate great riches through some 
establishments they thought to make in 1719, 
under the name of the Company of Mississippi, 
similar to the S. sea company of the English ; and 
to this intent they were eager to put their money 
into a fund, and to purchase shares ; but they were 
all ruined, and the projected establishments fell to 
the ground. 

This river receives in its course infinite others, 
which augment its stream ; such as the Ohio, 
nearly equal to the Danube, the Ovacache little 
inferior, the grand river of Alibama, the Mobila, 
and others, some of which are so impetuous and 
abundant as to bring down such a quantity of mud 
as to obscure the water for a distance of 20 leagues. 
In this river breed a multitude of alligators and 
other amphibious animals, and also aquatic birds : 
the country on cither side is Very fertile, inhabited 
by an infinite number of different nations of In 
dians, the best known of whom are the Hadovesaves, 
the Hanetons, Ovas, and Thuntolas. It disem 
bogues itself into the sea by a great many mouths, 
which form a number of islands, some of which are 
of a considerable size. The aforesaid Baron Touti 
places its three principal mouths between lat. 28 
and 29, and the best geographers between 28 50 
and 29 15 and between long. 89 5 and 89 38 w. 
The country on either side of these mouths is full 
of woods, and uncultivated through the frequent 
inundation and barrenness of the territory, this 
producing nothing but shrubs, and a species of 
trees, all of which are stripped of their bark, &amp;c. 
by the force of the waters. Some leagues further, 
up, beyond the lake, the country is represented by 
travellers as being very agreeable, covered with 
vines and all kinds of fruit-trees, and producing 
maize in abundance, with pulse and other grain, 
of which two crops are gathered yearly. 

[Mr. Ashe represents this river as exhibiting, in 

K K 



250 



MISSISSIPPI. 



[its scenery and current, an almost continued suc 
cession of beauty, richness, and grandeur. The 
navigation, like that of the Ohio, is interrupted 
with islands ; of which the number is increasing. 
During its floods, which are periodical, the same 
author asserts, a " first-rate man of war may de 
scend with safely." The country on both sides of 
the Mississippi, and on its tributary streams, is 
equal in goodness to any in N. America. This 
river is navigable to St. Anthony s falls without 
any obstruction, and some travellers describe it as 
navigable above them. On both sides this river 
are salt springs or licks, which produce excellent 
salt ; and on its branches are innumerable such 
springs. Besides the coal mines in the upper parts 
of the Ohio country, there are great quantities of 
coal on the upper branches of this river. Some 
account of the valuable productions on the banks 
of this majestic river, and the lands which its 
branches water, will be seen under the description 
of Louisiana, W. Florida, Tennessee, Georgia, 
&amp;c. &amp;c. 

Much, indeed, has been written, and much still 
remains to be said, of the course and soundings of 
this river, and of the properties of the soil through 
which it runs. It is a subject highly interesting 
and important ; and we shall not therefore be 
afraid of extending this article to an undue length 
by inserting 

Some Observations made in a Voyage, commencing 
at St. Catherine s landing, on the e. bank of 
the Mississippi, proceeding downwards to the 
mouth of Red river, and from thence ascending 
that river, the flkick river, and the Wash-it a 
river, as high as the Hot springs, in the prox 
imity of the last-mentioned river, extracted from 
the Journals of William Dunbar, Esq. and Dr. 
Hunter. 

&amp;lt; MR. DUNBAR, Dr. Hunter, and the party 
employed by the United States to make a survey 
of, and explore the country traversed by, the 
Washita river, left. St. Catherine s landing, on the 
Mississippi, in lat. 31 26 30" n. and long. 6h. 
5 56" w. from the meridian of Greenwich, on 
Tuesday the 16th of October 1804. A little 
distance below St. Catherine s creek, and five 
leagues from Natches, they passed the White 
cliffs, composed chiefly of sand, surmounted 
by pine, and from 100 to 200 feet high. When 
the waters of the Mississippi are low, the base of 
the cliff is uncovered, which consists of different 
coloured clays, and some beds of ochre, over 
which there lies, in some places, a thin lamina of 
iron ore. Small springs, possessing a petrifying 
quality, flow over the clay and ochre, and nume 



rous logs and pieces of timber, converted into 
stone, are strewed about the beach. Fine pure 
argil of various colours, chiefly white and red, is 
found here. 

* On the 17th they arrived at the mouth of Red 
river, the confluence of which with the Missis 
sippi, agreeably to the observations of Mr. de 
Ferrer, lies in lat. 31 1 W n. and long. 6h. T 
l\" w. of Greenwich, lied river is here about 500 
yards wide, and without any sensible current. 
The banks of the river are clothed with willow ; 
the land low and subject to inundation, to the 
height of 30 feet or more above the level of the 
water at this time. The mouth of the Red river is 
accounted to be 75 leagues from New Orleans, 
and three miles higher up than the Chafalaya or 
Opelousa river, which was probably a continuation 
of the Red river when its waters did not unite 
with those of the Mississippi but during the inun 
dation. 

* On the 18lh the survey of the lied river was 
commenced^ and on the evening of the 19th the 
party arrived at the mouth of the Black river, in 
lat. 31 15 48* w. and about 26 miles from the 
Mississippi. The Red river derives ils name from 
the rich fat earth or marl of that colour, borne 
down by the floods; the last of which appeared to 
have deposited on the high bank a stratum of up 
wards of half an inch in thickness. The vegeta 
tion on its banks is surprisingly luxuriant ; no 
doubt owing to the deposition of marl during its 
annual floods. The willows grow to a good size ; 
but other forest-trees are much smaller than those 
seen on the banks of the Mississippi. As you ad 
vance up the river it gradually narrows ; in lat. 
31 8 n. it is about 200 yards wide, which width 
is continued to the mouth of Black river, where 
each of them appears 150 yards across. The 
banks of the river are covered with pea-vine and 
several sorts of grass bearing seed, which geese 
and ducks eat very greedily ; and there are gene 
rally seen willows growing on one side, and on the 
other a small growth of black oak, paccawn, hic- 
cory, elm, &amp;c. The current in the Red river is 
so moderate as scarcely to afford an impediment to 
its ascent. 

On sounding the Black river, a little above its 
mouth, there was found 20 feet of water, with a 
bottom of black sand. The water of Black river 
is rather clearer than that of the Ohio, and of a 
warm temperature, which it may receive from the 
water flowing into it from the valley of the Mis 
sissippi, particularly by the Catahoola. At noon 
on the 23d, by a good meridian observation, they 
ascertained their latitude to be 30 36 29" n. andj 



MISSISSIPPI. 



251 



then a little below the mouths of the Cata- 
Loola, Washita, and Bayau Tenza, the united 
waters of which form the Black river. The cur 
rent is very gentle the whole length of the Black 
river, which in many places does not exceed SO 
yards in width. The banks on the lower part of 
the river present a great luxuriance of vegetation 
and rank grass, with red and black oak, ash, 
paccawn, liiccory, and some elms. The soil is 
black marl, mixed with a moderate proportion of 
sand, resembling much the soil on the Mississippi 
banks ; yet the forest-trees are not lofty, like those 
on the margin of the Great river, but resembling 
the growth on the lied river. In hit. 31 24 4:6" n. 
they observed that canes grew on several parts of 
the right bank, a proof that the land is not deeply 
overflowed ; perhaps from one to three feet : the 
banks have the appearance of stability ; very little 
willow, or other productions of a newly formed 
soil on either side. On advancing up the river, 
the timber becomes larger, in some places rising to 
the height of 40 feet ; yet the land is liable to be 
inundated, not from the waters of this small river, 
but from the intrusion of its more powerful neigh 
bour the Mississippi. The lands decline rapidly, 
as in all alluvial countries, from the margin to the 
cypress swamps, where more or less water stagnates 
all the year round. On the 21st they passed a 
small but elevated island, said to be the only one 
in this river for more than JOO leagues ascending. 
On the left bank, near this island, a small settle 
ment of a couple of acres has been begun by a 
man and his wife. The banks are not less than 40 
feet above the present level of the water in the river, 
and are but rarely overflowed : on both sides they 
are clothed with rich cane brake, pierced by creeks 
fit to carry boats during the inundation. 

* They saw many cormorants, and the hooping 
crane ; geese and ducks were not yet abundant, but 
are said to arrive in myriads, with the rains and 
winter s cold. They shot a fowl of the duck 
kind, whose foot was partially divided, and the 
body covered with a bluish or lead-coloured plu 
mage. On the morning of the 22d they observed 
green matter floating on the river ; supposed to 
come from the Catahoola and other lakes and 
bayaus of stagnant water, which, when raised a 
little by rain, flow into the Black.river ; and also 
many patches of an aquatic plant, resembling 
small islands, some floating on the surface of the 
river, and others adhering to, or resting on the 
shore and logs. On examining this plant it was 
found a hollow-jointed stem, with roots of the 
same form, extremely light, with very narrow 
willow-shaped leaves projecting from the joint, 



embracing, however, the whole of the tube, and 
extending to the next inferior joint or knot. The 
extremity of each branch is terminated by a spike 
of very slender, narrow, seminal leaves, from one 
to two inches in length, and one-tenth, or less, in 
breadth, producing its seed on the underside of the 
leaf, in a double row almost in contact ; the grains 
alternately placed in perfect regularity : not being 
able to find the flower, its class and order could 
could not be determined, although it is not pro 
bably new. Towards the upper part of the Black 
river the shore abounded with muscles and perri- 
winkles. The muscles were of the kind called 
pearl muscles. The men dressed a quantity of 
them, considering them as an agreeable food ; but 
Mr. D. found them tough and unpalatable. 

On arriving at the mouth of the Catahoola, 
they landed to procure information from a French 
man settled there. Having a grant from the Spa 
nish government, he has made a small settlement, 
and keeps a ferry-boat for carrying over men and 
horses travelling to and from Natchez, and the 
settlements on lied river, and on the Washita 
river. The country here is all alluvial*. In process 
of time, the rivers, shutting up ancient passages, 
and elevating the banks over which their waters 
pass, no longer communicate with the same faci 
lity as formerly : the consequence is, that many 
very large tracts, formerly subject to inundation, 
are now entirely exempt from that inconvenience. 
Such is the situation of a most valuable tract upon 
which this Frenchman is settled. His house stands 
on an Indian mount, with several others in view. 
There is also a species of rampart surrounding this 
place, and one very elevated mount, a view and 
description of which was postponed till the travel 
lers return ; their situation not allowing of the re 
quisite delay. The soil is equal to the best Missis 
sippi bottoms. 

From this place they proceeded to the mouth 
of Washita, in lat. 35 37 1" n. and encamped on 
the evening of the 23d. 

* This river derives its appellation from the name 
of an Indian tribe formerly resident on its banks ; 
the remnant of which, it is said, went into the 
gleat plains to the w. and either compose a small 
tribe themselves, or are incorporated into another 
nation. The Black river loses its name at the 
junction of the Washita, Catahoola, and Tenza, 
although our maps represent it as taking place of 
the Washita. The Tenza and Catahoola are also 
named from Indian tribes now extinct. The lat 
ter is a creek 12 leagues long, which is the issue 
of a lake of the same name, eight leagues in 
length, and about two leagues in breadth. It lies] 

K K 2 



MISSISSIPPI. 



[o&amp;gt;. from the mouth of the Catahoola, and com 
municates with the Red river during the great an 
nual inundation. At the w. or n. w. angle of the 
lake, a creek called Little river enters, which pre 
serves a channel with running water at all seasons, 
meandering along the bed of the lake ; but in all 
other parts its superficies, during the dry season 
from July to November, and often later, is com 
pletely drained, and becomes covered with the 
most luxuriant herbage; the bed of the lake then 
becomes the residence of immense herds of deer, 
of turkeys, geese, cranes, &amp;c. which feed on 
the grass and grain. Bayau Tenza serves only to 
drain off a part of the waters of the inundation 
from the low lands of the Mississippi, which here 
communicate with the Black river during the sea 
son of high water. 

Between the mouth of the Washita and Ville- 
mont s prairie on the right, the current of the river 
is gentle, and the banks favourable for towing. 
The lands on both sides have the appearance of 
being above the inundation ; the timber, generally 
such as high lands produce, being chiefly red, 
white, and black oaks, interspersed with a variety 
of other trees. The magnolia grandifiora, that in 
fallible sign of the land not being subject to inun 
dation, is not, however, among them. Along the 
banks a stratum of solid clay or marl is observ 
able, apparently of an ancient deposition. It lies 
in oblique positions, making an angle of nearly SO 
degrees with the horizon, and generally inclined 
with the descent of the river, although in a few 
cases the position was contrary. Timber is seen 
projecting from under the solid bank, which seems 
indurated, and unquestionably very ancient, pre 
senting a very different appearance from recently 
formed soil. The river is about 80 yards wide. 
A league above the mouth of the Washita, the 
Bayau Haha comes in unexpectedly from the right, 
and is one of the many passages through which 
the waters of the great inundation penetrate and 
pervade all the low countries, annihilating, for a 
time, the currents of the lesser rivers in the neigh 
bourhood of the Mississippi. The vegetation is 
remarkably vigorous along the alluvial banks, 
which are covered with a thick shrubbery, and 
innumerable plants in full blossom at this late 
season. 

1 Villemont s prairie is so named in consequence 
of its being include;! within a grant under the 
French government to a gentleman of that name. 
Many other parts on the Washita arc named after 
(heir early proprietors. The French people pro 
jected and began extensive settlements on this river, 
but the general massacre planned, and in part ex- 
2 



ecuted, by the Indians against them, and the con 
sequent destruction of the Natchez tribe by the 
French, broke up all these undertakings, and they 
were not recommenced under that government. 
Those prairies are plains, or savannas, without 
timber ; generally very fertile, and producing an 
exuberance of strong, thick, and coarse herbage. 
When a piece of ground has once got into this 
state in an Indian country, it can have no oppor 
tunity of re-producing timber, it being an inva 
riable practice to set fire to the dry grass in the fall 
or winter, to obtain the advantage of attracting 
game when the young tender grass begins to spring : 
this destroys the young timber, and the prairie an 
nually gains upon the wood-land. It is probuble 
that the immense plains known to exist in Ame 
rica, may owe their origin to this custom. The 
plains of the Washita lie chiefly on the e. side, 
and being generally formed like the Mississippi 
land, sloping from the bank of the river to the 
Great river, they are more or less subject to inunda 
tion in the rear ; and in certain great floods the 
water has advanced so far as to be ready to pour 
over the margin into the Washita. This has now 
become a very rare thing, and it may be estimated, 
that from a quarter of a mile to a mile in depth, will 
remain free from inundation during high floods. This 
is pretty much the case with those lands nearly as 
high as the post of the Washita, with the exception 
of certain ridges of primitive high land ; the rest 
being evidently alluvial, although not now subject 
to be inundated by the Washita river, in consequence 
of the great depth which the bed of the river has 
acquired by abrasion. On approaching towards the 
Bayau Louis, Avhich empties its waters into the 
Washita on the right, a little below the rapids, 
there is a great deal of high land on both sides, 
which produces pine and other timber, not the 
growth of inundated lands. At the foot of the ra 
pids the navigation of the river is impeded by beds 
of gravel formed in it. The first rapids lie in lat. 
31 48 57.5" n. a little above which there is a 
high ridge of primitive earth, studded with abun 
dance of fragments of rocks, or stone, which ap 
pear to have been thrown up to the surface in a 
very irregular manner. The stone is of a friable 
nature, some of it having the appearance of indu 
rated clay ; the -outside is blackish from exposure 
to the air ; within, it is a greyish white. It is said 
that in the hill the strata are regular, and that good 
grindstones may be here obtained. The last of the 
rapids, which is formed by a ledge of rocks cross 
ing the entire bed of the river, was passed in the 
evening of the 27th ; above it the water became 
again like a mill-pond, and about 100 yards wide.] 



MISSISSIPPI. 



253 



[The "whole of these first shoals or rapids embraced 
an extent of about a mile and a half ; the obstruc 
tion was not continued, but felt at short intervals 
in this distance. On the right, about four leagues 
from the rapids, they passed the Bayau anx Bceufs, 
a little above a rocky hill: high lands and savanna 
are seen on the right. On sounding the river they 
found three fathoms water on a bottom of mud and 
sand. The banks of the river, above the bayau, 
seem to retain very little alluvial soil; the high land 
earth, which is a sandy loam of a light grey co 
lour, with streaks of red saud and clay, is seen on 
the left bank ; the soil not rich, bearing pines, in 
terspersed with red oak, hiccory, and dog wood. 
The river is from CO to 100 yards wide here, but 
decreases as you advance. The next rapid is 
made by a ledge of rocks traversing the river, and 
narrowing the wa(er channel to about 30 yards. 
The width between the high banks cannot be less 
than 100 yards, and the banks from 30 to 40 feet 
high. In lat. J2 10 13", rapids and shoals again 
occurred, and the channel was very narrow ; the 
sand bars, at every point, extended so far into the 
bend as to leave little more than the breadth of the 
boat of water sufficiently deep for her passage, 
although it spreads over the width of70or80yards 
upon the shoal. 

* In the afternoon of the 31st they passed a little 
plantation or settlement on the right, and at night 
arrived at three others adjoining each other. These 
settlements are on a plain or prairie, the soil of 
which we may be assured is alluvial from the regu 
lar slope which the land has from the river. The 
bed of the river is now sufficiently deep to free 
them from the inconvenience of its inundation ; 
yet in the rear, the waters of the Mississippi ap 
proach, and sometimes leave dry but a narrow 
strip along the bank of the river. It is, however, 
now more common, that the extent of the fields 
cultivated (from | to 4 mile) remains dry during 
the season of inundation ; the soil here is very 
good, but not equal to (he Mississippi bottoms; it 
may be esteeemed second rate. At a small distance 
to the e. are extensive cypress swarnps, over which 
the waters of the inundation always stand to the 
depth of from 15 to 25 feet. On the zo. side, after 
passing over the valley of the river, whose breadth 
varies from a quarter of a mile to two miles, or 
more, the land assumes a considerable elevation, 
from 100 to 300 t oet, and extends all along to the 
settlements of the Red river. These high hinds 
are reported to be poor, and badly watered, being 
chiefly what is termed a pine barren. There is 
here a ferry and road of -communication between 



the post of the Wash ita and the Natchez, and a 
fork of this road passes to the settlement called the 
Rapids, on Red river, distant from this place, by 
computation, 150 miles. 

( On this part of the river, lies a considerable 
tract of land, granted by the Spanish government 
to the Marquis of Maison Rouge, a French emi 
grant, who bequeathed it with all his property to 
M. Bouligny, son of the late colonel of the Loui 
siana regiment, and by him sold to Daniel Clarke. 
It is said to extend from the post of Washita with 
a breadth of two leagues, including the river, 
down to the Bayau Calumet; the computed 
distance of which along the river is called 30 
leagues, but supposed not more than 12 in a direct 
line. 

* On the 6th of November, in the afternoon, 
the party arrived at the post of the Washita, in 
lat. 32 29 37" n. where they were politely re 
ceived by Lieutenant Bowmar, who immediately 
offered the hospitality of his dwelling, with all the 
services in his power. 

* From the ferry to this place, the navigation of 
the river is, at this season, interrupted by many 
shoals and rapids. The general width is from 80 
to 100 yards. The water is extremely agreeable 
to drink, and much clearer than that of the Ohio 
In this respect it is very unlike its two neighbours*, 
the Arkansa and Red rivers, whose waters are 
loaded with earthy matters of a reddish brown 
colour, giving to them a chocolate-like appear 
ance ; and, when those waters are low, are not 
potable, being brackish from the great number of 
salt springs which flow into them, and probably 
from the beds of rock salt over which they may 
pass. The banks of the river presented very little 
appearance of alluvial land, but furnished an in- 
fiiiitiu e of leautiful landscapes, heightened by the 
vivid colouring they derive from the autumnal 
changes of the leaf. Mr. Dunbar observes, that 
the change of colour in the leaves of vegetables, 

t 

which is probably occasioned by the oxygen oflhe 
atmosphere acting on the vegetable matter, de 
prived of the protecting power of vital principle, 
may serve as an excellent guide to the naturalist 
who directs his attention to the discovery of new 
objects for the use of the dyer. For he has always 
remarked, that the leaves of those trees whose bark 
or wood is known to produce a dye, arc changed 
in autumn to the same colour which is extracted in 
the dyer s vat from the woods ; more especially by 
the use of mordants, as alum, &amp;c. which yields 
oxygen : thus the foliage of the hiccory and oak, 
which produces the quercitron bark, is changed] 



254 



MISSISSIPPI. 



[before its fall into a beautiful yellow. Other oaks 
assume a fawn colour, a liver colour, or a blood 
colour, and are known to yield dyes of the same 
complexion. 

&amp;lt; In lat. 32 18 n. Dr. Hunter discovered along 
the river side a substance nearly resembling mine 
ral coal ; its appearance was that of the carbonated 
wood described by Kirvvan. It does not easily 
burn ; but on being applied to (he flame of a can 
dle, it sensibly increased it, and yielded a faint 
smell, resembling in a slight degree that of the 
gum lac of common sealing-wav. 

* Soft friable stone is common, and great quan 
tities of gravel and sand, upon the beaches in this 
part of the river. A reddish clay appears in the 
strata, much indurated and blackened by exposure 
to the light and air. 

1 The position called fort Miro being the pro 
perty of a private person, who was formerly civil 
commandant here, the lieutenant has taken post 
about 400 yards lower; has built himself some 
log houses, and inclosed them with a slight stock 
ade. Upon viewing the country e. of the river, 
it is evidently alluvial ; the surface has a gentle 
slope from the river to the rear of the plantations. 
The land is of excellent quality, being a rich black 
mould to the depth of a foot, under which there 
is a friable loam of a brownish liver colour. 

* At the post of the VVashita, they procured a 
boat of less draught of water than the one in which 
they ascended the river thus far; at noon, on the 
llth of November, they proceeded on the voyage, 
and in the evening encamped at the plantation of 
Baron Bastrop. 

4 This small settlement on the Washita, and 
some of the creeks falling into it, contains not 
more than 500 persons, of all ages and sexes. It 
is reported, however, that there is a great quantity 
of excellent land upon these creeks, and that the 
settlement is capable of great extension, and may 
be expected, with an accession of population, to 
become very flourishing. There are three mer 
chants settled at the post, who supply, at very ex 
orbitant prices, the inhabitants with their neces 
saries. These, with the garrison, two small planters, 
and a tradesman or two, constitute the present 
village. A great proportion of the inhabitants con 
tinue the old practice of hunting during the win 
ter season, and they exchange their peltry for ne 
cessaries, with the merchants, at a low rate. Dur 
ing the summer, these people content themselves 
with raising corn, barely sufficient for bread dur 
ing the year. In this manner 1 hey always remain 
extremely poor. Some few ^ho have conquered 



that habit of indolence, which is always the con 
sequence of the Indian mode of life, and attend to 
agriculture, live more comfortably, and taste a 
little of the sweets of civilized life, 

The lands along the river above the post are 
not very inviting, being a thin poor soil, and co 
vered with pine wood. To the right, the settle 
ments on the Bayau Barthelcmi and Siard, are 
said to be rich land. 

4 On the morning of the 1 3th they passed an 
island and a strong rapid, and arrived at a little 
settlement below a chain of rocks, which cross the 
channel between an islandand the mainland, called 
Iloque Raw. The Spaniard and his family set 
tled here, appear, from their indolence, to live 
miserably. The river acquires here a more spa 
cious appearance, being about 150 yards wide. 
In the afternoon they passed the Bayau Barlhelcmi 
on the right, above the last settlements, and about 
J2 computed leagues from the post. Here com 
mences Baron Bastrop s great grant of land from 
the Spanish government, being a square of 12 
leagues on each side, a little exceeding a million 
of French acres. The banks of the river continue 
about 30 feet high, of which 18 feet from the 
water are a clayey loam of a pale ash colour, upon 
which the water has deposited 12 teet of light 
sandy soil, apparently fertile, and of a dark 
brown colour. This description of land is of small 
breadth, not exceeding half a mile on each side 
of the river, and may be called the valley of the 
"NV ash ita, beyond which there is high land covered 
with pines. 

* The soil of the Bayau des Buttes continues 
thin with a growth of small timber. This creek 
is named from a number of Indian mounts disco 
vered by the hunters along its course. The mar 
gin of the river begins to be covered with such 
timber as usually grows on inundated land, par 
ticularly a species of white oak, vulgarly called 
the over-cup oak ; its timber is remarkably hard, 
solid, ponderous, and durable, and it produces 
a large acorn in great abundance, upon which 
the bear feeds, and which is very fattening for 
hogs. 

In lat. 32 50 8" n. they passed a long and 
narrow island. The face of the country begins to 
change ; the banks are low and steep ; the river 
deep and more contracted, from 30 to 50 yards in 
width. The soil in the neighbourhood of the river 
is a very sandy loam, and covered with such vege 
tables as are found on the inundated lands of the 
Mississippi. The tract presents the appearance of 
a new soil, very different from what they passed] 



MISSISSIPPI. 



255 



[below. This alluvial tract may be supposed the 
site of a great lake, drained by a natural channel, 
from the abrasion of the waters : sinee which pe 
riod the annual inundations have deposited the 
superior soil : 18 or 20 feet are wanting to render 
it habitable for man. It appears, nevertheless, 
well slocked with the beasts of the forest, several 
of which were seen. 

Quantities of water-fowl were beginning to make 
their appearance, which are not very numerous 
here until the cold rains and frost compel them to 
leave a more n. climate. Fish is not so abundant 
as might be expected, owing, it is said, to the 
inundation of the Mississippi, in the year 1799, 
which dammed up the Washita, some distance 
above the post, and produced a stagnation and 
consequent corruption of the waters that destroyed 
all the fish within its influence. 

* At noon, on the 15th of November, they 
passed the island of Mallet, and at 90 yards n. e. 
from the upper point of the island, by a good ob 
servation, ascertained their latitude to be 32 59 
27 /y n. or two seconds and a half of latitude s. of 
the dividing line between the territories of Orleans 
and Louisiana. The bed of the river along this 
alluvial country is generally covered with water, 
and the navigation uninterrupted ; but in the after 
noon of this day, they passed three contiguous 
sand bars, or beaches, called Les Trois Battures, 
and before evening the Bayau de Grand Marias, 
or Great Marsh creek, on the right, and La Cy- 
preri Chatfelrau, a point of high land on the other 
side, which reaches within half a mile of the river. 
As they advanced towards the Marias de Saline, 
on the right, a stratum of dirty white clay under 
the alluvial tract shewed them to be leaving the 
sunken, and approaching the high land country. 
The Salt Lick marsh does not derive its name from 
any bnckishness in the water of the lake or marsh, 
but from its contiguity to some of the licks some 
times called saline, and sometimes glaise, gene 
rally found in a clay compact enough for potters 
ware. The Bayau de la Tulipe forms a commu 
nication between the lake and the river. Opposite 
to this place, there is a point of high land forming 
a promontory, advancing within a mile of the 
river, and to which boats resort when the low 
grounds are under water. A short league above is 
the mouth of the grand Bayau de la Saline (Salt 
Lick creek). This creek is of a&amp;gt; considerable 
length, and navigable for small boats. The hun 
ters ascend it, to 100 of their leagues, in pursuit 
of game, and aH agree that none of the springs 
which feed this creek are salt. It has obtained its 
name from the many buffalo salt licks which have 



been discovered in its vicinity. Although most 
of these licks, by digging, furnish water which 
holds marine salt in solution, there exists no rea 
son for believing, that many of them would pro 
duce nitre. Notwithstanding this low and alluvial 
tract appears in all respects well adapted to the 
growth of the long moss (tilandsia), none w:is ob 
served since entering it in lat. 32 52 ; and as the 
pilot informed them, none would be seen in their 
progress up the river, it is probable that the lati 
tude of 33 is here the n. limit of vegetation. The 
long-leaf pine, frequently the growth of rich and 
even inundated land, was here observed in great 
abundance: the short-leaved or pitch pine, on the 
contrary, is always found upon arid lands, and 
generally in sandy and lofty situations. 

* This is the season when the poor sett crs on 
the Washita turn ont to make their annual hunt. 
The deer is now fat and the skins in perfect ion ; 
the bear is now also in his best state, with regard 
to the quality of his fur, and the quantity of fat or 
oil he yields, as he has been feasting luxuriantly 
on the autumnal fruits of the forest. It is here 
well known, that he does not confine himself, as 
some writers have supposed, to vegetable food ; he 
is particularly fond of bog s flesh : sheep and 
calves are frequently his prey, and no animal es 
capes him which comes within his power, and 
which he is able to conquer. He often destroys 
the fawn, when chance throws it in his way ; he 
cannot, however, discover it by smelling, notwith 
standing the excellence of his scent, for nature has, 
as if for its protection, denied the fawn the pro 
perty of leaving any effluvium upon its track, a 
property so powerful in the old deer. The bear, 
unlike most other beasts of prey, does not kill the 
animal he has seized upon before he eats it ; but, 
regardless of its -struggles, cries, and lamentations, 
fastens upon, and, if the expression is allowable, 
devours it alive. The hunters count much on 
their profits from the oil drawn from the bear s fat, 
which, at New Orleans, is always of ready sale, 
and much esteemed for its wholesorneness in cook 
ing, being preferred to butter or hog s lard. It is 
found to keep longer than any other animal oil, 
without becoming rancid ; and boiling it, from 
time to time, upon sweet bay leaves, restores its 
sweetness, or facilitates its conservation. 

In the afternoon of the J 7th they passed some 
sand beaches, and over a few rapids. They had 
cane brakes on both sides of the river; the canes 
were small, but demonstrated that the water does 
not surmount the bank more than a few feet. The 
river begins to widen as they advance ; the banks 
of the river shew the high land soil, with a stratum] 



256 



MISSTSSIP PI. 



[of three or four feet of alluvion deposited by the 
liver upon it. This superstratum is greyish, and 
very sandy, with a small admixture of loam, indi 
cative of the poverty of the mountains and up 
lands where the river rises. Near this they passed 
through a new and very narrow channel, in which 
all the water of the river passes, except in time of 
freshes, when the interval forms an island. A Hide 
above this pass is a small clearing, called Cache 
la Tulipe (Tulip s hiding place) ; this is the name 
of a French hunter who here concealed his pro 
perty. It continues the practice of both the white 
and red hunters to leave their skins, &amp;c. often 
suspended to poles, or laid over a pole placed upon 
two forked posts, in sight of the river, until their 
return from hunting. These deposits are consi 
dered as sacred, and few examples exist of their 
being plundered. After passing the entrance of a 
bay, which within must form a great lake during 
the inundation, great numbers of the long-leaf pine 
were observed ; and the increased size of the canes 
along the river s bank, denoted a better and more 
elevated soil ; on the left was a high hill (300 feet) 
covered with lofty pine trees. 

4 The banks of the river present more the ap 
pearance of upland soil, the under-stratum being a 
-pale yellowish clay, and the alluvial soil of a dirty 
white, surmounted by a thin covering of a brown 
vegetable earth. The trees improve in appearance, 
growing to a considerable size and height, though 
yet inferior to those on the alluvial banks of the 
Mississippi. After passing the Bayau de Hachis, 
on the left, points of high land, not subject to be 
overflowed, frequently touch the river, and the 
valley is said to be more than a league in breadth 
on both sides. On the left are pine hills called 
Code de Champignole. The river is not more 
than 50 or 60 yards wide. On the morning of the 
20th they passed a number of sand beaches, and 
some rapids, but found good depth of water be 
tween them. A creek called Chemin Convert, 
which forms a deep ravine in the high lands, here 
enters the river ; almost immediately above this is 
a rapid where the water "in the river is confined to 
a channel of about 40 yards in width: above it 
they had to quit the main channel, on account of 
the shallowness and rapidity of the water, and 
pass along a narrow channel of only 60 feet wide : 
without a guide, a stranger might take this passage 
for a creek. 

4 Notwithstanding the lateness of the season, 
and then, latitude they were in, they this day 
met with an alligator. The banks of the river are 
covered with cane or thick under-brush, fre 
quently so interwoven with thorns and briars as to 



be impenetrable. Birch, maple, holly, and two 
kinds of wood to which names have not yet been 
given, except water side wood, are here met 
with ; as also petsimons and small black grapes. 
The margin of the river is fringed with a variety 
of plants and vines, among which are several spe 
cies of convolvulus. 

&amp;lt; On the left they passed a hill and cliff 100 
feet perpendicular, crowned with pines, and 
called Cote de Finn s (Fin s hill), from which a 
chain of high land continues some distance. The 
cliff presents the appearance of an ash-coloured 
clay. A little farther to the right is the Bayau 
d Acasia (Locust creek). The river varies here 
from 80 to 100 yards in width, presenting frequent 
indications of iron along its banks, and some thin 
strata of iron ore. The ore is from half an inch 
to three inches in thickness. 

* On the morning of the 22d of November, 
they arrived at the road of the Chadadoquis In 
dian nation, leading to the Arkansa nation ; a little 
beyond this is the Ecor a Fabri (Fabri s cliffs) 
from 80 to 100 feet high; and a little distance 
above a smaller cliff called Le Petit Ecor a Fabri 
(the Little cliff of Fabri) : these cliffs appear 
chiefly to be composed of ash-coloured sand, with 
a stratum of clay at the base, such as runs all along 
under the banks of this river. Above these cliffs 
are several rapids ; the current is swifter, and de 
notes their ascent into a higher country : the water 
becomes clear, and equal to any in its very agree 
able taste, and as drinking water. In the river are 
immense beds of gravel and sand, over which the 
water passes with great velocity in the season of 
its floods, carrying with it vast quantities of drift 
wood, which it piles up, in many places, to the 
height of 20 feet above the present surface, point 
ing out the difficulty and danger of navigation in 
certain times of the flood ; accidents, however, are 
rare with the canoes of the country. 

As the party ascended they found the banks of 
the river less elevated, being only from nine to 
12 feet: they are probably surmounted by the 
freshes some feet. The river becomes more ob 
structed by rapids, and sand and gravel beaches^ 
among which are found fragments of stone of all 
forms, and a variety of colours, some highly po 
lished and rounded by friction. The banks of the 
river in this upper country suffer greatly by abra 
sion, one side and sometimes both being broken 
down by every flood. 

* At a place called Auges d Arclon, (Arclon s 
troughs) is laminated iron ore, and a stratum of 
black sand, very tenacious, shining with minute 
crystals. The breadth of the river is here about] 



MISSISSIPPI. 



257 



80 yards ; in some places, however, it is enlarg 
ed by islands, in others contracted to 80 or 100 feet. 
Kocks of a greyish colour, nnd rather friable, arc 
liere found in many places on the river. On the 
banks grow willows of a different form from those 
found below, and on the margin of the Mississippi ; 
the last are very brittle ; these, on the contrary, 
arc extremely pliant, resembling the osier, of which 
they are probably a species. 

4 At noon on the 24th, they arrived at the con 
fluence of the Lesser Missouri with the Washita ; 
the former is a considerable branch, perhaps the 
/ourth of the Washita, and comes in from the left 
hand. The hunters often ascend the Little Mis* 
souri, but are not inclined to penetrate far up, be 
cause it reaches near the great plains or prairies 
upon the Red river, visited by the Lesser Osage 
tribes of Indians, settled on Arkansa ; these last 
frequently carry war into the Chadadoquis tribe 
settled on the Red river, about w. s. w. from this 
place, and indeed they are reported not to spare 
any nation or people. They are prevented from 
visiting the head waters of the Wnshita by the 
steep hills in which they rise. These mountains 
are so difficult to travel over, that the savages 
not having an object sufficiently desirable, never 
attempt to penetrate to this river, and it is sup 
posed to be unknown to the nation. The Chada. 
doquis (or Cadaux as the French pronounce the 
word) may be considered as Spanish Indians: 
they boast, and it is said with truth, that they 
never have imbrued their hands in the blood of a 
white man. It is said that the stream of the Little 
Missouri, some distance from its mouth, flows 
over a bright splendid bed of mineral of a yel 
lowish white colour (most probably martial py 
rites) ; that 30 years ago, several of the inhabi 
tants, hunters, worked upon this mine, and sent 
a quantity of the ore to the government at New 
Orleans, and they were prohibited from working 
any more. 

* There is a great sameness in the appearance of 
the river banks ; the islands are skirted with osier, 
and immediately within, on the bank, grows a 
range of birch trees nnd some willows j the more 
elevated banks are covered with cane, among 
which grow the oak, maple, elm, sycamore, ash, 
hiccorv, dog-wood, holly, ironwood &amp;c From 
the pilot they learned that there is a body of ex 
cellent land on the Little Missouri, particularly 
on the creek called the Bayau a Terre Noire, 
which falls into it. This land extends to Red 
river, and is connected with the great prairies 
which form the hunting grounds of the Cadaux 
nation, consisting of about 200 warriors. They 

VOL, in. 



are warlike, but frequently unable to defend them 
selves against the tribe of Osages, settled on th&amp;lt; 
Arkansa river, who, passing round the mountains 
at the head of the Washita, and along the prairies 
which separated them from the main chain on the 
w. where the waters of the Red and Arkansa rivers 
have their rise, pass into the Cadaux country, and 
rob and plunder them. 

* The water in the river Washita rising, the 
party are enabled to pass the numerous rapids and, 
shoals which they meet with in the upper cour--.ry ; 
some of which are difficult of ascent. The gt ;ieral 
height of the main banks of the river is from six 
to 12 feet above the level of the water : (he land 
is better in quality, the canes, &amp;c. shewing a more 
luxuriant vegetation. It is subject to inundation, 
and shews a brown soil mixed with sand. Near 
Cache Macon (Maison s hiding place) on tlie right, 
they stopped to examine a supposed coal mine : 
Dr. Hunter, and the pilot, set out tor this pur 
pose, and about a mile and a half n. w. from the 
boat, in the bed of a creek, they found a substance 
similar to what they had before met with under 
that name, though more advanced towards a state 
of perfect coal. At the bottom of the creek, in a 
place then drv, were found detached pieces of 
from 50 to 100 pounds weight, adjoining to which 
lay wood, changing into the same substance. A 
stratum of this coal, six inches thick, lay on both 
sides of this little creek, over another of yellow 
clay, and covered by one foot of gravel ; on the 
gravel are eight inches of loam,, which bear a few 
inches of vegetable mould. This stratum of coal 
is about three feet higher than the water in the 
creek, and appears manifestly to have been, at 
some period, the surface of the ground. The 
gravel and loam have been deposited there since, 
by the waters. Some pieces of this coal were very 
black and solid, of an homogeneous appearance, 
much resembling pit coal, but of less specific 
gravity. It does not appear sufficiently impreg 
nated with bitumen, but may be considered as 
vegetable matter in the progress of transmutation 
to coal. 

c .Below the Bayau de I Eau Froide, which runs 
into the Washita from the right, the river is 100 
and 70 yards, flowing through tolerably good land. 
They passed a beautiful forest of pines, and on the 
28th fell in with nn old Dutch hunter and his party, 
consisting in all of five persons. 

* This man has resided 40 years on the Wa- 
shita, and before that period had been up the Ar- 
kansa river, the White river, and the St. Francis : 
the two last, he informs, are of difficult navigation, 
similar to the Waabita, but the Arkansa river u] 

I. L 



MISSISSIPPI. 



great magnitude, having a large and broad 
channel, and when the water is low, has great sand 
bunks, like those in the Mississippi. So far as he 
has been up it, the navigation is safe and commo 
dious, without impediments from rocks, shoals, or 
rapids; its bed being formed of mud and sand. 
The soil on it is of the first rate quality. The 
country is easy of access, being lofty open forests, 
unembarrrassed by canes or undergrowth. The 
water is disagreeable to drink, being of a red colour, 
and brackish when the river is low. A multitude 
of creeks which flow into the Arkansa furnish 
sweet water, which the voyager is obliged to carry 
with him for the supply of his immediate wants. 
This man confirms the accounts of silver being 
abundant up that river : he has not been so high 
as to see it himself, but says he received a silver 
pin from a hunter, who assured him that he himself 
collected the virgin silver from the rock, out of 
which he made the epinglete by hammering it out. 
The tribe -of the Osage live higher up than this 
position, but the hunters rarely go so high, being 
afraid of these savages, who are at war with all the 
world, and destroy all strangers they meet with. 
It is reported that the Arkansa nation, with a part 
of the Choctaws, Chickasaws, Shawneese, &amp;c. 
have formed a league, and are actually gone, or 
going, 800 strong, against these depredators, with 
a view to destroy or drive them entirely off, and 
possess themselves of their fine prairies, which are 
most abundant hunting grounds, being plentifully 
stocked with buffalo, elk, deer, bear, and every 
other beast of the chase common to those latitudes 
in America. This hunter having given information 
of a small spring in their vicinity, from which 
he frequently supplied himself with salt by eva 
porating the water, Dr. Hunter, with a party, 
accompanied him, on the morning of the 29th of 
November, to the place. They found a saline, 
about a mile and a half n, of the camp from 
whence they set out, and near a creek which enters 
the Washita a little above. It is situated in the 
bottom of the bed of a dry gully. The surround 
ing land is rich, and well timbered, but subject 
to inundation, except an Indian mount on the 
creek side, having a base of 80 or 100 feet diameter, 
and 20 feet high. After digging about three feet, 
through blue clay, they came to a quicksand, from 
which the water flowed in abundance : its taste 
was salt and bitter, resembling that of water in the 
ocean. In a second hole it required them to dig 
six feet before they reached the quicksand, in 
doing which they threw up several broken pieces 
of Indian pottery. The specific gravity, com 
pared with the river, was, from the first pit, or 



that three feet deep, 1.02720, from the second pit, 
or that six feet deep, 1.02104, yielding a saline 
mass, from the evaporation of 10 quarts, which, 
when dry, weighed eight ounces ; this brine is, 
therefore, about the same strength as that of the 
ocean on our coast, and twice the strength of the 
famous licks in Kentucky, called Bullet s Lick 
and Mann s Lick, from which so much salt is 
made. 

* The Fourche de Cadaux (Cadadoquis fork), 
which they passed on the morning of the 30th, is 
about 100 yards wide at its entrance into the Wa 
shita, from the left; immediately beyond which, 
on the same side, the land is high, probably ele 
vated 300 feet above the water. The shoals and 
rapids here impede their progress. At noon they 
deduced their latitude, by observation, to be 30 U 
11 37" n. Receiving information of another salt 
lick, or saline, Dr. Hunter landed, with a party, 
to view it. The pit was found in a low flat place, 
subject to be overflowed from the river ; it was 
wet and muddy, the earth on the surface yellow, 
but on digging through about four feet of blue 
clay, the salt water oozed from a quicksand. Ten 
quarts of this water produced, by evaporation, six 
ounces of saline mass, which, from taste, was 
principally marine salt ; to the taste, however, it 
shewed an admixture of soda, and muriated mag 
nesia, but the marine salt greatly preponderated. 
The specific gravity was about 1.076 , probably 
weakened from the rain which had fallen the day 
before. The ascent of the river becomes trouble 
some, from the rapids and currents, particularly 
at the Isle du Bay an des Roches (Rocky Creek 
island), where it required great exertions, and 
was attended with some hazard, to pass them. 
This island is three-fourths of a mile in length. 
The river presents a series of shoals, rapids, and 
small cataracts ; and they passed several points of 
high land, full of rocks and stones, much harder 
and more solid than they had yet met with. 

* The rocks were all silicious, with their fissures 
penetrated by sparry matter. Indications of iron 
were frequent, and fragments of poor ore were 
common, but no rich ore of that, or any other 
metal, was found. Some of the hills appear well 
adapted to the cultivation of the vine ; the soil 
being a sandy loam, with a considerable propor 
tion of gravel, and a superficial covering of good 
vegetable black earth. The natural productions 
are, several varieties of oak, pine, dog-wood, holly, 
&amp;c. with a scattering undergrowth of whortle 
berry, hawthorn, China briar, and a variety of 
small vines. 

* Above the Isle de Mallon, the country wears] 



MISSISSIPPI. 



259 



[another prospect ; high lands and rocks frequently 
approach the river. The rocks, in grain, resemble 
free stone, aud arc hard enough to be used as hand- 
mill stones, to which purpose they are frequently 
applied. The quality of the lands improves, the 
stratum of vegetable earth being from six to 12 
inches, of a dark brown colour, with an admix 
ture of loam arid sand. Below Deer island they 
passed a stratum of free stone, 50 feet thick, under 
which is a quarry of imperfect slate in perpen 
dicular layers. About a league from the river, 
and a little above the slate quarry, is a considerable 
plain, called Prairie de Champignole, often fre 
quented by buffaloes. Some salt licks are found 
near it, and in many situations on both sides of 
this river, there are said to be salines, which may 
hereafter be rendered very productive, and from 
which the future settlements may be abundantly 
supplied. 

About four miles below the Chuttes (falls) they, 
from a good observation, found the latitude 34 21 
25 a . The land on either hand continues to im 
prove in quality, with a sufficient stratum of dark 
earth of a brownish colour. Hills frequently rise 
out of the level country, full of rocks and stones, 
hard and flinty, and often resembling Turkey oil 
stones. Of this kind was a promontory which 
came in from the right hand a little below the 
Chuttes ; at a distance it presented the appearance 
of ruined buildings and fortifications, and several 
insulated masses of rock conveyed the idea of 
redoubts and out-works. This effect was heigh 
tened by the rising of a flock of swans, which had 
taken their station in the water at the foot of these 
walls. As the voyagers approached, the birds 
floated about majestically on the glassy surface of 
the water, and in tremulous accents seemed to con 
sult upon means of safety. The whole was a sub 
lime picture. In the afternoon of the third of 
December, the party reached the Chut(es,and found 
the falls to be occasioned by a chain of rocks of 
the same hard substance seen below, extending in 
the direction of n. e. and 5. w. -quite across the 
river. The water passes through a number of 
branches worn by the impetuosity of the torrent, 
where it forms so many cascades. The chain of 
rock or hill on the lelt appears to have been cut 
down to its present level by the abrasion of the 
waters. By great exertion, and lightening (he 
boat, they passed the Chuttes that evening, and 
encamped just above the cataracts, and within the 
hearing of their incessant roar. 

* Immediately above the Chuttes, the current of 
the water is slow, to another ledge of hard free 
stone ; the reach between is spacious, not less than 



200 yards wide, and terminated by a hill SOO feet 
high, covered with beautiful pines: this is a fine 
situation for building. In lat. 34 25 48" they 
passed a very dangerous rapid, from the number 
of rocks which obstruct the passage of the water, 
and break it into foam. On the right of the rapid 
is a high rocky hill covered with very handsome 
pine woods. The stratum of the rock has an in 
clination of 30 to the horizon, in the direction of 
the river descending. This hill may be 300 or 
350 feet high : a border, or list, of green cane 
skirts the margin of the river, beyond which ge 
nerally rises a high, and sometimes a barren hill. 
Near another rapid they passed a hill on the left, 
containing a large body of blue slate. A small 
distance above the Bayau de Saline they had to 
pass a rapid of 150 yards in length, and four feet 
and a half fall, which, from its velocity, the 
French have denominated La Cascade. Below the 
cascade there are rocky hills on both sides, com 
posed of very hard free stone. The stone in the 
bed of the river, and which has been rolled from 
the upper country, was of the hardest flint, or of a 
quality resembling the Turkey oil stone. Fourche 
au Tigre, (Tyger s creek), which comes in from 
the right, a little above the cascade, is said to have 
many extensive tracts of rich level land upon it. 
The rocky hills here frequently approach the 
Washita on both sides ; rich bottoms are neverthe 
less unfrcquent, and the upland is sometimes of 
moderate elevation and tolerably level . T he stones 
and rocks here met with have their fissures filled 
by sparry and crystalline matter. 

* Wild turkeys become more abundant and less 
difficult of approach than below ; and the howl of 
the wolves is heard during the night. 

&amp;lt; To the Fourche of Calfat, (Caulker s creek) 
where the voyage terminates, they found level and 
good land on the right, and high hills on the left 
hand. After passing overa very precipitous rapid, 
seemingly divided into four steps or falls, one of 
which was at least 15 inches in perpendicular 
height, and which together could not be less than 
five and a half feet, they arrived at Ellix s camp, 
a small distance below the Fourche au Calfat, 
where they stopped on the sixth of December, as 
the pilot considered it the most convenient land 
ing from whence to carry their necessary baggage 
to the hot springs, the distance being about three 
leagues. There is a creek about two league* 
higher up, called Bayau des Sources Chatuls, 
(I lot Spring creek) upon the banks of which the 
hot springs are situated at about t\\o leajrues from 
its mouth. The banks of i( are hilly, and the ron&amp;lt;J 
loss eligible than from Ellis s cainp.J 



260 



MISSISSIPPI. 



[ c On ascending the hill, to encamp, they found 
the land very level and good, some plants in flower, 
and a great many evergreen vines ; the forest oak 
with an admixture of other woods. The latitude 
of this place is 34 27 31". The ground on 
which they encamped was about 50 feet above the 
water in the river, and supposed to be 30 feet 
higher than the inundations. H ills of considerable 
height, and clothed with pine, were in view, but 
the land around, and extending beyond their 
view, lies handsomely for cultivation. The super 
stratum is of a blackish-brown colour, upon a 
yellow basis, the whole intermixed with gravel 
and blue schistus, frequently so far decomposed 
as to have a strong aluminous taste. From their 
camp, on the Washita, to the hot springs, a dis 
tance of about nine miles, the first six miles of the 
road is in a w. direction without many sinuosities, 
and the remainder n. which courses are necessary 
to avoid some very steep hills. In this distance, 
they found three principal salt licks, and some in 
ferior ones, which are all frequented by buffalo, 
deer, &amp;c. The soil around them is a white tena 
cious clay, probably fit for potters ware ; hence 
the name of glaise, which the French hunters have 
bestowed upon most of these licks, frequented by 
the beasts of the forest, many of which exhibit no 
saline impregnation. The first two miles from the 
river Camp is over level land of the second rate 
quality ; the timber chiefly oak, intermixed with 
other trees common to the climate, and a few scat 
tered pines. Further on, the lands, on either hand, 
rise into gently swelling hills, covered with hand 
some pine woods. The road passes along a valley 
frequently wet by the numerous rills and springs 
of excellent water which issue from the foot of the 
hills. Near the hot springs the hills become more 
elevated, steeper of ascent, and rocky. They are 
here called mountains, although none of them in 
view exceed 4 or 500 feet in altitude. It is said 
that mountains of more than five times the eleva 
tion of these hills are to be seen in the n. w. to- 
Avards the sources of the Washita. One of them 
is called the Glass, Crystal, or Shining mountain, 
from the vast number of hexagonal prisms of very 
transparent and colourless crystal which are found 
on its surface ; they are generally surmounted by 
pyramids at one end, rarely on both. These crys 
tals do not produce a double refraction of the rays 
of light. Many searches have been made over 
these mountains for the precious metals, but it is 
believed without success. 

1 At the hot springs they found an open log 
cabin, and a few huts of spUt boards, all calcu 
lated for summer encampment, and which had been 



erected by persons resorting to the springs for the 
recovery of their health. 

* They slightly repaired these huts, or cabins, 
for their accommodation during the time of their 
detention at the springs, for the purpose of ex 
amining them and the surrounding country, and 
making such astronomical observations as were 
necessary for ascertaining their geographical po 
sition. 

1 It is understood that the hot springs are in 
cluded within a grant of some hundred acres, 
granted by the late Spanish commandant of the 
Washita to some of his friends, but it is riot be 
lieved that a regular patent was ever issued for 
the place; and it cannot be asserted that residence, 
with improvement of the land here, forms a plea 
upon which any claim to it can be founded. 

On their arrival they immediately tasted the 
waters of the hot springs, that is, after a few mi 
nutes cooling, for it was impossible to approach it 
with the lips when first taken up, without scald 
ing : the taste does not differ from that of good 
water rendered hot by culinary fire. 

* On the 10th they visited all the hot springs. 
They issue on the e. side of the valley, where the 
huts are, except one spring, which rises on the w. 
bank of the creek, from the sides and foot of a hill. 
From the small quantity of calcarious matter yet 
deposited, the a&amp;gt;. spring does not appear to be of 
long standing ; a natural conduit probably passes 
under the bed of the creek, and supplies it. There 
are four principal springs rising immediately on 
the e. bank of the creek, one of which may be 
rather said to spring out of the gravd-bed of the 
run; a fifth, a smaller one than that above-men- 
tioned, as rising on the w. side of the creek; and 
a sixth, of the same magnitude, the most n. and 
rising near the bank of thfe creek ; these are all 
the sources that merit the name of springs, near the 
huts ; but there is a considerable one below ; and 
all along, at intervals, the warm water oozes out, 
or drops, from the bank into the creek, as appears 
from the condensed vapour floating along the mar 
gin of the creek where the drippings occur. 

&amp;lt; The hill from which the hot springs issue is of 
a conical form, terminating at the top with a few 
loose fragments of rock, covering a flat space 25 
feet in diameter. Although the figure of the hill 
is conical, it is not entirely insulated, but con 
nected with the neighbouring hills by a very nar 
row ridge. The primitive rock of this hill, above 
the base, is principally silicious, some part of it 
being of the hardest Hint, others a free stone, ex 
tremely compact and solid, and of various colours. 
The base of the hill, and for a considerable extent,] 



MISSISSIPPI. 



26 f 



fis. composed of a blackish blue schistus, which 
divides into perpendicular lamina like blue slate. 
The water of the hot springs is, therefore, deli 
vered from the silicious rock, generally invisible at 
the surface, from the mass of calcarious matter 
with which it is incrusted, or rather buried, and 
which is perpetually precipitating from the water 
of the springs : a small proportion of iron, in the 
form of a red calx, is also deposited ; the colour of 
which is frequently distinguishable in the lime. 

* In ascending the hill several patches of rich 
black earth are found, which appear to be formed 
by the decomposition of the calcarious matter : in 
other situations the superficial earth is penetrated, 
or incrusted, by limestone, with fine lamina or 
minute fragments of iron ore. 

* The water of the hot springs must formerly 
have issued at a greater elevation in the hill, and 
run over the surface, having formed a mass of 
calcarious rock 100 feet perpendicular, by its de 
position. In this high situation they found a 
spring, whose temperature was 140 of Fahren 
heit s thermometer. After passing the calcarious 
region, they found the primitive hill covered by a 
forest of not very large trees, consisting chiefly of 
oak, pine, cedar, holly, hawthorn, and others 
common to the climate, with a great variety of 
vines, some said to produce black, and others yel 
low grapes, both excellent in their kinds. The 
soil is rocky, interspersed with gravel, sand, and 
fine vegetable mould. On reaching the height of 
200 feet perpendicular, a considerable change in 
the soil was observable ; it was stony and gravelly, 
with a superficial coat of black earth, but imme 
diately under it lies a stratum of fat, tenacious, 
soapy, red clay, inclining to the colour of bright 
Spanish snuff, homogeneous, with scarcely any 
admixture of sand, no saline, but rather a soft 
agreeable taste : the timber diminishes, and the 
rocks increase in size to the summit. The whole 
height is estimated at 300 feet above the level of 
the valley. 

1 On examining the four principal springs, or 
those which yield the greatest quantity of water, 
or of the highest temperature, No. 1 was found to 
raise the mercury to 150, No. 2 to 154, No. 3 to 
136, and No. 4 to 132 of Fahrenheit s thermo 
meter ; the last is on the w. side of the creek : 
No. 3 is a small basin, in which there is a consi 
derable quantity of green matter, having much the 
appearance of a vegetable body, but detached 
from the bottom, yet connected with it by some 
thing like a stem, which rests in calcarious matter. 
The body of one of these pstuido plants was from 
four to five inches in diameter; the bottom a 



smooth film of some tenacity, and the upper sur 
face divided into ascending fibres of half, or three 
fourths of an inch long, resembling the gills of a 
fish, in transverse row*. A little further on was 
another small muddy basin, in which the water 
was warm to the finger; in it was a vermes about 
half an inch long, moving with a serpentine or 
vermicular motion. It was invariably observed, 
that the green matter forming on the stones and 
leaves covered a stratum of calcarious earth, some 
times a little hard or brittle, at others soft and im 
perfect. From the bottom of one of the hot springs 
a frequent ebullition of gas was observed, which 
not having the means of collecting, they could not 
ascertain its nature : it was not inflammable, and 
there is little doubt of its being carbonic acid, 
from the quantity of lime, and the iron, held in 
solution by the water. 

* They made the following rough estimate of the 
quantity of water delivered by the springs. There 
are four principal springs, two of inferior note ; 
one rising out of the gravel, and a number of drip 
pings and drainings, all issuing from the margin, 
or from under the rock which overhangs the creek. 
Of the four first mentioned, three deliver nearly 
equal quantities, but No. 1, the most considerable, 
delivers about five times as much as one of the 
other three ; the two of inferior note may, together, 
be equal to one; and all the drippings, and small 
springs, are probably under-rated at double the 
quantity of one of the three ; that is, all together, 
they will deliver a quantity equal to eleven times 
the water issuing from the one most commodiously 
situated for measurement. This spring filled a 
vessel of II quarts in 11 seconds; hence the whole 
quantity of hot water delivered from the springs 
at the base of the hill is 165 gallons in a minute, 
or 3774 hogsheads in 24 hours, which is equal to 
a handsome brook, and might work an overshot 
mill. In cool weather condensed vapour is seen 
rising out of the gravel-bed of the creek, from 
springs which cannot be taken into account. Du 
ring the summer and fall, the creek receives little 
or no water but what is supplied by the hot 
springs ; at that season itself is a hot bath, too hot, 
indeed, near the springs; so that a person may 
choose the temperature most agreeable to himself, 
by selecting a natural basin near to^ or farther 
from, the principal springs* At three or four 
miles below the springs the water is tepid and un 
pleasant to drink. 

* From the to. mountain, estimated to be of equal 
height with that from which the hot springs flow, 
there are several fine prospects. The valley of 
the Washita, comprehended between the hills on] 



262 



MISSISSIPPI. 



[either side, seemed a perfect flat, and about 12 
miles wide. On all hands were seen the hills, or 
mountains, as they are here called, rising behind 
each other. In the direction of n. the most dis 
tant were -estimated to be 50 miles off, and are 
supposed to be those of the Arkansa river, or the 
rugged mountains which divide the waters of the 
Arkansa from those of the Washita, and prevent 
theOsage Indians from visiting the latter, of whom 
they are supposed ignorant ; otherwise their ex 
cursions here \vould prevent this place from being 
visited by white persons, or other Indians. In a 
s. w. direction, at about 40 miles distance, is seen 
a perfectly level ridge, supposed to be the high 
prairies of the Red river. 

Notwithstanding the severity of the weather, a 
considerable number, and some variety of plants 
were in flower, and others retained their verdure: 
indeed the ridge was more temperate than the val 
ley below ; there it was cold, damp, and penetrat 
ing ; here dry, and the atmosphere mild. Of the 
plants growing here was a species of cabbage ; the 
plants grow with expanded leaves, spreading on 
the ground, of a deep green, with a shade of pur 
ple T the taste of the cabbage was plainly predomi 
nant, with an agreeable warmth inclining to that 
of the radish ; several tap-roots penetrated into the 
soil of a white colour, having the taste of horse 
radish, but much milder. A quantity of them 
taken to the camp and dressed, proved palatable 
and mild. It is not probable that cabbage seed 
has been scattered on this ridge ; the hunters 
ascending this river have always had different 
objects. Until further elucidation, this cabbage 
must be considered as indigenous to this seques 
tered quarter, and may be denominated the cab 
bage radish of the Washita. They found a plant, 
then green, called by the French racine rouge, 
(red root), which is said to be a specific in female 
obstructions ; it has also been used, combined 
with the China root, to dye red ; the last probably 
acting as a mordant. The top of this ridge is co 
vered with rocks of a flinty kind, and so very hard 
as to be improper for gun-flints, for when applied 
to that use it soon digs cavities in the hammer of 
the lock. This hard stone is generally white, but 
frequently clouded with red, brown, black, and 
other colours. Here and there fragments of iron 
stone were met with, and where a tree had been 
overturned, its roots brought to view fragments of 
schistus, which were suffering decomposition from 
exposure to the atmosphere. On digging where 
the slope of the hill was precipitous, they found 
the second stratum to be a reddish clay, resembling 
that found on the conical hill e. of the camp. At 



two-thirds down the hill, the rock was a hard free 
stone, intermixed with fragments of flint which 
had probably rolled from above. Still lower was 
found a blue schistus, in a state tending to decom 
position where exposed to the atmosphere, but 
hard and resembling coarse slate in the interior. 
Many stones had the appearance of Turkey oil 
stones : at the foot of the hill the country expands 
into good farming lands. 

Dr. Hunter, upon examining the waters of the 
hot springs, obtained the following results : 

It differed nothing from the hot water in smell 
or taste, but caused a slight eructation shortly after 
drinking it. 

* Its specific gravity is equal to rain or distilled 
water. 

4 It gave to litmus paper a slight degree of red 
ness, evincing the presence of the carbonic acid, or 
fixed air sulphuric, and threw down a few de 
tached particles. Oxylat of ammoniac caused a 
deposition and white cloud, shewing the presence 
of a small portion of lime. Prusiat of potash pro 
duced a slight and scarcely perceptible tinge of 
blue, designating the presence of a small quantity 
of iron. 

4 Sixteen pounds of water evaporated to dryness 
left ten grains of a grey powder, wh,ich proved to 
be lime. 

* The myrtle wax tree grows in the vicinity of 
the springs. At the season in which the voyagers 
were there, the wax was no longer green, but had 
changed its colour to a greyish white, from its 
long exposure to the weather. The berry, when 
examined by a microscope, is less than the smallest 
garden pea, approaching to an oval in form. 
The nucleus, or real seed, is the size of the seed of 
a radish, and is covered with a number of kidney- 
shaped glands, of a brown colour and sweet taste ; 
these glands secrete the wax, which completely 
envelop:- them, and at this season gives to the 
whole the appearance of an imperfectly white berry. 
This is a valuable plant and merits attention : its 
favourite position is a dry soil, rather poor, and 
looking down upon the water. It is well adapted 
to ornament the margins of canals, lakes, or rivu 
lets. The cassina yapon is equally beautiful, and 
proper for the same purpose ; it grows here along 
the banks of this stony creek, intermingled with 
the myrtle, and bears a beautiful little red berry, 
very much resembling the red currant. 

* The rock through which the hot springs either 
pass or trickle over, appears undetermined by the 
waters of the creek. The hot water is continually 
depositing calcarious, and perhaps some silicious 
matter, forming new rocks, always augmenting] 



MISSISSIPPI. 



263 



[and projecting their promontories over the run 
ning water of the creek, which prevents its forma 
tion below the surface. Wherever tli is calcarious 
crust is seen spreading over the bank and margin 
of the creek, there, most certainly, the hot water 
will be found, either running over the surface, or 
through some channel, perhaps below the new 
rock, or dropping from the edges of the overhang 
ing precipice. The progress of nature in the for 
mation of this new rock is curious, and worthy 
the attention of the mineralogist. When the hot 
water issues from the fountain, it frequently 
spreads over a superficies of some extent : so far 
as it reaches on either hand, there is a deposition 
or growth of green matter. Several lamina of 
this green matter will be found lying over each 
other ; and immediately under, and in contact with 
the inferior lamina, which is not thicker than pa 
per, is found a whitish substance resembling a co- 
agulum ; when viewed with a microscope, this last 
is also found to consist of several, sometimes a 
good number of lamina, of which that next the 
green is the finest and thinnest, being the last 
formed ; those below increasing in thickness and 
tenacity until the last terminates in a soft earthy 
matter, which reposes in the more solid rock. 
Each lamina of the coagulum is penetrated in all 
its parts by calcarious grains, extremely minute, 
and divided in the more recent web, but much 
larger and occupying the whole of the inferior 
lamina. The understratum is continually consoli 
dating, and adding bulk and height to the rock. 
When this acquires such an elevation as to stop 
the passage of the water, it finds another course 
over the rock, hill, or margin of the creek, form 
ing, in turn, accumulations of matter over the 
whole of the adjacent space. When the water has 
found itself a new channel, the green matter, 
which sometimes acquires a thickness of half an 
inch, is speedily converted into a rich vegetable 
earth, and becomes the food of plants. The sur 
face of the calcarious rock also decomposes and 
forms the richest black mould, intimately mixed 
with a considerable portion of soil ; plants and 
trees vegetate luxuriantly upon it. 

* On examining a piece of ground upon which 
the snow dissolved as it fell, and which was co 
vered with herbage, they found, in some places, a 
calcarious crust on the surface ; but in general a 
depth of from five inches to a foot of the richest 
black mould. The surface was sensibly warm to 
the touch. In the air the mercury in the thermo 
meter stood at 41 ; when placed four inches under 
the surface, and covered with earth, it rose rapidly 
to 68 ; and upon the calcarious rock, eight inches 



beneath the surface, it rose to 80. This result 
was uniform over the whole surface, which was 
about a quarter of an acre. 

On searching they found a spring, about 15 
inches under the surface, in the water of which 
the thermometer shewed a temperature of 130. 
Beneath the black mould was found a brown mix 
ture of lime and silex, very loose and divisible, 
apparently in a state of decomposition, and pro 
gressing towards the formation of black mould ; 
under this brownish mass it became gradually 
whiter and harder, on the depth of from six to 
12 inches, where it was a calcarious sparkling 
stone. It was evident that the water had passed 
over this place, and formed a flat superficies of 
silicious lime-stone : and that its position, nearly 
level, had facilitated the accumulation of earth, in 
proportion as the decomposition advanced. Simi 
lar spots of ground were found higher up the hill, 
resembling little savannas, near which hot springs 
were always discovered, which had once flowed 
over them. It appears probable that the hot water 
of the springs, at an early period, had all issued 
from its grand reservoir in the hill, at a much 
greater elevation than at present. The calcarious 
crust may be traced up, in most situations on the 
w. side of the hill looking down the creek and 
valley, to a certain height, and perhaps 100 feet 
perpendicular ; in this region the hill rises preci 
pitously, and is studded with hard silicious stones ; 
below, the descent is more gradual, and the soil a 
calcarious black earth. It is easy to discriminate 
the primitive hill from that which has accumu 
lated, by precipitation, from the water of the 
springs ; this last is entirely confined to the w. 
side of the hill, and washed at its base by the wa 
ters of the creek, no hot spring being visible in 
any other part of its circumference. By actual 
measurement along the base of the hill, the influ-; 
ence of the springs is found to extend 70 perches, 
in a direction a little to the e. of n. : along the 
whole of this space the springs have deposited 
stony matter, calcarious, with an addition of silex, 
or crystallized lime. The accumulation of calca 
rious matter is more considerable at the n. end of 
the hill than the s. ; the first may be above 100 
feet perpendicular, but sloping much more gra 
dually than the primitive hill above, until it ap 
proaches the creek, where not untrequently it ter 
minates in a precipice of from six to 20 feet. 
The difference between the primitive and secondary 
hill is so striking that a superficial observer must 
notice it ; the first is regularly very steep, and 
studded with rock and stone of the hardest flint, 
and other silicious compounds, and a superficies] 



[of two or three inches of good mould covers a red 
clay ; below, on the secondary hill, which carries 
evident marks of recent formation, no flint or sili- 
cious stone is found ; the calcarious rock conceals 
all from view, and is itself frequently covered by 
much fine rich earth. It would seem that this 
compound,. precipated from the hot waters, yields 
easily to the influence of the atmosphere; for 
where the waters cease to flow over any portion of 
the rock, it speedily decomposes ; probably more 
rapidly from the heat communicated ,from the in 
terior part of the hill, as insulated masses of the 
rock are observed to remain without change. 

f The cedar, the wax myrtle, and cassina yapon, 
all evergreens, attach themselves particularly to 
the calcarious region, and seem to grow and thrive 
even in the clefts of the solid rock. 

A spring, enjoying a freedom of position, pro 
ceeds with great regularity in depositing the mat 
ter it holds in solution ; the. border or rim of its 
basin forms an elevated ridge, from whence pro 
ceeds a glacis all around, where the waters have 
flowed for some time over one part of the brim ; 
this becomes more elevated, and the water has to 
seek a passage where there is less resistance ; thus 
forming, in miniature, a crater, resembling in 
shape the conical summit of a volcano. The ,hill 
being steep above, the progress of petrifaction is 
stopped on that side, and the waters continue to 
flow and spread abroad, incrusting the whole face 
of the hill below. The last formed calcarious 
border of the circular basin is soft, and easily di 
vided : at a small depth it is more compact ; and 
at the depth of six inches it is generally hard white 
stone. If the bottom of the basin is stirred up, a 
quantity of the red calx of iron rises, and escapes 
over the summit of the crater, 

* Visitants to the hot springs, having observed 
shrubs and trees with the roots in the hot water, 
have been induced to try experiments, by sticking 
branches of trees in the run of hot water. Some 
branches of the wax myrtle were found thrust into 
the bottom of a spring run, the water of which was 
130 by Fahrenheit s thermometer ; the foliage 
and fruit of the branch were not only sound and . 
healthy, but, at the surface of the water, roots 
were actually sprouting from it : on pulling it up 
the part which had penetrated the hot mud was 
found decayed. 

* The green substance discoverable at the bot 
tom of the hot springs, and which at first sight has 
the appearance of plush, on examination by the 
microscope, was found to be a vegetable produc 
tion. A film of green matter spreads itself on the 
calcarious base, Trem which rise fibres more than 



half an inch in lenglh, forming a beautiful vege 
tation. Before the microscope it sparkled with 
innumerable nodules of lime, some part of whieh 
was beautifully crystallized. This circumstance 
might cause a doubt of its being a true vegetable, 
buit its great resemblance to some of the mosses, 
particularly the byssi, and the discovery which 
Mr. Dunbar made of its being the residence of 
animal life, confirmed his belief of its being a true 
moss. After a diligent search he discovered a 
very minute shell-fish, of the bivalve kind, inha 
biting this moss ; its shape nearly that of the fresh 
water muscle ; the colour of the shell a greyish 
brown, with spots of a purplish colour. When 
the animal is undisturbed it opens the shell, and 
thrusts out four legs, very transparent, and arti 
culated like those of a quadruped ; the extremi 
ties of the fore legs are very slender and sharp, 
but those of the hind legs somewhat broader, ap 
parently armed with minute toes : from the extre 
mity of each shell issues three or four forked hairs, 
which the animal seems to possess the power of 
moving ; the fore legs are probably formed for 
making incisions into the moss for the purpose of 
procuring access to the juices of the living plant, 
upon which, no doubt, it feeds; it ma} be pro* 
vided with a proboscis, although it did not ap 
pear while the animal was under examination? 
the hind legs are well adapted for propelling 
in its progress over the moss, or through the 
water. 

* It would be desirable to ascertain the cause of 
that perpetual fire which keeps up the high tempe 
rature of so many springs as flow from this hill, at 
a considerable distance from each other : upon 
looking around, however, sufficient data for the 
solution of the difficulty arc not discoverable. No 
thing of a volcanic nature is to be seen in this 
country ; neither could they learn that any evi 
dence in favour of such a supposition was to be 
found in the mountains connected with this river. 
An immense bed of dark blue schistus appears to 
form the base of the hot spring hill, and of all 
those in its neighbourhood ; the bottom of the 
creek is formed of it ; and pieces are frequently 
met with rendered soft by decomposition, and 
possessing a strong aluminous taste, requiring no 
thing but lixiviation and crystallization to com 
plete the manufacture of alum, As bodies under 
going chemical changes generally produce an al 
teration of temperature, the heat of these springs 
may be owing to the disengagement of caloric, 
or the decomposition of the schistus. Another, 
and perhaps a more satisfactory cause may be as- 
signed : it is well known, that within the circle of] 



MISSISSIPPI. 



265 



[(lie waters of this river, vast beds of martial py 
rites exist : they have not yet, however, been dis 
covered in the vicinage of the hot springs, but 
may, nevertheless, form immense beds under the 
bases of these hills ; and as in one place at least, 
there is evidence of the presence of bitumen, the 
union of these agents will, in the progress of de 
composition, by the admission of air and moisture, 
produce degrees of heat capable of supporting the 
phenomena of the hot springs. No sulphuric acid 
is present in this water; the springs may be sup 
plied by the vapour of heated water, ascending 
from caverns where the heat is generated, or the 
Jieat may be immediately applied to the bottom of 
an immense natural caldron of rock, contained in 
the bowels of the hill, from which, as a reservoir, 
the springs may be supplied. 

* A series of accurate observations determined 
the latitude of the hot springs to be 34 31 4. 16" w. 
and long. 6 h. IF 25", or 92 50 45" w. from the 
meridian of Greenwich. 

* While Mr. Dunbar was making arrangements 
for transporting the baggage back to the river 
camp, Dr. Hunter, with a small party, went on 
an excursion into the country. He left the hot 
springs on the morning of the 27th, and after tra 
velling sometimes over hilts and deep craggy 
mountains, with narrow valleys between them, then 
up the valleys, and generally by the side of a 
branch emptying into the Washita, they reached 
the main branch of the Calfat in the evening, 
bout 12 miles from the springs. The stones they 
met with during the first part of the day were sili- 
-cious, of a whitish grey, with flints, white, cream- 
coloured, red, &amp;c. The beds of the rivulets, and 
-often a considerable way up the hills, shewed im 
mense bodies of schistus, both blue and grey, some 
of it efflorescing and tasting strongly of alum. 
The latter part of the day, they travelled over and 
between hills of black, hard, and compact flint in 
shapeless masses, with schist as before. On as 
cending these high grounds, you distinctly per 
ceive the commencement of the piney region, be 
ginning at the height of 60 or 70 feet, and extend 
ing to the top. The soil in these narrow valleys 
is thin and full of stones. The next day, which 
was stormy, they reached a branch of the Bayau 
de Saline, which stretches towards the Aikansa, 
and empties into the Washita many leagues below, 
having gone above 12 miles. The mountains they 
had passed being of the primitive kind, which sel 
dom produce metals, and having hitherto teen no 
thing of a mineral kind, a little poor iron ore ex- 
ceptcd, and the face of the country, as far as they 
could see, presenting the same aspect, they re- 

VOL. III. 



turned to the camp and the hot springs, on the 
evening of the SOlh, by another route, in which 
they met with nothing worthy notice. 

In consequence of the rains which had fallen, 
Mr. Dunbar, and those who were transporting the 
baggage to the river camp, found the road watery. 
Tiie soil on the flat lands, under the stratum of ve 
getable mould, is yellowish, and consists of decom 
posed sclmtus, of which there arc immense beds 
in every stage of dissolution, from the hard stone 
recently uncovered and partially decomposed, to 
the yellow and apparently homogeneous earth. The 
covering of vegetable earth between the hills and 
the river is, in most places, sufficiently thick to 
constitute a good soil, being from four to six 
inches; and it is the opinion of the people upon 
the Washita, that wheat will grow here to great 
perfection. Although the higher hills, SOO to COO 
feet in height, are very rocky, yet the inferior 
hills, and the sloping bases of the first, are gene 
rally covered with a soil of a middling quality. 
The natural productions are sufficiently luxuriant, 
consisting chiefly of black and .red oak, intermixed 
with a variety of other woods, and a considerable 
undergrowth. Even on these rocky hills are three 
or four species of vines, said to produce annually 
an abundance of excellent grapes. A great variety 
of plants which grow here, some of which in their 
season are said to produce flowers highly orna 
mental, would probably reward the researches of 
the botanist. 

* On the morning of the Sth of January 1805, 
the party left Ellis s on the river camp; where 
they had been detained for several days, waiting; 
for such a rise in the waters of the river, as would 
carry their boat in safety over the numerous ra 
pids belo\v. A rise of about six feet, which had 
taken place the evening before, determined them 
to move this morning ; and they passed the C mt- 
tes about one o clock. They stopped to examine 
the rocky promontory below these falls, and took 
some specimens of the stone Xvhich so much re 
sembles the Turkey oil stone. It appears too 
hard. The strata of this chain were observed to 
run perpendicularly nearly e. and w. crossed by 
fissures at right angles from five to eight feet apart ; 
the lamina from one-fourth of an inch to five inches 
in thickness. About a league below, they landed 
at Whetstone hill, and took several specimens. 
This projecting hill is a mass of greyish blue 
schistus of considerable hardness, and about 20 
feet perpendicular, not regularly so, and from a 
quarter to two inches in thickness, but does not 
split with an even surface. 

They landed again on the morning of the Oth,] 
M M 



366 



MISSISSIPPI. 



[in sight of the Bayau de la Prairie de Champig- 
nole, to examine and take specimens of some free 
stone and blue slate. The slate is a blue schistus, 
hard, brittle, and unfit for the covering of a house : 
none proper for that pur pose have been discovered, 
except on the Calfat, which Dr. Hunter met with 
in one of his excursions. 

On the evening of the 10th they encamped 
near Arclon s troughs, having been only three days 
in descending the distance which took them 13 to 
ascend. They stopped some time at the camp of 
a Mr. Le Fevre. He is an intelligent man, a 
native of the Illinois, but now residing at the 
Arkansas. He came here with some Delaware and 
other Indians, whom he had fitted out with goods, 
and receives their peltry, fur, &amp;c. at a stipulated 
price, as it is brought in by the hunters. Mr. Le 
Fevre possesses considerable knowledge of the in 
terior of the country ; he confirms the accounts 
before obtained, that the hills or mountains which 
give rise to this little river, are, in a manner, insu 
lated ; that is, they are entirely shut in and in 
closed by the immense plains or prairies which ex 
tend beyond the Red river, to the s. and beyond 
the Missouri, or at least some of its branches, to 
the n. and range along the e. base of the great 
chain, or dividing ridge, commonly known by the 
name of the Sand hills, which separate the waters 
of the Mississippi from those which fall into the 
Pacific ocean. The breadth of this great plain is 
not well ascertained. It is said by some to be at 
certain parts, or in certain directions, not less than 
200 leagues ; but it is agreed by all who have 
a knowledge of the w. country, that the mean 
breadth is at least two-thirds of that distance. A 
branch of the Missouri, called the river Plate or 
Shallow river, is said to take its rise so far s. as to 
derive its first waters from the neighbourhood of 
the sources of the Red and Arkansa rivers. By 
the expression plains or prairie, in this place, is 
not to be understood a dead flat, resembling cer 
tain savannas, whose soil is stiff and impenetrable, 
often under water, and bearing only a coarse grass 
resembling reeds; very different are the w. prai 
ries, which expression signifies only a country 
without timber. These prairies are neither flat 
nor hilly, but undulating into gentle swelling 
lawns, and expanding into spacious valleys, in the 
centre of which is always found a little timber 
growing on the banks of the brooks and rivulets of 
the finest waters. 

* The whole of these prairies are represented to 
be composed of the richest and most fertile soil ; 
the most luxuriant and succulent herbage covers 
the surface of the earth, interspersed with millions 



of flowers and flowering shrubs, of the most orna 
mental kinds. Those who have viewed only a 
skirt of these prairies, speak of them with enthu 
siasm, as if it was only there that nature was to be 
found truly perfect : they declare, that the feiti- 
tility and beauty of the rising grounds, the extreme 
richness of the vales, the coolness and excellent 
quality of the water found in every valley, the 
salubrity of the atmosphere, and above all the 
grandeur of the enchanting landscape which this 
country presents, inspire the soul with sensations 
not to be felt in any other region of the globe. 
This paradise is now very thinly inhabited by a 
few tribes of savages, and by the immense herds of 
wild cattle (bison) which people these countries. 
The cattle perform regular migrations, according 
to the seasons, from s. to n. and from the plains 
to the mountains; and in due time, taught by 
their instincts, take a retrograde direction. 

{ The Indian tribc.s move in the rear of the herds, 
and pick up stragglers, and such as lag behind, 
which they kill with the bow and arrow for their sub 
sistence. Th is country is not subjected to those very 
sudden deluges of rain which in most hot coun 
tries, and even in the Mississippi territory, tear up 
and sweep away, with irresistible fury, the crop 
and soil together: on the contrary, rain is said 
to become more rare in proportion as the great 
chain of mountains is approached; and it would 
seem that within the sphere of the attraction of 
those elevated ridges, little or no rain falls on the 
adjoining plains. This relation is the more cre 
dible, as in that respect the new country of the 
United States resembles other flat or low countries 
similarly situated ; such as the country lying be 
tween the Andes and the w. Pacific. The plains 
are supplied with nightly dews so extremely abun 
dant, as to have the effect of refreshing showers of 
rain ; and the spacious valleys, which are ex 
tremely level, may, with facility, be watered by 
the rills and brooks, which are never absent from 
these situations. Such is the description of the 
better known country lying to the s. of Red river, 
from Nacogdoches towards St. Antonio, in the 
province of Tax us; the richest crops are said to 
be procured there without rain ; but agriculture 
in that country is at a low ebb ; the small quan 
tity of maize furnished by the country, is said to 
be raised without cultivation. A rude opening is 
made in the earth, sufficient to deposit the grain, 
at the distance of four or five feet, in irregular 
squares, and the rest is left to nature. The soil is 
tender, spongy, and rich, and seems always to re 
tain humidity sufficient, with the bounteous dews 
of heaven, to bring the crops to maturity.] 



MISSI SSIPP1. 



267 



[&amp;lt; Tlic lied and Arkansa rivers, whose courses 
are very long, pass through portions of this fine 
country. They are botli navigable to an unknown 
distance by boats of proper construction ; the 
Arkansa river is, however, understood to have 
greatly the advantage with respect to the facility 
of navigation. Some difficult places are met with 
in the Red river below the Nakitosh, after which 
it is good for 150 leagues (probably computed 
leagues of the country, about two miles each); 
there the voyager meets \vith a very serious ob 
stacle, the commencement of the " raft," as it is 
called ; that is, a natural covering which conceals 
the whole river for an extent of 17 leagues, con 
tinually augmenting by the driftwood brought 
down by every considerable fresh. This cover 
ing, which, fora considerable time was only drift 
wood, now supports a vegetation of every thing 
abounding in the neighbouring forest, not except 
ing trees of a considerable size ; and the river may 
be frequently passed without any knowledge of its 
existence. It is said that the annual inundation 
is opening for itself a new passage through the 
low grounds near the hills ; but it must be long 
before nature, unaided, will excavate a passage 
sufficient for the waters of Red river. About 50 
leagues above this natural bridge, is the residence 
of the Cadaux or Cadadoquis nation, whose good 
qualities are already mentioned. The inhabitants 
estimate the post of Nakitosh to be halfway be- 
tween New Orleans and the Cadaux nation. 
Above this point the navigation of Red river is 
said to be embarrassed by many rapids, falls, and 
shallows. The Arkansa river is said to present a 
safe, agreeable, and uninterrupted navigation, as 
hi&amp;lt;jh as it is known. The lands on each side are 
of the best quality, and well watered with springs, 
brooks, and rivulets, affording many situations for 
mill-seats. From description it would seem that 
along this river there is a regular gradation of hill 
and dale, presenting their extremities to the river ; 
the hills are gently swelling eminences, and the 
dales spacious valleys with living water meander 
ing through them ; the forests consist of handsome 
trees, chiefly what is called open woods. The 
quality of the land is supposed superior to that 
on Red river, until it ascends to the prairie 
country, where the lands on both rivers are pro 
bably similar. 

f About 200 leagues up the Arkansa is an in- 
teresting place called the Salt prairie : there is a 
considerable fork of the river there, and a kind of 
savanna where the salt-water is continually oozing 
out and spreading over the surface of a plain. 
During the dry summer season the salt may be 



raked up in large heaps ; a natural crust, of a hand 
breadth in thickness, is formed at this season. This 
place is not often frequented, on account of the 
danger from the Osage Indians : much less dare 
the white hunters venture to ascend higher, where 
it is generally believed that silver is to be found. 
it is further said, that high up the Arkansa river 
salt is found in form of a solid, and may be dug 
out with the crow-bar. The waters of the Ar 
kansa, like those of Red river, are not potable 
during the dry season, being both charged highly 
with a reddish earth or mould, and extremely 
brackish. 

* This inconvenience is not greatly felt upon the 
Arkansa, where springs and brooks of fresh water 
are frequent ; the Red river is understood not to 
be so highly favoured. Every account seems to 
prove that immense natural magazines of salt must 
exist in the great chain of mountains to the w. ; 
as all the rivers, in the summer season, which flow 
from them, are strongly impregnated with that mi 
neral, and are only rendered palatable after receiv 
ing the numerous streams of fresh water which 
join them in their course. The great w. prairies, 
besides the herds of wild cattle, (bison, commonly 
called buffalo), are also stocked with vast num 
bers of wild goat (not resembling the domestic 
goat), extremely swift-footed. As the description 
given of this goat is not perfect, it may from its 
swiftness prove to be the antelope, or it possibly 
may be a goat which has escaped from the Spanish 
settlements of New Mexico. A Canadian, who 
had been much with the Indians to the w. speaks 
of a wool-bearing animal larger than a sheep, the 
wool much mixed with hair, which he had seen in 
large flocks. He pretends also to have seen a uni 
corn, the single horn of which, he says, rises out 
of the forehead and curls back, conveying the 
idea of the fossil cornu ammonis. This man says 
he has travelled beyond the great dividing ridge 
so far as to have seen a large river flowing to the 
w. The great dividing mountain is so lofty that 
it requires two days to ascend from the base to its 
top j other ranges of inferior mountains lie before 
and behind it; they are all rocky and sandy. 
Large lakes and valleys lie between the mountains. 
Some of the lakes are so large as to contain con 
siderable islands; and rivers flow from some of 
them. Great numbers of fossil bones, of very 
large dimensions, are seen among the mountains, 
which the Canadian supposes to be the elephant. 

1 He does not pretend to have seen any of the 

precious metals, but has seen a mineral which he 

supposes might yield copper. From the top of the 

high mountain the view is bounded by a curve, as] 

M M 2 



268 



MISSISSIPPI. 



[upon the ocean, and extends over the most beau 
tiful prairies, which seem to be unbounded, par 
ticularly towards the e. The finest of the lands 
he has seen are on the Missouri ; no other can 
compare in richness and fertility with them. This 
Canadian, as well as Le Fevre, speaks of the Osa- 
ges of the tribe of Whitehairs, as lawless and un 
principled ; and the other Indian tribes hold them 
in abhorrence as a barbarous and uncultivated race, 
and the different nations who hunt in their neigh 
bourhood, have their concerting plans for their 
destruction. On the morning of the llth, the 
party passed the Petit EcoraFabri. The osier 
which grows on the beaches above, is not seen 
below upon the river ; and here they began to 
meet with the small tree called Charmer, which 
grows only on the water side, and is met with all 
the way down the Washita. The latitude of 33 
40 /; seems the n. boundary of the one, and the s. 
boundary of the other of these vegetables. Having 
noticed the limit set to the long moss, (tclandsia) 
on the ascent of the river, in Int. 33, Mr. Dun- 
bar made inquiry of Mr. Le. Fevre, as to its 
existence on the Arkansa settlement, which is 
known to lie in about the same parallel : he said, 
that its growth is limited about 10 miles 5. of the 
settlement, and that as remarkably, as if a line had 
been drawn e. and 10. for the purpose; as it ceases 
all at once, and not by degrees. Hence it ap 
pears, that nature has marked with a distinguishing 
feature, the line established by congress between 
the Orleans and Louisiana territories. The cy 
press is not found on the Washita higher than 
lat. 34 n. 

1 In descending the river, they found their rate 
of going to exceed that of the current about six 
miles and a half in 24 hours ; and that on the 
12th, they had passed the apex of the tide or wave 
occasioned by the fresh, and were descending 
along an inclined plain ; as they encamped at 
night, they found themselves in deeper, water the 
next morning, and on a more elevated part of the 
inclined plain, than they had been in the preceding 
evening, from the progress of the apex of the tide 
during their repose. 

At noon, on the 16th, they reached the post 
of the Washita. 

4 Mr. Dunbar being anxious to reach the Nat 
chez as early as possible, and being uuable to pro 
cure horses at the post, took a canoe with one 
soldier and his own domestic, to push down to the 
Catahoola, from whence to Concord there is a road 
of 30 miles across the low grounds. He set off 
early on the morning of the 20th, and at night 
reached the settlement of an old hunter, with 



whom he had conversed on his way up the river. 
This man informed him, that at the place called 
the Mine, on the Little Missouri, there is a smoke 
winch ascends perpetually from a particular place, 
and that the vapour is sometimes insupportable. 
The river, or a branch of it, passes over a bed of 
mineral, which from the description given is no 
doubt martial pyrites. In a creek or branch of 
the Fourche a Luke, there is found on the beaches 
and in the cliffs, a great number of globular bo 
dies, some as large, or larger, th p. n a man s head, 
which, when broken, exhibit the appearance of 
gold, silver, and precious stones ; most pnobably 
pyrites and crystallized spar. And at the Four- 
die des Glaises a Paul, (higher up the river than 
Fourche a Luke,) near the river there is a cliff full 
of hexagonal prisms, terminated by pyramids 
which appear to grow out of the rock :. they are 
from six to eight inches in length,, and some of 
them are an inch in diameter. There are beds of 
pyrites found in several small creeks communi 
cating with the Washita, but it appears that the 
mineral indications are greatest on the Little Mis 
souri ; because, as before noted, some of the hun 
ters actually worked on them, and sent a parcel of 
the ore to New Orleans. It is the belief here, that 
the mineral contains precious metal, but that the 
Spanish government did not choose a mine should 
be opened so near to the British settlements. An 
express prohibition was issued against working 
these mines. 

At this place, Mr. Dunbar obtained one or 
two slips of the bois-de arc, (bow wood or yellow 
wood), from the Missouri. The fruit, it seems, 
had fallen before the maturity, and lay upon the 
ground. Some were the size of a small orange, 
with a rind full of tubercles ; the colour, though 
it appeared faded, still retained a resemblance to 
pale gold. 

6 The tree in its native soil, when laden with 
its golden fruit, (nearly as large as the egg of ant 
ostrich,) presents the most splendid appearance ; 
its foliage is of a deep green, resembling the var 
nished leaf of the orange tree ; upon the whole, 
no forest tree can compare with it in ornamental 
grandeur. The bark of the young tree resembles, 
in texture, the dog wood bark ; the appearance 
of the wood recommends it for trial as an article 
which may yield a yellow dye. It is deciduous ; 
the branches are numerous, and full of short thorns 
or prickles, which seem to point it out as proper 
for hedges or live fences. This treee is known to 
exist near the Nakitosh (perhaps in lat. 32) and 
upon the river Arkansa, high up (perhaps in lat. 
3lf); it is therefore probable that it may thrive from] 



MISSISSIPPI. 



269 



[latitude 38 to 40, and will be a great acquisition 
to the United States if it possesses no other merit 
than that of being ornamental. 

In descending the river, both Mr. Dunbar 
and Dr. Hunter searched for the place said to yield 
gypsum, or plaster of Paris, but failed. The 
former gentleman states, that he has no doubt of 
its existence, having noted two places where it has 
been found ; one of which is the first hill or high 
land which touches the river on the w. above the 
Bayau Calumet, and the other is the second high 
land on the same side. As these are two points of 
the same continued ridge, it is probable that an 
immense body of gypsum will be found in the 
bowels of the hills where they meet, and perhaps 
extending far beyond them. 

On the evening of the 22d, Mr. Dunbar 
arrived at the Catahoola, where a Frenchman of the 
name of llebrard, who keeps the ferry across 
Black river, is settled. Here the road from the 
Washita forks, one branch of it leading to the 
settlement on Red river, and the other up to the 
post on the Washita. The proprietor of this place 
has been a hunter and a great traveller up the 
Washita into the w. country ; he confirms generally 
the accounts received from others. It appears, 
from what they say, that in the neighbourhood 
of the hot springs, but higher up, among the 
mountains, and upon the Little Missouri, during 
the summer season, explosions are very frequently 
heard, proceeding from under the ground, and not 
rarely a curious phenomenon is seen, which is 
termed the blowing of the mountains ; it is con- 
fined elastic gas forcing a passage through the 
side or top of a hill, driving before it a great 
quantity of earth and mineral matter. During 
the winter season the explosions and blowing of 
the mountains entirely cease, from whence we 
may conclude, that the cause is comparatively 
superficial, brought into action by the increased 
Jieat of the more direct rays of the summer sun. 

The confluence of the Washita, Catahoola, 
and Tenza is an interesting place. The last of 
these communicates with the Mississippi low lands, 
by the intervention of other creeks and lakes, and 
by one in particular, called Bayau d Argent, 
which empties into the Mississippi, about 14 miles 
above Natchez. During high water there is a 
navigation for batteaux of any burthen along the 
bay an. A large lake, called St. John s lake, 
occupies a considerable part of the passage be 
tween the Mississippi and the Tenza : it is in a 
horse-shoe form, and has, at some former period, 
been the bed of the Mississippi : the nearest part 
of it is about one mile removed from the river at 



the present time. This lake, possessing elevated 
banks similar to those of the river, has been lately 
occupied am! improved. The Catahoola Bayau is 
the third navigable stream : during the time of the 
inundation there is an excellent communication by 
the lake of that name, and from thence, by large 
creeks, to the Red river. The country around 
the point of union of these three rivers is altoge 
ther alluvial, but the place of Mr. Hcbrard s resi 
dence is no longer subject to inundation. There 
is no doubt, that as the country augments in po. 
pttlation arid riches, this place will become the site 
of a commercial inland town, which will keep 
pace with the progress and prosperity of the coun 
try. One of the Indian mounts here is of a con 
siderable elevation, with a species of rampart, 
surrounding a large space, which was, no doubt, 
the position of a fortified town. 

While here, Mr. Dunbar^net with an American 
who pretended to have been up the Arkansa river 
SCO leagues. The navigation of this river he says 
is good to that distance, for boats drawing three or 
four feet water. Implicit faith, perhaps, ought 
not to be given to his relation, respecting the 
quantity of silver he pretends to have collected 
there. He says he has found silver on the Washita, 
30 leagues above the hot springs, so rich, that 
three pounds of it yielded one pound of silver, and 
this was found in a cave. He asserts, also, that 
the ore of the mine upon the Little Missouri was 
carried to Kentucky, by a person of the name of 
Bon, where it was found to yield largely in silver. 
This- man says he has been up the Red river 
likewise, and that there is a great rapid just below 
the raft, or natural bridge, and several others 
above it ; that the Caddo nation is about 50 leagues 
above the raft, and near to their village commences 
the country of the great prairies, which extend 
4 or 500 miles to the w. of the sand mountains, as 
they are termed. These great plains reach far 
beyond the Red river to the s. and n. over the 
Arkansa river, and among the numerous branches 
of the Missouri. He confirms the account of the 
beauty and fertility of the w. country. 

* On the morning of the 25th, Mr. Dunbar set 
out, on horseback, from the Catahoola to Natchez. 
The rain which had fallen on the preceding days 
rendered the roads wet and muddy, and it was 
two in the afternoon before he reached the Bayau 
Crocodile, which is considered half way between 
the Black river and the Mississippi. It is one of 
the numerous creeks in the low grounds, which 
assist in venting the waters of the inundation. On 
the margins of the water courses the lands are 
highest, aud produces canes j they fall off, in the] 



270 



MIS 



[rear, into cypress swamps and lakes. The waters 
of the Mississippi were rising, and it was with 
some difficulty that they reached a house near 
Concord that evening. This settlement was be 
gun since the cession of Louisiana to the United 
States, by citizens of the Mississippi territory, who 
have established their residence altogether upon 
newly acquired lands taken up under the authority 
of the Spanish commandant, and have gone to the 
expence of improvement either in the names of 
themselves or others, before the 20th of December 
1803, hoping thereby to hold their new possession 
under the sanction of the law. 

* Exclusive of the few actual residents on the 
banks of the Mississippi, there are two very hand 
some lakes in the interior, on the banks of which 
similar settlements have been made. He crossed 
at the ferry, and at mid-day of the 26th reached 
his own house. 

Dr. Hunter, and the remainder of the party, 
followed Mr. Dunbar, down the Washita, with 
the boat in which they ascended the river, and 
ascending the Mississippi, reached St. Catharine s 
landing on the morning of the 3 1st January 1805.] 
MISSOURI, a settlement of Indians of the pro 
vince and government of Louisiana ; situate on 
the shore of the river of its name, and where the 
French have built a fort for the defence of their 
establishment there. The Spaniards, in 1721, at 
tempted to take this fort, and attacked two settle 
ments of the Octotatas Indians; but the mission 
aries came to their succour, and finding the Spa 
niards asleep cut off all their heads, with the ex 
ception of one religious person, whom they suf 
fered to accompany them. He afterwards escaped 
by a stratagem, in pretending to shew the Indians 
his way of managing a horse j it was by taking to 
flight. 

[MISSOURI River, in Louisiana, falls into the 
Mississippi from the w. 18 miles below the mouth 
of the Illinois, 130 above the mouth of the Ohio, 
and above 1160 miles from the Balize, or mouths 
of the Mississippi, in the gulf of Mexico. In 
Captain Hutchins s map, it is said to be navigable 
1300 miles. Late travellers up this river, (among 
whom is a French gentleman, a general officer, 
who has made a map of his expedition) represent 
that the progress of settlement by the Spaniards on 
the s. and w. and by the English on the n. and e. 
of the Missouri, is astonishing. People of both 
these nations have trading-houses 6 or 700 miles 
up this river. Mr. M Kenzie performed a tour 
from Montreal to the S. sea ; and it appears by his 
map that by short portages, and these not very 
numerous, there is a water communication, without 



M I S 

great interruption, from the Upper lakes to 
Nootka sound, or its neighbourhood ; but the most 
correct notion respecting the navigation of a river 
is always to be derived from the account as given 
verbatim by those who have visited it. The fol 
lowing copious information is therefore extracted 
from the Trave/s of Captains JT/erm and Clarke, 
from St. Louis, by way of the Missouri and Co-. 
*lumi)ia Rivers to the Pacific Ocean, performed in 
the years 1804, 1805, and 1806, containing some 
Delineations of the Manners, Customs, Religion, 
Sfc. of the Indians. N. B. At the end will be 
found a statement of the commerce of the Mis 
souri. 

On the 14th of May 1804, (as these travellers ob 
serve), we embarked from St. Louis on the expedi 
tion, having, previous to our setting out, provided 
ourselves with every thing requisite for the prosecu 
tion of the voyage, particularly with large quanti 
ties of ammunition and fire-arms, for the purpose 
of protecting us from the hostile attacks of the na 
tives, and for procuring food. We likewise took 
a large quantity of ornaments, consisting of me 
dals, trinkets, &amp;c. for the purpose of gaining a 
favourable reception among the Indians, and ob 
taining such articles of use as our situation might 
require. 

Our party, consisting of 43, was generally 
divided into two companies, the one for hunting, 
who travelled by land ; the other to remain in our 
water conveyance, which consisted only of two 
small perogues and a batteau. Larger vessels 
would have obstructed us in ascending the Mis 
souri near its source. Both companies joined at 
night, when we were compelled to encamp by the 
banks of the river ; our vessel being too light to 
sail except by day. 

* The country bordering on the Missouri pro 
duces immense quantities of fur, which can be 
purchased of the Indians for a mere trifle, and 
may be easily transported from the head of this 
river to the Columbia river at a small expence, 
on account of the low rate at which horses might 
be purchased for the purpose from the Snake In 
dians, who inhabit this mountainous district : 
from the Columbia river they may be conveyed to 
China by a very short route. 

* This trade would give employment to an im 
mense number of inhabitants; arid the country is 
sufficiently luxuriant for the population of an im 
mense colony. 

* The Missouri is already ranked among the 
greatest rivers. It is an object of astonishment to 
the whole world. The uninformed man admires 
its rapidity, its lengthy course, and the salubrity] 



MISSOURI. 



271 



[of its waters, and is amazed at its colour ; while 
the reflecting mind admires the innumerable riches 
scattered on its banks, and, foreseeing the future, 
beholds already this rival of the Nile flowing 
through countries as fertile, as populous, and as 
extensive as those of Egypt. 

The Missouri joins the Mississippi five leagues 
above the town of St. Louis, about lat. 40 n. 
It is necessary to observe, that after uniting with 
the Mississippi, it flows through a space of 1200 
miles, before it empties itself into the gulf of Mex 
ico. As this part of its course is well known, 1 
shall speak (writes Captain Lewis) of the Mis 
souri only. 

* 1 ascended about 600 leagues, without per 
ceiving a diminution either in its width or rapidity. 
The principal rivers which empty into the 
Missouri, are, as you ascend, the Gasconade, the 
river of the Osages, the two Charaturns, the Great 
river, the river Des Canips, Nichinen, Batoney, 
the Great and Little Nirnaha, the river Plate, the 
river De Sioux, the L Eau-qui-court. 

As far as 25 leagues above its junction with 
the Mississippi, are to be found different settle 
ments of American families, viz. at Bonhomme, 
and Frmme Osage, &amp;lt;SfC. ; beyond this, its banks 
are inhabited only by savage nations the Great 
and Little Osnges, settled 120 leagues on the river 
of that name; the Canips, the Ottos, the Panis, 
the Loupes or Panis M alias, the Mahas, the 
Poukas, the Ricaras, the Mandanes, the Sioux : 
the last nation is not fixed on the banks of the Mis 
souri, but habitually goes there to hunt. 

* The banks of the Missouri are alternately woods 
and prairies : it is remarked, that the higher you 
ascend this river, the more common are these prai 
ries ; and they seem to increase every year by the 
fires which are kindled every autumn by the sa 
vages, or white hunters, either by chance, or with 
the design of facilitating their hunting. 

&amp;lt; The waters of the Missouri are muddy, and 
contain throughout its course a sediment of very 
fine sand, which soon precipitates; but this cir 
cumstance, which renders them disagreeable to the 
sight, takes nothing from their salubrity. 

Experience has proved, that the waters of the 
Missouri are more wholesome than those of the 
Ohio and the Upper Mississippi. The rivers and 
streams which empty into the Missouri below the 
river Plate, ^are clear and limpid ; above this 
river they are as muddy as the Missouri itself. 
This is occasioned by beds of sand, or hills of a 
very fine white earth, through which they take 
their course. 

* The bed of the Missouri is obstructed with 



banks, sometimes of sand, and sometimes of gravel, 
which frequently change their place, and conse 
quently render the navigation always uncertain. 
Its course is generally w. by n. w. 

To give a precise idea of the incalculable riches 
scattered on the banks of the Missouri, would re 
quire unbounded knowledge. 

The flats are covered with huge trees ; the liard 
or poplar ; the sycamore, out of one piece of 
which are made canoes, which carry nearly 18 
cwt ; the maple, which affords the inhabitants an 
agreeable and wholesome sugar ; and the wild 
cherry-tree, and the red and black walnut, so useful 
in joiners work ; the red and white elm, necessary 
to cart wrights ; the triacanthos, which, when well 
trimmed, forms impenetrable hedges ; the water- 
willow, the white and red mulberry-tree, &amp;c. &amp;c. 

* On the shores are found in abundance the 
white and black oak, proper for every kind of 
ship- wrights and carpenters work ; the pine, so 
easily worked ; and, on the stony mountains, the 
durable cedar. 

* It would be impossible to detail all the species 
of trees, even those unknown in other countries, 
and the use that can be made of them, of which 
we are still ignorant. 

Thcplants are still more numerous ; wSwill pass 
lightly over this article, for the want of sufficient 
botanical knowledge. The Indians are well ac 
quainted with the virtues of many of them ; they 
make use of them to heal their wounds, and to 
poison their arrows ; they also use various kinds of 
savoyanues to dye different colours ; they have 
one which is a certain and prompt cure for the ve 
nereal disease. 

4 The lands on the borders of the Missouri are 
excellent, and when cultivated are capable of 
yielding abundantly all the productions of the tem 
perate, and even some of the warm climates ; wheat, 
maize, and every species of grain, Irish potatoes, 
and excellent sweet potatoes. Hemp seems here to 
be an indigenous plant : even cotton succeeds, 
though not so well as in more s. countries. Its cul 
ture, however, yields a real advantage to the in- 
habitants settled on the banks of the Missouri, 
who find in the crop of a field of about two acres 
sufficient for the wants of their families. 

* The natural prairies are a great resource, be 
ing of themselves excellent pasturages, and facili 
tating the labours of the man who is just settled, 
who can thus enjoy, with little labour, from the 
first year a considerable crop. Clay fit for making 
bricks is very common. There is also Fayance 
clay, and another species of clay, which in the 
opinion of intelligent persons is the real koaolin to] 



272 



M I S S O U 11 I. 



[\vhich the porcelain of China owes the whole of its 
reputation. 

* There are found on the borders of the Mis 
souri many sprmgs of salt-water of every kind, 
which will yield more than sufficient salt for the 
consumption of the country, when it shall become 
inhabited. 

* Salt-petre is found here in great abundance, ii 
numberless caves, which are met with along the 
banks of the river. 

* The stones are generally calcarious and gates. 
There is found one also, which is believed to be pe 
culiar to the banks of the Missouri. It is of a 
blood red colour, compact, soft under the chisel, 
and hardens in the air, and is succeptible of a 
most beautiful polish. The Indians use it for their 
calumets ; but from the extent of its layers, it 
might be easily employed in more important 
works. They have also quarries of marble, of 
which we only knew the colour ; they are streaked 
with red. One quarry is well known, and easily 
worked, consisting of a species of plaster, which we 
are assured is of the same nature as that of Paris, 
and of which the United States make a great use: 
we also found volcanic stones, which demonstrate 
the ancient existence of unknown volcanoes. 

* We were confirmed in the belief that there 
were volcanoes in some of their mountains, by the 
intelligence that we received from the Indians, 
who informed us, " that the Evil Spirit was mad 
at the red people, and caused the mountains to 
vomit fire, sand, gravel, and large stones, to terrify 
and destroy them ; but the Good Spirit had com 
passion on them, and put out the fire, chased the 
Evil Spirit out of the mountains, and left them 
unhurt; but when they returned to their wicked 
ness, the Great Spirit had permitted the Evil 
Spirit to return to the mountains again, and vomit 
up fire ; but on their becoming good, and making 
sacrifices, the Great Spirit chased away the Evil 
Spirit from disturbing them, and for 40 snows (40 
years) he had not permitted him to return." 

* The short stay we have generally made among 
the savage nations has prevented us from making 
those researches which would have supplied us 
with more extensive information respecting the 
various mines found on the borders of the Mis 
souri. We know with certainty only of those of 
iron, lead, and coal ; there is, however, no doubt, 
but that there are some of tin, of copper, of silver, 
and even of gold, according to the account of the 
Indians, who have found some particles or dust 
of these metals cither on the surface of the earth, 
or on the banks of small torrents. 

* I consider it a duty at the same time to give 

1 



an idea of the salt mines, and the salines, which 
are found in the same latitude on the branches of 
the river Arkansas. At about 300 miles from the 
village of the Great Osages, in a is. direction, 
after having passed several branches of the river 
Arkansas, we find a flat of about 15 leagues in 
diameter, surrounded by hills of an immense ex 
tent : the soil is a black sand, very fine, and so hard 
that the horses hardly leave a trace. During a 
warm and dry season there exhales from this flat, 
vapours, which, after being condensed, fall on this 
black sand, and cover it with an incrustation of 
salt, very white and fine, and about half an inch 
thick : the rains destroy this phenomenon. 

At about J8 miles from this flat are found mines 
of genuine salt near the surface of the earth. The 
Indians, who are well acquainted with them, are 
obliged to use levers to break and raise it. 

&amp;lt; At a distance of about 15 leagues from the flat 
of which we have just spoken, and in a s. direc 
tion, there is a second mine of genuine salt of the 
same nature its the other. These two mines differ 
only in colour : the first borders on a blue, the se 
cond approaches a red. Much further 5. and still 
on the branches of the Arkansas, is a saline, which 
may be considered as one of the most interesting 
phenomena in nature. 

* On the. declivity of a small hill there are five 
holes, about a foot and a half in diameter, and two 
in depth, always full of salt water, without ever 
overflowing. If a person were to draw any of this 
water the hole would immediately fill itself; and 
about ten feet lower, there flows from this same 
hill a large stream of pure and sweet water. 

* If this country were peopled, the working of 
these genuine salt mines would be very easy by 
means of the river Arkansas. This species of salt 
is found by experience to be far preferable to any 
other for salting provisions. 

Should these notes, imperfect and without 
order as they are, but in every respect founded 
on truth, and observations made by myself, excite 
the curiosity of men of intelligence, capable of in- 
"vestiirating the objects which they have barely 
suggested, 1 do not doubt but that incalculable 
advantages would result to the United States, and 
especially to the district of Louisiana. 

It is impossible to give an exact account of the 
peltries which are brought down the Mississippi, 
as they are all immediately transported to Canada, 
without passing any port of this country; we can 
obtain a true statement only from the settlements 
on the lakes. It is but a short time since the lied 
river has been explored. 

* After leaving the river Des Moens the fur] 



MISSOURI. 



273 



[trade from tlie Upper Missouri is carried on en 
tirely by British houses, and almost the whole of 
the fur which is obtained from the other Indian 
traders is also sent to Canada, where it commands 
much higher prices than at New Orleans ; where, 
in fact, there is no demand. It is also necessary 
to observe, that the further n. we go, the greater is 
the value of the peltries. It is but a few years 
since peltries have been exported from America 
by way of the Ohio. It is to be thought that the 
e. part of America will encourage this exporta 
tion, by raising the prices of peltries to nearly 
those of Canada. 

* The countries at the head of the Missouri and 
of the Columbia rivers bear a great similarity ; 
being cold and very sterile, except in pasturage 
only. At the foot of the mountain, at the head 
of the Missouri, lives a tribe of Indians called 
Serpentine or Snake Indians ; who are the most 
abject and miserable of the human race, having 
Ijttle besides the features of human beings. 

They live in a most wretched state of poverty, 
subsisting on berries and fish ; the former they 
manufacture into a kind of bread, which is very 
palatable, but possesses little nutritious quality. 
Horses form the only article of value which they 
possess, in these the country abounds; and in 
very severe winters they are compelled to subsist 
on them for the want of a better substitute for 
food. They are a very harmless inoffensive 
people ; when we first made our appearance among 
them they were filled with terror, many of them 
fled, while the others who remained were in tears, 
but were soon pacified by tokens of friendship, and 
by presents of beads, &amp;c. which soon convinced 
them of our friendly disposition. 

* The Snake Indians are in their stature crooked, 
which is a peculiarity, as it does not characterise 
any other tribe of Indians that came within the 
compass of our observation. To add to this de 
formity, they have high cheek bosies, large light 
coloured eyes, and are very meagre, which gives 
them a frightful aspect. 

* For an axe we could purchase of them a 
good horse. We purchased 27 from them, that 
did not cost more than 100 dollars ; which will be 
a favourable circumstance I or transporting fur over 
to the Columbia river. 

* At (he head of the Columbia river, resides a 
tribe by the name of Pallotepallors, or Flatheads ; 
the latter name they derive from an operation 
that renders the top of the head flat; which is 
performed while they arc infants, when the bones 
of the cranium are soft and elastic, and are easily 

VOL. III. 



brought to the desired deformity. The operation 
is performed by tying boards, hewn to a proper 
shape for the purpose, which they compress on the 
head. In performing this eccentric operation, 
manyjinfants, it is thought, VA ilhout doubt lose their 
lives. The more they get the head misshapen, 
the greater do they consider its beauty. 

They are a very kind and hospitable people. 
We left in charge with them, when we descended 
the Columbia river, our horses, which they kept 
safe. They likewise found where we had con 
cealed our ammunition in the earth ; and had they 
not been an honest people, and preserved it safe, 
our lives must have been inevitably lost ; they de 
livered up the whole, without wishing to reserve 
any, or to receive for it a compensation. 

They, like the Snake Indians, abound in horses, 
which subsist in the winter season on a shrub they 
call evergreen, which bears a large leaf, that is 
tolerably nutritious ; they likewise feed upon the 
side of hills out of which gush small springs of 
water that melt the snow and afford pasture. In 
this manner our horses subsisted while going over 
the rocky mountains. 

( The country inhabited by the Snake and 
Flatheaded Indians produces but very little game. 

* Captain Clark kept an account of the distances 
of places from one to another; which were not 
kept by myself, for which reason I hope it will be 
a sufficient apology for subjoining two of his state 
ments. 

Letter from Captain Clark to It is Excellency 

Governor Harrison. 

" Dear Sir, Fort Mandan, April 2d. 

" By the return of a party which we sent from 
this place with dispatches, I do myself the plea 
sure of giving you a summary view of the Mis 
souri, &amp;c. 

* " In ascending as high as the Kanzas river, 
which is 334 miles up the Missouri : on the s. w. 
side, we met a strong current, which was from five 
to seven miles an hour, the bottom is extensive, 
and covered with timber, the high country is inter 
spersed with rich handsome prairies, well watered, 
and abounding in deer and bears ; in ascending as 
high as the river Plate, we met a current less rapid, 
not exceeding six miles an hour ; in this distance we 
passed several small rivers on each side, which 
water some finely diversified country, principally 
prairie, as between Vincennes and Illinois, the 
bottoms continuing wide, and covered with timber : 
this river is about 6000 yards wide at the mouth, 
not -navigable ; it heads in the rocky mountains, 
with the N. river, and Yellow Stone river, and] 

N N 



274 



MISSOURI. 



[passes through an open country ; 15 leagues up 
li is river the Ottoes and 30 Missonries live in one 
village, and can raiae 200 men ; 15 leagues higher 
up, the Paneas and Panea republicans live in one 
village, and can raise 700 men ; up the Wolf fork 
ofthTs river, Papia Louisis live in one village, 
and can raise 280 men ; these Indians have par 
tial ruptures frequently ; the river Plate is 630 
miles up the Missouri on the s. w. side. Here we 
find the antelope or goat ; the next river of size 
ascending, is the Stone river, commonly called 
by the Ingaseix, Little river Desious ; it takes 
its rise in lake Dispice, 15 miles from the river 
Demoir, and is 64 yards wide ; here commences 
the Sioux country. The next by note is the Big 
Sioux river, which heads with the St. Peter s, and 
waters of lake Winnepie, in some high wooded 
country ; about 90 miles, still higher, the river 
Jacqua falls on the same side, and about 100 yards 
wide ; this river heads with the waters of lake 
Winnepie, at no great distance e. from the place, 
the head of the river Demon in Pelican lake, be 
tween the Sioux rivers and St. Peter s ; the country 
on both sides of the Missouri from the river Plate 
to that place has very much the same appearance ; 
extensive fertile plains, containing but little tim 
ber, and that little, principally confined to the river 
bottoms and streams ; the country e. of this place, 
and off from the Missouri as low as Stone river, 
contains a number of small trees, many of which 
are said to be so much impregnated with Glauber s 
xsalt as to produce all its effects ; certain it is, that 
the water in the small streams from the hill below 
on the s. w. side possesses this quality. About the 
river Jacqua Bruff, the country contains a great 
quantity of mineral, cobalt, cinnabar, alum, cop 
peras, and several other things; the stone coal 
which is on the Missouri is very indifferent. As 
cending 52 miles above the Jacqua, the river Qui- 
cum foils in on the s. w. side of this river, is 1026 
miles up, 150 yards wide, not navigable ; it heads 
in the black mountains which run nearly parallel 
to the Missouri from about the head of the Kanzas 
river, and ends s. w. of this place. Quicurn 
waters a broken country 122 miles by water higher. 
White river falls in on the s. w. side, and is 300 
yards wide, and navigable, as all the other streams 
are which are not particularly mentioned : this 
river heads in some small lakes, short of the black 
mountains. The Mahan and Poncan nations rove 
on the heads of this river and the Quicum, and 
can raise 250 men ; they were very numerous a 
few years ago, but the small-pox and the Sioux 
Lave reduced them to their present state; the 



Sioux possess the s. w. of the Missouri, above 
White river, 132 miles higher, and on the w. 
side. Teton river falls into it, it is small, and 
heads in the open plains ; here we met a large 
band of Sioux, and the second which we had 
seen, called Tetons ; these are rascals, arid may be 
justly termed the pirates of the Missouri ; they 
made two attempts to stop us ; they are subdi 
vided, and stretch on the river near to this 
place, having reduced the Racres and Mandans, 
and driven them from the country they now oc 
cupy. 

* u The Sioux bands rove in the country to the 
Mississippi. About 47 miles above the Teton 
river, the Chyanne river falls in from the s. w. 
4000 yards wide, is navigable to the black moun 
tains, in which it takes its rise, in the third range ; 
several bands of Indians but little known, rove on 
the head of this and the river Plate, and are stated 
to be as follows : Chaoenne cOO men ; Staetons 
100; Canenaviech 400 ; Cayanwa and Wetahato 
200; Cataha 70; Detame 30; Memesoon 50; 
Castahana 1300 men ; it is probable that some of 
those bands are the remains of the Padoucar na 
tion. At 1440 miles up the Missouri, (and a short 
distance above two handsome rivers which take 
their rise in the black mountains), the Kicaras 
live in three villages, and are the remains of 10 
different tribes of Paneas, who have been reduced 
and driven from their country lower down by the 
Sioux ; their number is about 500 men, they raise 
corn, beans, &amp;c. and appear friendly and well- 
disposed ; they were at war with the nations of 
this neighbourhood, and we have brought about 
peace. Between the Recars and this place, two 
rivers fall in on the s. w. and one on the n. e. not 
very long, and take their rise in the open country ; 
this country abounds in a great variety of wild 
animals, but a few of which the Indians take; 
many of those animals are uncommon in the United 
States, such as white, red, and grey bears ; long- 
eared mules, or black-tail deer, (black at the end 
of the tail only) large hares, antelope or goat ; the 
red fox; the ground prairie dogs, (who burrow 
in the ground) the braroca, which has a head like 
a dog, and the size of a small dog ; the white 
brant, magpie, calumet eagle, &amp;c. and many others 
are said to inhabit the rocky mountains. 

* I have collected the following account of the 
rivers and country in advance of this, to wit: 
two days march, in advance of this, the Little 
Missouri falls on the s. side, and heads at the n. w. 
extremity of the black mountains ; six days march 
further, a large river joins the Missouri, affording] 



MISSOURI. 



275 



as much water as the main river. This river is 
rapid, without a fall, and navigable to the rocky 
mountains, its branches head with the waters of 
the river. Plate; the country in advance is said to 
be broken. 

* " The trade of the nations at this place is from 
the n. w. and Hudson s bay establishments, on 
the Assinneboin river, distant about 150 miles : 
those traders are nearly at open war with each 
other, and better calculated to destroy than pro 
mote the happiness of those nations to which they 
have latterly extended their trade, and intend to 
form an establishment near this place in the course 
of this year. 

" Your most obedient servant, 

" WM. CLARK. * 

Letter from Captain Clark to his Brother. 

&amp;lt; " St. Louis, 23d Sept. 1806. 
&amp;lt; " Dear Brother, 

* " We arrived at this place at 12o clockto-day 
from the Pacific ocean, where we remained during 
the last winter, near the entrance of the Columbia 
jiver. This station we left on the 27th of March 
last, and should have reached St. Louis early in 
August, had \re not been detained by the snow, 
which barred our passage across the rocky moun 
tains until the 24th of June. In returning through 
these mountains, we divided ourselves into several 
parties, digressing from the route by which we 
went out, in order the more effectually to explore 
the country, and discover the most practicable route 
which does exist across the continent, by the way 
of the Missouri and Columbia rivers: in this we 
were completely successful, and have therefore 
no hesitation in declaring, that, such as nature has 
permitted, we have discovered the best route 
which does exist across the continent of N. Ame 
rica in that direction. Such is that by way of 
the Missouri to the foot of the rapids, below the 
great falls of that river, a distance of 2575 miles, 
thence by land, passing by the rocky mountains 
to a navigable part of the Kooskooske, 340 ; and 
with the Kooskooske 73 miles, Lewis s river 154 
miles, and the Columbia 413 miles, to the Pacific 
ocean, making the total distance, from the con 
fluence of the Missouri and Mississippi, to the dis 
charge of the Columbia into the Pacific ocean, 3555 
miles. The navigation of the Missouri may be 
deemed good ; its difficulties arise from its tailing 
banks, timber imbedded in the mud of its channel, 
its sand bars, and the steady rapidity of its cur 
rent, all which may be overcome with a great de 
gree of certainty, by using the necessary precau 
tions. The passage by land of 340 miles, from the 



falls of the Missouri to the Kooskooske, is the 
most formidable part of the track proposed across 
the continent. Of this distance, 200 miles is 
along a good road, and 140 miles over tremendous 
mountains, which for 60 miles are covered with 
eternal snows. A passage over these mountains is, 
however, practicable from the latter part of June 
to the last of September ; and the cheap rate at 
which horses are to be obtained from the Indians 
of the rocky mountains, and the za. of them, re 
duces the expences of transportation over this 
portage to a mere trifle. The navigation of the 
Kooskooske, Lewis s river, and the Columbia, is 
safe and good, from the 1st of April to the mid 
dle of August, by making three portages on the 
latter river; the first of which, in descending, is 
1200 paces at the falls of Columbia, 261 miles up 
that river ; the second of two miles at the long 
narrows, six miles below the falls ; and a third, also 
of two miles, at the great rapids, 65 miles still 
lower down. The tide flows up the Columbia 
183 miles, and within seven miles of the great 
rapids. Large sloops may with safety ascend as 
high as the tide water; and vessels of 300 tons 
burthen reach the entrance of the Multnomah river, 
a large s. branch of the Columbia, which takes its 
rise on the confines of New Mexico, with the 
Colorado and Apostle s rivers, discharging itself 
into the Columbia, 125 miles from its entrance into 
the Pacific ocean. J consider this track across the 
continent of immense advantage to the fur trade, 
as all the furs collected in nine-tenths of the most 
valuable fur country in America, may be con 
veyed to the month of the Columbia, and shipped 
from thence to the East Indies, by the 1st of Au 
gust in each year; and will of course reach Can 
ton earlier than the furs which are annually ex 
ported from Montreal arrive in Great Britain. 

* " In our outward-bound passage we ascended 
t&amp; the foot of the rapids below the great falls of 
the Missouri, where we arrived on the 14th of 
June 1805. Not having met with any of the 
natives of the rocky mountains, we were of course 
ignorant of the passes by land, which existed 
through those mountains to the Columbia river : 
and had we even known the route, we were desti 
tute of horses, which would have been indispen 
sably necessary to enable us to transport the re 
quisite quantity of ammunition and other stores to 
ensure the remaining part of our voyage down the 
Columbia ; we therefore determined to navigate 
the Missouri as far as it was practicable, or until 
we met with some of the natives, from whom we 
could obtain horses and information of the conn- 
try. Accordingly, we undertook a wu&amp;gt;t laborious! 

N N ^ 

// O OF THtf u ^ A 

* VF T W T) f ~ " T trn 

I* i V IS. .4 v.l 1 /, 

, // 



&amp;gt;*,* -i*" 1 



276 



MISSOURI. 



[portage at the falls of the Missouri, of 18 miles, 
which we effected with our canoes and baggage by 
the 3d of July. From hence, ascending the Mis 
souri, we penetrated the rocky mountains at the 
distance of 71 miles above the upper part of the 
portage, and penetrated as far as the three forks 
of that river, a distance of 180 miles further. 
Here the Missouri divides into three nearly equal 
branches at the same point. The two largest 
branches are so nearly of the same dignity, that 
we did not conceive that either of them could with 
propriety retain the name of the Missouri ; and 
therefore called these streams Jefferson s, Madi 
son s, and Gallatin s rivers. The confluence of 
those rivers is 2858 miles from the mouth of the 
Missouri, by the meanders of that river. We 
arrived at the three forks of the Missouri on the 
27th of July. Not having yet been so fortunate 
as to meet with the natives, although I had pre 
viously made several excursions for that purpose, 
we were compelled still to continue our route by 
\vater. 

" The most n. of the three forks, that to which 
we had given the name of Jefferson s river, was 
deemed the most proper for our purpose, and we 
accordingly ascended it 248 miles, to the upper 
forks, and its extreme navigable point; making 
the total distance to which we had navigated the 
waters of the Missouri 3096 miles, of which 429 
lay within the rocky mountains. On the morning 
of the 17th of August 1805, 1 arrived at the forks 
of Jefferson s river, where 1 met Captain Lewis, 
who had previously penetrated, with a party of 
three men, to the waters of the Columbia, disco 
vered a band of the Shoshone nation, and had 
found means to induce 35 of their chiefs and war 
riors to accompany him to that place. From these 
people we learned that the river on which they 
resided was not navigable, and that a passage 
through the mountains in that direction was im 
practicable. Being unwilling to confide in this 
unfavourable account of the natives, it was con 
certed between Captain Lewis and myself, that 
one of us should go forward immediately with a 
small party, and explore the river ; while the 
other in the interim should lay up the canoes at 
that place, and engage the natives with their 
horses to assist in transporting our stores and bag 
gage to their camp. Accordingly I set out the 
next day, passed the dividing mountains between 
the waters of the Missouri and Columbia, and 
descended the river which I call the East fork of 
Lewis s river, about 70 miles. Finding that the 
Indian s account of the country, in the direction 
of this river, was correct, 1 returned and joined 



Captain Lewis on the 29th of August, at the Sho 
shone camp, excessively fatigued, as you may sup 
pose ; having passed mountains almost inacces 
sible, and compelled to subsist on berries during 
the greater part of my route. We now purchased 
27 horses of these Indians, and hired a guide, who 
assured us that he could in 15 days take us to a 
large river in an open countn r , w. of these moun 
tains, by a route some distance to the n. of the 
river on which they lived, and that by which the 
natives w. of the mountains visit the plains of the 
Missouri, for the purpose of hunting the buffalo. 
Every preparation being made, we set forward 
with our guide on the 31st of August, through 
those tremendous mountains, in which we con 
tinued until the 22d of September, before we 
reached the lower country beyond them ; on our 
way we met with the Olelachshoot, a band of the 
Tuchapaks, from whom we obtained an accession 
of seven horses, and exchanged eight or ten others. 
This proved of infinite service to us, as we were 
compelled to subsist on horse beef about eight days 
before we reached the Kooskooske. 

4 " During our passage over those mountains, we 
suffered every thing which hunger, cold, and fa 
tigue could impose; nor did our difficulties, with 
respect to provision, cease on our arrival at the 
Kooskooske, for although the Pallotepallors, a nu 
merous nation inhabiting that country, were ex 
tremely hospitable, and for a few trifling articles 
furnished us with an abundance of roots and dried 
salmon, the food to which they were accustomed, 
we found that we could not subsist on these arti 
cles, and almost all of us grew sick on eating 
them ; we were obliged, therefore, to have re 
course to the flesh of horses and dogs, as food, to 
supply the deficiency of our guns, which produced 
but little meat, as game was scarce in the vicinity 
of our camp on the Kooskooske, where we were 
compelled to remain, in order to construct our 
perogues, to descend the river. At this season the 
salmon are meagre, and form but indifferent food. 
While we remained here, I was myself sick for 
several days, and my friend Captain Lewis suf 
fered a severe indisposition. 

* " Having completed four perogues and a small 
canoe, we gave our horses in charge to the Pallote 
pallors until we returned, and on the 7th of Octo 
ber re-embarked for the Pacific ocean. We de 
scended by the route 1 have already mentioned. 
The water of the river being low at this season, we 
experienced much difficulty in descending: we 
found it obstructed by a great number of difficult 
and dangerous rapids, in passing which our pe 
rogues several times filled, and the men escapedj 



MISSOURI. 



277 



[narrowly with their lives. However, this diffi 
culty does not exist in high water, which hap 
pens within the period 1 have previously men 
tioned. We found the natives extremely nume 
rous, and generally friendly, though we have on 
several occasions owed our lives and the fate of the 
expedition to our number, which consisted of 31 
men. On the 17th of November we reached the 
ocean, where various considerations induced us 
to spend the winter ; we therefore searched for an 
eligible situation for that purpose, and selected a 
spot on the s. side of a little river, called by the 
natives Netul, which discharges hself at a small 
bar on the s. side of the Columbia, and 14 miles 
within point Adams. Here we constructed some 
log-houses, and defended them with a common 
stockade work. This place we called fortClatsop, 
after a nation of that name who were our nearest 
neighbours. In this country we found an abund 
ance of elk, on which we subsisted principally 
during the last winter. We left fort Clatsop on the 
27th of March. Oji our homeward-bound voyage, 
being much better acquainted with the country, we 
were enabled to take such precautions as in a great 
measure to secure us from the want of provisions 
at any time, and greatly to lessen our fatigues, 
when compared with those to which we were 
compelled to submit in our outward-bound journey. 
We have not lost a man since we left the Mandans, 
a. circumstance which 1 assure you is a pleasing 
consideration to me. As 1 shall shortly be with 
you, and the post is now waiting, I deem it un 
necessary here to attempt minutely to detail the 
occurrences of the last 18 months. 

" I am, &amp;c. your affectionate brother, 

" VV M. CLARK." 

The treatment we received from the Indians, 
during nearly three years that we were with them, 
was very kind and hospitable ; except the ill 
treatment we received from the Sioux tribe, who 
several times made attempts to stop us ; and we 
should have been massacred, had we not terrified 
them from their murderous intention, by threaten 
ing them with the small-pox, in such a manner as 
would kill the whole tribe. Nothing could be 
more horrible to them, than the bare mention of 
this fatal disease. It was first communicated to 
them by the Americans, and it spread from tribe 
to tribe with an unabated pace until it extended 
itself across the continent. 

* " This fatal infection spread around with a 
baneful rapidity, which no flight could escape, and 
with a fatal effect that nothing could resist. It 
destroyed with its pestilential breath whole fami 
lies and tribes ; and the horrid scene presented to 



those who had the melancholy and affecting op 
portunity of beholding it, a combination of the 
dead and dying, and such as to avoid the horrid 
fate of their friends around them, prepared to dis 
appoint the plague of its prey, by terminating 
their own existence. The habits and lives of those 
devoted people, who provide not to-day for the 
wants of to-morrow, must have heightened the 
pains of such an affliction, by leaving them not 
only without remedy, but even without alleviation. 
Nothing was loll them, but to submit in agony 
and despair. To aggravate the picture, if aggra 
vation were possible, may be added the sight of 
the helpless child, beholding the putrid carcase of 
its beloved parents dragged from their huts by the 
wolves, who were invited hither by the stench, and 
satiated their hunger on the mangled corpse ; or, in 
the same manner, the dog serving himself with food 
from the body of his once beloved master. Nor 
was it uncommon for the father of a family, whom 
the infection had just reached, to call his family 
around him, to represent their sufferings and cruel 
fate from the influence of some evil spirit, who 
was preparing to extirpate their race ; and to 
invite them to baffle death with all its horrors, 
with their own weapons ; and at the same time, 
if their hearts failed in this necessary act, he was 
himself ready to perform the deed of mercy with 
his own hand, as the last act of his affection, and 
instantly follow them to the chambers of death." 
(A WesternTraneUer.) The Indians being destitute 
of physicians, living on animal food, and plunging 
themselves into cold water, on the first discovery 
of the disease, rendered it generally mortal. 

1 Whife we were at fort Mondan, the Sioux 
robbed several of our party when they were return 
ing to the fort, with the fruits of an excursion 
after game ; and murdered several of the Mandan 
tribe in cold blood, without provocation, while 
reposing on the bosom of friendship. On hearing 
of this massacre, Captain Clark and the greater 
part of us volunteered to avange the murder ; but 
were deterred by not receiving succour from the 
Mandan warriors, who declined to avenge the 
outrage committed on them. The probable reason 
of their not enlisting was, that they were too much 
afraid of the superior number of the Sioux to ven 
ture an engagement. 

1 Soon after this massacre, we received authentic 
intelligence, that the Sioux had it in contemplation 
(if their threats were true) to rnurdcr us in the 
spring ; but were prevented from making the at 
tack, by our threatening to spread the small pox, 
with all its horrors, among them. Knowing that 
it first originated among the white people, and] 



278 

[having heard of inoculation, and the mode of 
keeping the infection in phials, which they had 
but an imperfect idea of, a bare threat filled them 
with horror, and was sufficient to deter them from 
their resolute and bloody purpose. This strata 
gem may appear insignificant to the reader, but 
was of the greatest consequence to us ; for to it 
alone we owed not only the fate of the expedition, 
but our lives. 

c Most of the tribes of Indians, that we became 
acquainted with (except the Sioux), after being 
introduced by our interpreter, and having found 
that our intentions were friendly towards them, 
never failed of greeting us with many tokens of 
their friendly disposition. Soon after our inter 
view, we were invited to smoke the calumet of 
peace, and to partake freely of their venison. 
The women and children, in particular, were not 
wanting in shewing tokens of friendship, by en 
deavouring to make our stay agreeable. On our 
first meeting, they generally held a council, as 
they term it, when their chief delivers a talk, in 
which they give their sentiments respecting their 
ucw visitors, which were filled with professions of 
friendship, and often were very eloquent, and 
abounded with sublime and figurative language. 

* When we departed, after taking leave, they 
would often put up a prayer; of which the fol 
lowing is a sample, which was put up for us by a 
Mandan : That the Great Spirit would favour 
us with smooth water, with a clear sky by day, 
and a bright star-light by night ; that we might 
not be presented with the red hatchet of war ; 
but that the great pipe of peace might ever shine 
upon us, as the sun shines in an unclouded day, 
and that we might be overshadowed by the smoke 
thereof; that we might have sound sleep, and 
that the bird of peace might whisper in our ears 
pleasant dreams ; that the deer might be taken 
by us in plenty ; and that the Great Spirit would 
take us home in safety to our women and children. 
These prayers were generally made with great 
fervency, often smiting Avith great vehemence their 
Lands upon their breast ; their ey&amp;lt;^s fixed in ado 
ration towards heaven. In this manner they 
would continue their prayers until we were out of 
sight. 

4 In the fore part of autumn we experienced 
slight typhus indispositions, caused by great 
vicissitudes of weather, which at times was very 
damp. 

Our affectionate companion Serjeant Floyd was 
seized with a severe astenic disease, to which he fell 
a victim. He was seized with an acute pain in his 
intestines, accompanied with great suppression of 



the pulmonary function. Every effort that our 
situation allowed, was in vain used for his recovery ; 
we buried him in the most decent manner that our 
circumstances would admit : he was universally 
lamented by us. 

* Several times, many of our party were in im 
minent danger of being devoured by the wild 
beasts of prey ; but happily we escaped. Fre 
quently we were annoyed by a kind of light-co 
loured bear, of which the country, near the head 
of the Missouri, abounds. After being attacked, 
they give no quarter, but rush with great fury to 
ward their enemy. One of our parly shot at one 
of them, and wounded him; the bear, instead of 
being intimidated by the smart of the wound, 
was stimulated into rage, and rushed with great 
fury to devour the assailant ; who saved his life 
by running headlong down a steep precipice, that 
formed the bank of the river ; but was severely- 
bruised by this precipitate retreat. 

* The following narrative of an encounter with 
a snake, is told by a companion, whose veracity 
can be relied on ; I will give it in his own words, 
as he related it in a letter to his friend. 

* " Some time," says he, " before we reached 
fort Mandan, while I was out on an excursion of 
hunting, one of the greatest monsters that ever 
shocked the mind with horror was presented to my 
sight. When passing deliberately in a forest that 
bordered on a prairie, I heard a rustling in the 
bushes; I leaped towards the object, delighted 
with the prospect of acquiring game. But on 
proceeding a few paces further, my blood was 
chilled by the appearance of a serpent of an enor 
mous size; on discovering me, he immediatelj 
erected his head to a great height ; his colour was 
of a yellower hue than the spots of a rattlesnake,, 
and on the top of his back were spots of a reddish 
colour ; his eyes emitted fire, his tongue darted, 
as though he menaced my destruction. He was 
evidently in the attitude of springing at me, when 
I levelled my rifle at him ; but probably owing to 
my consternation, I only wounded him ; but the 
explosion of the gun and the wound turned to 
flight the awful enemy. Perhaps you may think, 
that my fright has magnified the description. I 
can candidly aver, that he was in bulk half as 
large as a middle-sized man." 

In the Indian tribes there is so great a simi 
larity in their stature, colour, government, and 
religious tenets, that it will be requisite for per 
spicuity, to rank them under one general head ; 
and when there is a contrast in the course of the 
description it will be mentioned. 

* They are all (except the Snake Indians) tall in] 

2 



MISSOURI. 



279 



[ stature, straight, and robust ; it is very seldom 
they are deformed, which has given rise to the sup 
position, that they put to death their deformed 
children, which is not the case. Their skin is of 
a copper colour, their eyes large, black, and of a 
bright and sparkling colour, indicative of a subtle 
and discerning mind. Their hair is of the same 
colour, and prone to grow long, straight, and sel 
dom or never curled ; their teeth are large and 
white. I never observed any decayed among them, 
which makes their breath as sweet as the air they 
inhale. The women are about the stature of the 
English women, and much inclined to corpulency, 
which is seldom Ihe case with the other sex. 

* I shall not enter into a discussion about the 
cause of their hue. I shall barely mention the 
suppositions that are made respecting it. Some 
have asserted, that it is derived principally from 
their anointing themselves with fat in the summer 



season, to prevent profuse perspiration, and this, 
combined with the influence of the sun, has given 
the tincture of their complexion. To support the 
hypothesis, they assert that the abovementioned 
causes repeated give colour to the parent, who 
procreates his own likeness, until at length it is en 
tailed on posterity. But notwithstanding this 
curious reasoning, others are of opinion, that the 
hand of the Creator gave the reddish hue to the 
Indians, the sable colour to the African, and that 
of white to the civilized nations. 

1 They esteem a beard exceedingly unbecoming, 
and take great pains to get rid of it, nor is there 
ever any to be perceived on their faces, except 
when they grow old and become inattentive to their 
appearance. Every crinose excrescence on other 
parts of their body is held in as great abhorrence 
by them, and both sexes are equally careful to 
extirpate it, in which they often employ much time. 
4 The Pallotepallors, Serpentine, Mandan, and 
other interior tribes of Indians, pluck them out 
with bent pieces of hard wood, formed into a kind 
of nippers made for that purpose; while those 
that have a communication with Americans or Eu 
ropeans procure from them wire, which they in 
geniously make into an instrument resembling a 
screw, which will take so firm a hold of the beard, 
that with a sudden twitch they extirpate it by 
the roots, when considerable blood never fails to 
flow. 

The dress of the Indians varies according to 
the tribe they belong to ; but in general it is made 
very commodious, not to encumber them in pur 
suing the chase, or their enemy ; those that inha 
bit the Missouri, I have often seen, in cold wea 
ther, without any apparel to screen themselves 



from the inclemency of the weather. The lower 
rank of the Pallotepallors and Clatsops, wear no 
thing in the summer season, but a small garment 
about their hips, which is either manufactured out 
of bark or skins, and which would vie with, if not 
excel, any European manufature, being diver 
sified with different colours, which give it a gay 
appearance. Their kings are generally dressed in 
robes made out of small skins (which takes several 
hundred for a garment) of different colours, neatly 
tanned ; these they hang loosely over their shoul 
ders. 

* In deep snows they wear skins that entirely 
cover their legs and feet, and almost answer for 
breeches, being held up by strings tied to the 
lower part of their waist. Their bodies, in the 
winter season, are covered with different kinds of 
skins, that are tanned with the fur on, which 
they wear next to the skin. Those of tl&amp;gt;e men, 
who wish to appear more gay than others, pluck 
out the greatest part of their hair, leaving only 
small locks, as fancy dictates, on which are hung 
different kinds of quills, and feathers of elegant 
plumage superbly painted. The Sioux and Osages, 
who traffic with the Americans, wear some of 
our apparel, such as shirts and blankets ; the for 
mer they cannot bear tied at the wristbands and 
collars, and the latter they throw loosely over their 
shoulders. Their chiefs dress very gay: about 
their heads they wear all kinds of ornaments that 
can well be bestowed upon them, which are curi 
ously wrought, and in the winter long robes of the 
richest fur, that trail on the ground. 

In the summer there is no great peculiarity, 
only that what the higher rank wear is excessively 
ornamented . 

1 The Indians paint their heads and faces yellow, 
green, red, and black; which they esteem very 
ornamental. They also paint themselves when 
they go to war ; but the method they make use of 
on this occasion differs from that which they em 
ploy merely for decoration. 

1 The Chipaway young men, who are emulous 
of excelling their companions in finery, slit the out 
ward rim of both ears ; at the same time they take 
care not to separate them entirely, but leave the 
flesh thus cut, still untouched at both extremities : 
around this spungy substance, from the upper to 
the lower part, they twist brass wire, till the weight 
draws the amputated rim in a bow of five or six 
inches diameter, and drags it down almost to the 
shoulder. This decoration is esteemed gay and 
becoming. 

* It is also a custom among them to bore their 
noses, and wear in them pendants of different sorts.} 



280 



MISSOURI. 



[Shells are often worn, which when painted are 
reckoned very ornamental. 

The Indians who inhabit the borders of Louisi 
ana, make for their legs a kind of stocking, either 
of skins or cloth ; these are sewed up as much as 
possible in the shape of their leg, so as to admit 
of being drawn on and off; the edges of the stuff 
of which they are composed, are left annexed to 
the seams, and hang loose about the breadth of a 
hand ; and this part, which is placed on the out 
side of the leg, is generally ornamented with lace 
and ribbons, and often with embroidery and por 
cupine quills variously coloured. The hunters 
from Louisiana find these stockings much more 
convenient than any others. Their shoes are made 
of the skins of deer or elk ; these, after being 
dressed with the hair on, are cut into shoes, and 
fashioned so as to be easy to their feet, and con 
venient for walking. The edges round the ancle 
are decorated with pieces of brass or tin, fixed 
round a leather string about an inch long, which 
being placed very thick make a very pleasing 
noise when they walk or dance. 

&amp;lt; The dress of the women in the summer season, 
consists only of a petticoat that does not reach 
down to \heir knees. In the winter they wear a 
shift made of skins, which answers a very good 
purpose when they stand erect, as it is sufficiently 
low ; but when they stoop they often put modesty 
to the blush. Their feet and legs are covered in a 
manner similar to the other sex. 

* Most of the female Indians who dwell on 
the w. side of the Mississippi, near its confluence 
with the Missouri, decorate their heads by enclos 
ing their hair in plates of silver ; these are costly 
ornaments, and used by the highest rank only. 
Those of the lower rank make use of bones, which 
they manufacture 1o resemble those of silver. The 
silver made use of is formed into thin plates of 
about four or five inches broad, in several of which 
they confine their hair. That plate which is 
nearest to the head is of considerable width ; the 
next narrower, and made so as to pass a little way 
under the other, and so gradually tapering until 
they get to a very considerable magnitude. 

4 This decoration proves to be of great expence, 
for they often wear it on the back part of the head, 
extending to the full length of their hair, which is 
commonly very long. 

c The women of every nation generally paint 
a spot against each ear, about the size of a crown 
piece ; some of them paint their hair, and some 
times a spot on the middle of their forehead. 

* The Indians have no fixed habitations when 
they are hunting j but build where conveniency 



directs ; their houses are made so low as not to 
admit one to stand erect, and are without win 
dows. Those that are built for a permanent resi 
dence are much more substantial ; they are mad 
of logs and bark, large enough to contain several 
apartments. Those built for their chiefs are often 
very elegant. That of the chief warrior of the 
Mahas is at least 60 feet in circumference, and 
lined with furs and painting. The furs are of 
various colours, many of which 1 had never seen 
betbre, and were extremely beautiful ; the variety 
in colour formed a contrast that much added to 
its elegance. The paintings were elegant, and 
would adorn the dwellings of an opulent European 
prince. But the houses of the common people are 
but very indifferent. 

6 They have also moveable houses, which they 
use for fishing, and sometimes for hunting, made 
of deer skins or birch bark sewed together, which 
they cover over poles made for the purpose ; they 
are bent over to form a semicircle, resembling 
those bent by the Americans for beans or hops to 
grow on, and are covered over as before mentioned ; 
they are very light, and easily transported where 
necessity requires. 

1 The best of their cabins have no chimneys, but 
a small hole to let the smoke through, which they 
are compelled to stop up in stormy weather ; and 
when it is too cold to put out their fire, their huts 
are filled with clouds of smoke, which render 
them insupportable to any but an Indian. 

* The common people lie on bear skins, which 
are spread on the floor. Their chiefs sleep on bea 
ver skins, which are sometimes elevated. 

* Their utensils are few, and in point of useful 
ness very defective ; those to hold water in are 
made of the skins of animals, and the knotty 
excrescences of hard wood ; their spoons are manu 
factured out of wood, or the bones of a buffalo, 
and are tolerably commodious, and I have often 
seen them elegant, and sometimes painted. 

* The Flatheads and Clatsops make baskets out 
of rushes that will hold Avater, if they are not very 
dry. These two nations appear to have more of 
a mechanical genius, than any other people that I 
have ever been acquainted with ; and I think 
they are not outrivalled by any nation on earth, 
when taking into consideration their very limited 
mechanical instruments. 

* Many of the Indian nations make no use of 
bread, salt, and spices, and many live to be old 
without seeing or tasting of either. Those that 
live near the snowy mountains, live in a great 
measure on berries, which clothe the fields in great 
abundance.] 



MISSOURI. 



281 



[&amp;lt; The Taukies, and other c. tribes, where Indian 
corn grows, take green eorn and beans, boil them 
tegether with bear s flesh, the fat of which gives a 
flavour, and renders it beyond comparison deli 
cious? they call this dish Succatosh. 

In general they have no idea of the use of milk, 
although great quantities might be collected from 
the buffalo and elk. They only consider it proper 
for the nourishment of the young of these ani 
mals in their tender state. It cannot be perceived, 
that any inconvenience arises from the disuse of 
articles so much esteemed by civilized nations, 
which they employ to give a relish and flavour to 
their food. But on the contrary, the great healthi 
ness of the Indians, and the unhealthiness of the 
sons of Epicurus, prove that the diet of the former 
is the most salutary. 

* They preserve their meat by exposing it to the 
sun in the summer, and in the winter by putting 
it between cakes of ice, which keep it sweet, and 
free from any putrefactive quality. 

Their food consists, in a great measure, of the 
flesh of the bear, buffalo, and deer. They who 
reside near the head of the Missouri and Columbia 
rivers, chiefly make use of the buffalo and elk, 
which are often seen from 50 to 100 in a drove. 
Where there are plenty of the two last mentioned 
animals there are but few of the former, and 
where there are many of the former, but few of 
the latter. 

4 The mode of roasting their meat is by burn 
ing it under ground, on the side of a hill, placing 
stones next to the meat : the mode of building to 
heat it somewhat resembles the fire-place made 
under a limekiln. In this manner they roast the 
largest of their animals. 

The mode of cooking smaller pieces is to roast 
them in stones, that are hewn out for the pur 
pose. 

* The Flatheads and Clatsops procure a root about 
the size of a potato, spontaneously and in great 
abundance, which is tolerably palatable, and per 
fectly agrees with the natives ; but made us all 
sick, while we were among them. Before we de 
scended the Columbia river, we were unable to pro 
cure game, and had recourse to the flesh of dogs 
and horses to preserve life, as those roots would, 
without doubt, have destroyed us, and we were 
unable to procure any other kind of food. 

* Many of the tribes of Indians are extremely 
dirty. I have seen the Maha Indians bring water 
in the paunches of animals that were very dirty, 
and in other things equally so. But the Maha 
chiefs are very neat and cleanly in theijr tents, ap 
parel, and food. 

VOL. III. 



The Indians commonly eat in large parties, so 
that their meals may with propriety be termed 
feasts ; they have not set hours for their meals, but 
obey the dictates of nature. 

* Many of the tribes dance before or after their 
meals, in devotion to the Great Spirit for the bless 
ings they receive. Being informed of the mode 
of our saying grace, they answered, that they 
thought we were stupid and ungrateful, not to 
exercise our bodies for the great benefits we re 
ceived ; but muttering with our lips, they thought 
was an unacceptable sacrifice to the Great Spirit, 
and the stupid mode of the ceremony ridiculous 
in the extreme. In their feasts, the men and wo 
men eat apart ; but in their domestic way of living, 
they promiscuously eat together. 

1 Instead of getting together and drinking, as the 
Americans do, they make use of feasting as a sub 
stitute. 

When their chiefs are assembled together on 
any occasion, they always conclude with a feast, 
at which their hilarity and cheerfulness know no 
bounds. 

* No people on earth are more hospitable, kind, 
and free, than the Indians. They will readily 
share with any of their own tribe, and eVen with 
those of a different nation, the last part of their 
provisions. Though they do not keep one com 
mon stock, yet that community of goods, which is 
so prevalent among them, and their generous dis 
positions, render it nearly of the same effect. 

* They strike fire by rubbing together sticks of 
wood, of a particular kind, which will yield it 
with ease ; from other kinds it is impossible to pro 
cure it. 

They are extremely circumspect and deliberate 
in every word and action ; nothing hurries them 
into any intemperate wrath, but that inveteracy 
to their enemies, which is rooted in every Indian s 
breast, and never can be eradicated. In all other 
instances they are cool and deliberate, taking care 
to suppress the emotions of the heart. If an In 
dian has discovered that a friend of his is in dan 
ger of being cut oft" by a lurking enemy, he does 
not tell him of his danger in direct terms, as though 
he were in fear, but he first coolly Jisks him which 
way lie is going that day, and having his answer, 
with the same indifference tells him, that he has 
been informed, that a noxious beast lies on the 
route he is going, which might probably do him 
mischief. This hint proves sufficient, and his 
friend avoids the danger with as much caution, as 
though every design and motion of his enemy had 
been pointed out to him. 

* This apathy often shews ilself on occasions} 

o o 



282 



MISSOURI. 



[that would call forth the favour of a susceptible 
heart. If an Indian has been absent from his fa 
mily for several months, either on a war or hunting 
party, and his wife and children meet him at some 
distance from his habitation, instead of the affec 
tionate sensations that naturally arise in the breast 
of more refined beings, and give rise to mutual 
congratulations, he continues his course without 
looking to the right or left; without paying the 
least attention to those around him, till he arrives 
at his house: he there sits down, and with as much 
unconcern as if he had not been absent a day 
smokes his pipe ; those of his friends who followed 
him do the same ; perhaps it is several hours be- 
fore he relates to them the incidents that have be 
fallen him during his absence, though perhaps he 
has left a father, a brother, or a son dead on the 
field, (whose loss he ought to have lamented) or 
has been successful in the undertaking that called 
Lim from his home. 

* If an Indian has been engaged for several days 
in the chase, or any other laborious expedition, 
and by accident continued long without food, 
\vhen he arrives at the hut of a friend, where he 
knows that his wants will be immediately supplied, 
he takes care not to shew the least symptoms of 
impatience, or betray the extreme hunger that he 
is tortured with; but, on being invited in, sits 
contentedly down, and smokes his pipe with as 
much composure as if his appetite was cloyed, and 
he was perfectly at ease ; he does the same if 
among strangers. This custom is strictly adhered 
to by every tribe, as they esteem it a proof of for 
titude, arid think the reverse would entitle them to 
the appellation of old women. 

* If you tell an Indian, that his children have 
greatly signalized themselves against an enemy, 
have taken many scalps, and brought home many 
prisoners, he does not appear to feel any strong 
emotions of pleasure on the occasion; his answer 
generally is, " they have done well," and makes 
but very little inquiry about the matter; on the 
contrary, if you inform him that his children are 
slain or taken prisoners, he makes no complaints, 
he only replies, " it is unfortunate," and, for 
some time, asks no questions about how it hap 
pened. 

This seeming indifference, however, does not 
proceed from a suppression of (he natural affections, 
for, notwithstanding they are esteemed savages, 
I never saw among any other people greater proofs 
of filial tenderness ; and although they meet their 
wives after a long absence with the stoical indif 
ference just mentioned, they are not, in general, 
yoid of conjugal affection. 



* Another peculiarity is observable in the man 
ner of paying (heir visits. If an Indian goes to 
visit a particular person in a family, he mentions 
to whom his visit is intended, and the rest of the 
family immediately retire to the other end of the 
hut or tent, and are careful not to come near 
enough to interrupt them during the whole con 
versation. The same method is pursued when a 
young man goes to pay his addresses to a young 
woman ; but then he must be careful not to let 
love be the subject of his discourse whilst the day 
light remains. 

* They discover an amazing sagacity, and ac 
quire with the greatest readiness any thing that de 
pends upon the attention of the mind. By expe 
rience, and an acute observation, they attain many 
perfections, to which Americans are strangers. 
For instance, they will cross a forest or a plain, 
which is 200 miles in breadth, so as to reach with 
great exactness the point at which they intend to 
arrive, keeping during the whole of that space in 
a direct line, without any material deviations ; and 
this they will do with the same ease, let the wea 
ther be fair or cloudy. 

With equal acuteness they will point to that 
part of the heavens the sun is in, though it be in 
tercepted by clouds or fogs. Besides this, they 
are able to pursue, with incredible facility, the 
traces of man or beast, either on leaves or grass ; 
and on this account it is with great difficuliy a fly 
ing enemy escapes discovery. 

* They are indebted for these talents, not only to 
nature, but to an extraordinary command of the 
intellectual faculties, which can only be acquired 
by an unremitted attention, and by long expe 
rience. 

* They are in general very happy in a retentive 
memory. They can recapitulate every particular 
that has been treated of in council, and remember 
the exact time when they were held. Their belts 
of wampum preserve the substance of the treaties 
they have concluded with the neighbouring tribes, 
for ages back, to which they will appeal and re 
fer, with as much perspicuity and readiness, as 
Europeans can to their written records. 

* Every nation pays great respect to old age. 
The advice of a father will never receive any ex 
traordinary attention from the young Indians ; 
probably they receive it with only a bare assent; 
but they will tremble before a grand father, and sub 
mit to his injunctions with the utmost alacrity. 
The words of the ancient part of their community 
are esteemed by the young as oracles. If they 
take, during hunting parties, any game that is 
reckoned by them uncommonly delicious, it is] 



MISSOURI. 



283 



[immediately presented to the eldest of their rela 
tions. 

* They never suffer themselves to be overbur 
dened with care ; but live in a state of perfect 
tranquillity and contentment, being naturally in 
dolent. If provisions, just sufficient for their sub 
sistence, can be procured with little trouble, and 
near at hand, they will not go far, or take any ex 
traordinary pains for it, though by so doing they 
might acquire greater plenty, and of a more esti 
mable kind. 

f Having much leisure time, they indulge this 
indolence to which they are so prone, by sleeping 
and rambling about among their tents. But when 
necessity obliges them to take the field, either to 
oppose an enemy, or to procure food, they are 
alert and indefatigable. Many instances of their 
activity on these occasions, will be given when we 
treat of their wars. 

* The greatest blemish in their character, is that 
savage disposition which impels them to treat their 
enemies with a severity that every other nation 
shudders at. But if they are thus barbarous to 
those with whom they are at war, they are friend 
ly, hospitable, and humane in peace. It may 
with truth be said of them, that they are the worst 
enemies, and the best friends, of any people in the 
world. 

* They are, in general, strangers to the passion 
of jealousy, and brand a man with folly that is dis 
trustful of his wife. Among some tribes the very 
idea is not known ; as the most abandoned of 
their young men very rarely attempt the virtue of 
married women, nordolhese put themselves in the 
way of solicitations : yet the Indian women in ge 
neral are of an amorous disposition ; and before 
they are married, are not the less esteemed for the 
indulgence of their passions. 

1 The Indians, in their common state, arc stran 
gers to all distinction of property, except in the 
articles of domestic use, which every one considers 
as his own, and increases as circumstances admit. 
They are extremely liberal to each other; and 
supply the deficiency of their friends with any su 
perfluity of their own. 

* In dangers they readily give assistance to those 
of their band Mho stand in need of it, without any 
expectation of return, except those just rewards 
that are always conferred by the Indians on merit. 
Governed by the plain and equitable laws of na 
ture, every one is rewarded according to his deserts ; 
arid their equality of condition, manners, and pri 
vileges, with that constant and sociable familiarity 
which prevails throughout every Indian nation, 
animates them with a pure and patriotic spirit. 



that tends to the general good of the society to 
which they belong. 

* If any of their neighbours are bereaved, by 
death, or by an enemy, of their children, those who 
are possessed of the greatest number of prisoners, 
who are made slaves, supply the deficiency; and 
these are adopted by them, and treated in every 
respect as if they really were the children of the 
person to whom they are presented. 

* The Indians can form to themselves no idea of 
the value of money ; they consider it, when they 
are made acquainted with the uses to which it is 
applied by other nations, as the source of innume 
rable evils. To it they attribute all the mischiefs 
that are prevalent among Europeans, such as trea 
chery, plundering, devastation, and murder. 

They esteem it irrational, that one man should 
be possessed of a greater quantity than another, and 
are amazed that any honour should be annexed to 
the possession of it. 

1 But that the want of this useless metal should 
be the cause of depriving persons of their liberty, 
and that on the account of this particular distribu 
tion of it, great numbers should be shut up within 
the dreary walls of a prison, cut off from society, 
of which they constitute a part, exceeds their be 
lief; nor do they fail, on hearing this part of the 
United States system of government related, to 
charge the institutors of it with a total want of hu 
manity, and to brand them with the names of sa 
vages and brutes. 

1 They show almost an equal degree of indiffer 
ence for the productions of art. When any of 
these are shewn them, they say, " It is pretty, I 
like to look at it," and often are not inquisitive 
about the construction of it, neither can they form 
proper conceptions of its use. But if you tell them 
a person runs with great agility, that he is skilled 
in hunting, can direct with unerring aim a gun, or 
bend with ease a bow ; that he can dexterously 
work a canoe, understands the art of war, is ac 
quainted with the situations of a country, and can 
make his way without a guide through an immense 
forest, subsisting during the time on a small quan 
tity of provisions, they are in raptures ; they listen 
with great attention to the pleasing tale, and bestow 
the highest commendation on the hero of it. 

They make but litlle use of physicians arid me 
dicine, and consequently have few diseases amongst 
them. There is seldom an Indian but (hat blooms 
with the appearance of health. They have no 
midwives among them; and among several tribes 
the mother is without the assistance of any person 
being with her at the time of her delivery, not 
having even a female attendant.] 
o o 2 



284 



MISSOURI. 



[ Soon after the birth of a child, it is placed on a 
board, which is covered with a skin stuffed with 
soft moss: the child is laid on its back, and tied to 
it. To these machines are fastened strings, by 
which they hang them to branches of trees: or, if 
they do not find trees handy, they place them 
against a stump or stone while they dress the deer 
or fish, or do any domestic business. In this posi 
tion they are kept until they are several months 
old. When taken out they are suffered to go 
naked, and are daily bathed in cold water, which 
renders them vigorous and active. 

An Indian child is generally kept at the breast 
until it is two years old, and sometimes, though 
rarely, a year longer. 

4 The Indians often occasion inflammatory dis 
eases by excessive eating, after a fast of three or 
four days, when retreating from, or pursuing an 
enemy. 

The inequality of riches, the disappointments 
of ambition, and merciless oppression, are not with 
them exciting causes of insanity. I made great in 
quiry, but was not able to learn, that a single case 
of melancholy or madness was ever known among 
them. 

* The dreadful havoc that the small-pox has 
made has necessarily been mentioned. 

1 The mode of curing a fever is by profuse per- 
epiration, which is effected by the patient being 
confined in a close tent or wigwam, over a hole in 
the earth, in which red-hot stones are placed ; a 
quantity of hot water is then thrown upon the 
stones, which involves the patient in a cloud of 
vapours and sweat ; in this situation he rushes out, 
and plunges into a river, and from thence retires 
into a warm bed. 

They never think of giving medicine, until 
they have first made an attempt to remove the 
disease by sacrifices and prayer, and if the patient 
recovers soon, it is attributed to the holy manage 
ment of the priest; and if medicine is to be used 
as the last alternative, they never administer it 
without its being accompanied with prayer, and a 
large quantity of meat, which they consume on 
the fire for a sacrifice. 

They have a plant among them, which has the 
power of producing abortion. It is related by 
Mr. Jefferson, in his Notes on Virginia, that the 
Indians inhabiting the frontiers possess a plant 
that produces the same effect. 

Considering their ignorance of astronomy, time 
is very rationally divided by the Indians. Those 
in the interior parts (and of those I would gene 
rally be understood to speak) count their years by 
winters j or, as they express themselves, by snows. 



1 Some nations among them reckon their years by 
moons, and make them consist of 12 sy nodical or 
lunar months, taking care, when 30 moons have 
waned, to add a supernumerary one, which they 
term the lost moon ; and then begin to count as 
before. They pay a great regard to the first ap 
pearance of every moon, and on the occasion al 
ways repeat some joyful sounds, stretching at the 
same time their hands towards it. 

* Every month has with them a name expressive 
of its season ; for instance, they call the month of 
March (in which their year generally begins, at 
the first new moon after the vernal equinox) the 
worm month or moon ; because at this time the 
worms quit their retreats in the bark of the trees, 
&amp;c. where they have sheltered themselves during 
the winter. 

* The month of April is termed by them the 
month of plants. May, the month of flowers. 
June, the hot moon. July, the buck moon. 
Their reason for thus denominating these is ob 
vious. 

August, the sturgeon moon ; because in this 
month they catch great numbers of that fish. 

* September, the corn moon ; because in that 
month they gather in their Indian corn. 

&amp;lt; October, the travelling moon ; as they leave 
at this time their villages, and travel towards 
the place where they intend to hunt during the 
winter. 

* November, the beaver moon ; for in this month 
the beavers begin to take shelter in their houses, 
having laid up a sufficient store of provisions for 
the winter season. 

4 December, the hunting moon, because they em 
ploy this month in pursuit of their game. 

* January, the cold moon, as it generally freezes 
harder, and the cold is more intense in this than 
in any other month. 

* February, they call the snow moon, because 
more snow commonly falls during this month than 
any other in the winter. 

When the moon does not shine, they say the 
moon is dead ; and some call the three last days 
of it the naked days. The moon s first appear 
ance they term its coming to life again. 

* They make no division of weeks ; but days 
they count by sleeps, half days by pointing to 
the sun at noon, and quarters by the rising and 
the setting of the sun ; to express which in their 
traditions they make use of very significant hiero 
glyphics. 

* The Indians are totally unskilled in geography 
as well as all the other sciences, and yet they draw 
on their birch bark very exact charts or maps of] 



MISSOURI. 



285 



[the countries they are acquainted with. The la 
titude and longitude only are wanting to make 
them tolerably complete. 

Their sole knowledge in astronomy consists in 
being able to point out the polar star ; by which 
they regulate their course when they travel in the 
night. 

They reckon the distance of places, not by 
miles or leagues, but by a day s journey, which, 
according to the best calculations I could make, 
appears to be about 20 English miles. These 
they also divide into halves and quarters, and will 
demonstrate them in their maps with great exact 
ness, by the hieroglyphics just mentioned, when 
they regulate in council their war parties, or their 
most distant hunting excursions. 

* They have no idea of arithmetic ; and though 
they are able to count to any number, figures as 
well as letters appear mysterious to them, and above 
their comprehension. 

* Every separate body of Indians is divided into 
bands or tribes ; which band or tribe forms a little 
community with the nation to which it belongs. 
As the nation has some particular symbol by which 
it is distinguished from others, so each tribe has a 
badge from which it is denominated ; as that of 
the eagle, the panther, the tiger, the buffalo, &amp;c. 
One band is represented by a snake, another a 
tortoise, a third a squirrel, a fourth a wolf, and a 
fifth a buffalo. Throughout every nation they 
particularize themselves in the same manner, and 
the meanest person among them will remember his 
lineal descent, and distinguish himself by his re 
spective family. 

4 Did not many circumstances tend to confute 
the supposition, I should be almost induced to 
conclude, from this distinction of tribes, and the 
particular attachment of the Indians to them, that 
they derive their origin, as some have asserted, 
from the Israelites. 

* Besides this, every nation distinguishes itself 
by the manner of constructing its tents or huts. 
And so well versed are all the Indians in this dis 
tinction, that though there appears to be no dif 
ference on the nicest observations made by an 
American, yet they will immediately discover, 
from the position of a pole left, in the ground, what 
nation has encamped on the spot many months 
before. 

t Every band has a chief, who is termed the 
great chief, or the chief warrior; and who is 
chosen in consideration of his experience in war, 
and of his approved valour, to direct their mili 
tary operations, and to regulate all concerns be 
longing to that department. But this chief is not 



considered as the head of the state. Besides the 
great warrior, who is elected for his warlike qua 
lifications, there is another who enjoys a pre 
eminence as his hereditary right, and has the more 
immediate management of their civil affairs. This 
chief might, with great propriety, be denominated 
the Sachem ; whose assent is necessary in all con 
veyances and treaties, to which he affixes tho 
mark of the tribe or nation. 

* Though these two are considered as the heads 
of the band, and the latter is usually denominated 
their king, yet the Indians are sensible of neither 
civil nor military subordination. As every one of 
them entertains a high opinion of his consequence, 
and is extremely tenacious of his liberty, all in 
junctions that carry with them the appearance of 
a positive command, are instantly rejected with 
scorn. 

On this account it is seldom that their leaders 
are so indiscreet as to give out any of their orders 
in a peremptory style ; a bare hint from a chief 
that he thinks such a thing necessary to be done, 
instantly arouses an emulation among the inferior 
ranks, and it is immediately executed with great 
alacrity. By this method the disgustful part of 
the command is evaded, and an authority that 
falls little short of absolute sway instituted in its 
room. 

1 Among the Indians no visible form of govern 
ment is established ; they allow of no such distinc 
tion as magistrate and subject, every one appear 
ing to enjoy an independence that cannot be con- 
trouled. The object of government among them 
is rather foreign than domestic, for their attention 
seems more to be employed in preserving such an 
union among members of their tribes as will enable 
them to watch the motions of their enemies, and 
act against them with concert and vigour, than to 
maintain interior order by any public regulations. 
If a scheme that appears to be of service to the 
community is proposed by the chief, every one is 
at liberty to choose whether or not he will assist in 
carrying it on ; for they have no compulsory laws 
that lay them under any restrictions. If violence 
is committed, or blood is shed, the right of re 
venge is left to the family of the injured: the chiefs 
assume neither the power of inflicting nor of mo 
derating the punishment. 

1 Some nations, where the dignity is hereditary, 
limit the succession to the female line. On the 
death of a chief, his sister s son sometimes suc 
ceeds him in preference to his own son ; and if he 
happens to have no sister, the nearest female rela 
tion assumes the dignity. This accounts for a 
woman being at the head of the Winnebago nation/j 



286 



MISSOURI. 



| which, before 1 was acquainted witli their laws, 
appeared strange to me. 

Each family has a right to appoint one of its 
chiefs to be an assistant to the principal chief, who 
watches over the interest of his family, and with 
out whose consent nothing of a public nature can 
be carried into execution. These are generally 
chosen for their ability in speaking ; and such only 
are permitted to make orations in their councils 
and general assemblies. 

In this body, with the hereditary chief at its 
head, the supreme authority appears to be lodged ; 
as by its determination every transaction relative 
to their hunting, to their making war or peace, and 
to all their public concerns, is regulated. Next to 
these the body of warriors, which comprehends 
all that are able to bear arms, hold their rank. 
This division has sometimes at its head the chief of 
the nation, if he has signalized himself by any re 
nowned action, if not, some chief that has rendered 
himself famous. 

* In their councils^ which are held by the fore 
going members, every affair of consequence is de 
bated, and no enterprise of the least moment un 
dertaken, unless it there meets with the general 
approbation of the chiefs. They commonly as 
semble in a hut or tent appropriated to this pur 
pose, and being seated in a circle on the ground, 
the eldest chief rises and makes a speech ; when he 
has concluded another gets up, and thus they all 
speak, if necessary, by turns. 

c On this occasion their language is nervous, and 
their manner of expression emphatical. Their 
style is adorned with images, comparisons, and 
strong metaphors, and is equal in allegories to that 
of any of the c. nations. In all their set speeches 
they express themselves with much vehemence, 
but in common discourse according to our usual 
method of speech. 

* The young men arc suffered to be present at 
the councils, though they are not allowed to make 
a speech till they are regularly admitted ; they 
however listen with great attention, and to show 
that they both understand and approve of the re 
solutions taken by the assembled chiefs, they fre 
quently exclaim, " That is right;" " That is 
good." 

* The customary mode among all ranks of ex 
pressing their assent, and which they repeat at the 
end of almost every period, is by uttering a kind 
of forcible aspiration, which sounds like an union 
of the letters OAH. 

4 Dancing is a favourite exercise among the In 
dians ; they never meet on any public occasion, 
but this makes a part of the entertainment : and 



when they are not engaged in war or hunting, the 
youth of both sexes amuse themselves in this man 
ner every evening. 

They always dance, as 1 have just observed, at 
their feasts. In these as well as all other dances, 
every man rises in his turn, and moves about with 
great freedom and boldness ; singing, as he does so, 
the exploits of his ancestors. During this, the 
company, who are seated on the ground in a circle 
round the dancer, join with him in making the 
cadence, by an odd tone, -which they utter all 
together, and which sounds, * Heh, heh, hell." 
These notes, if they might be so termed, are ar 
ticulated with a harsh accent, and strained out 
with the utmost force of their lungs; so that one 
would imagine their strength must be soon ex 
hausted by it ; instead of which they repeat it with 
the same violence during the whole of their enter 
tainment. 

The women, particularly those of the w. na 
tions, dance very gracefully. They carry them 
selves erect, and with their arms hanging down 
close to their sides, move first a few yards to the 
right, and then back again to the left. This move 
ment they perform without taking any steps as 
an American would do, but with their feet con 
joined, moving by turns their toes and heels. In 
this manner they glide with great agility to a cer 
tain distance and then return ; and let those who 
join in the dance be ever so numerous, they keep 
time so exactly with each other that no interrup 
tion ensues. During this, at stated periods, they 
mingle their shrill voices with the hoarser ones of 
the men, who sit around (for it is to be observed 
that the sexes never intermix in the same dance), 
which, with the music of the drums and chichi- 
coes, make an agreeable harmony. 

4 The Indians have several kinds of dances, 
which they use on different occasions, as the pipe 
or calumet dance, the war dance, the marriage 
dance, and the dance of the sacrifice. The move 
ments in every one of these are dissimilar ; but it 
is almost impossible to convey any idea of the 
points in which they are unlike. 

&amp;lt; Different nations likewise vary in their manner 
of dancing. The Chipaway throw themselves 
into a greater variety of attitudes than any other 
people ; sometimes they hold their heads erect, at 
others they bend them almost to the ground ; then 
recline on one side, and immediately after on the 
other. Others carry themselves more upright, 
step firmer, and move more gracefully ; but they 
all accompany their dances with the disagreeable 
noise just mentioned. 

The pipe dance is the principal, and the most] 
2 



MISSOURI. 



[pleasing to a spectator of any of them, being the 
least frantic, and the movements of it most grace 
ful. It is but on particular occasions that it is 
used ; as when ambassadors from an enemy arrive 
to treat of peace, or when strangers of eminence 
pass through their territories. 

&amp;lt; The war dance, which they use both before 
they set out on their war parties and on their re 
turn from them, strikes terror inlo strangers. It 
is performed, like the others, amidst a circle of the 
warriors ; a chief generally begins it, who moves 
from the right to the left, singing at the same time 
both his own exploits and those of his ancestors. 
When he has concluded his account of any me 
morable action, he gives a violent blow with his 
war club against a post that is fixed in the ground, 
near the centre of the assembly, for this purpose. 

Every one dances in his turn, and recapitu 
lates the wondrous deeds of his family, till they 
all at last join in the dance. Then it becomes 
truly alarming to any stranger that happens to be 
among them, as they throw themselves into every 
horrible and terrifying posture that can be ima 
gined, rehearsing at the same time the parts they 
expect to act against their enemies in the field. 
During this they hold their sharp knives in their 
hands, with which, as they whirl about, they are 
every moment in danger of cutting each other s 
throats; and did they not shun the threatened 
mischief with inconceivable dexterity, it could 
not be avoided. By these motions they intend to 
represent the manner in which they kill, scalp, 
and take their prisoners. To heighten the scene, 
they set up the same hideous yells, cries, and war 
whoops they use in time of action ; so that it is 
impossible to consider them in any other light than 
as an assembly of demons. 

* After some hours spent in dancing, the feast be 
gins ; the dishes being brought near me, I per 
ceived that they consisted of dog s flesh ; and I 
was informed that at all their public grand feasts 
they never use any other kind of food. 

* In this custom of eating dog s flesh on parti 
cular occasions, they resemble the inhabitants of 
some of the countries that lie on the n. e. borders 
of Asia. The author of the account of Kam- 
schatka, published by order of the Empress of 
Russia, informs us, that the people inhabiting 
Koreka, a country n. of Kamschatka, who wan 
der about in hordes like the Arabs, when they pay 
their worship to the evil being, kill a rein-deer or 
a dog, the flesh of which they eat, and leave the 
head and tongue sticking on a pole with the front 
towards the e. : also, that when they are afraid 
of any infectious distemper, they Jcill a dog, and 



winding the guts about two poles pass between 
them. These customs, in which they are nearly 
imitated by the Indians, seem to add strength to 
my supposition, that America was first peopled 
from this quarter. 

* " I know not," says a traveller among them, 
" under what class of dances to rank that per 
formed by the Indians who came to my tent when 
I landed near lake Pepin, on the banks of the 
Mississippi. When I looked out, as I there men 
tioned, 1 saw about 20 naked young Indians, the 
most perfect in their shape, and by far the hand 
somest of any I had ever seen, coining towards 
me, and dancing as they approached to the music 
of their drums. At every ten or twelve yards they 
halted, and set up their yells and cries. 

i u When they reached my tent 1 asked them to 
come in; which, without deigning to make me 
any answer, they did. As 1 observed that they 
were painted red and black, as they usually are 
when they go against an enemy, and perceived 
that some parts of the war dance were intermixed 
with their other movements, I doubted not but 
they were set on by the inimical chief who had 
refused my salutation ; I therefore determined to 
sell my life as dear as possible. To this purpose, 
I received them sitting on my chest with my gua 
arid pistols beside me, and ordered my men to 
keep a watchful eye on them, and to be also upon 
their guard. 

( " The Indians being entered they continued 
their dance alternately, singing at the same time of 
their heroic exploits, and the superiority of their 
race over every other people. To enforce their 
language, though it was uncommonly nervous and 
expressive, and such as would of itself have car 
ried terror to the firmest heart ; at the end of every 
period they struck their war clubs against the poles 
of my tent with such violence that I expected 
every moment it would have tumbled upon us. 
As each of them, in dancing round, passed by me, 
they placed their right hand above their eyes, and 
coming close to me looked steadily in my face, 
which I could not construe into a token of friend 
ship. My men gave themselves up for lost, and I 
acknowledge, for my own part, that 1 never found 
my apprehensions more tumultuous on any oc 
casion. 

* " When they had nearly ended their dance, 
I presented to them the pipe of peace, but they 
would not receive it. 1 then, as my last resource, 
thought I would try what presents would do ; ac 
cordingly I took from my chest some ribbons and 
trinkets, which 1 laid before them. These seemed 
to stagger their resolutions, and to avert, in some] 



288 



MISSOURI. 



[degree their anger ; for after holding a consulta 
tion together they sat down on the ground, which 
1 considered as a favourable omen. 

6 " Thus it proved, for in a short time they re 
ceived the pipe of peace, and lighting it, first 
presented it to me, and then smoked with it them 
selves. Soon after they took up the presents, 
which had hitherto lain neglected, and appearing 
to be greatly pleased with them departed in a 
friendly manner ; and never did I receive greater 
pleasure than at getting rid of such formidable 
guests. 

" It never was in my power to gain a thorough 
knowledge of the designs of my visitors. I had 
sufficient reason to conclude that they were hos 
tile, and that their visit, at so late an hour, was 
made through the instigation of the Grand Sautor; 
but I was afterwards informed that it might be in 
tended ns a compliment which they usually pay to 
the chiefs of every other nation who happen to fall 
in with them, and that the circumstances in their 
conduct which had appeared so suspicious to me, 
were merely the effects of their vanity, and de 
signed to impress on the minds of those whom 
they thus visited, an elevated opinion of their va 
lour and prowess. In the morning before I con 
tinued my route, several of their wives brought 
me a present of some sugar, for whom 1 found a 
few more ribbons. 

* " The dance of the sacrifice is not so denomi 
nated from their offering up at the same time a sa 
crifice to any good or evil spirit, but is a dance to 
which the Naudowessies give that title, from being 
used when any public fortunate circumstance be- 
fals them. Whilst I resided among them, a fine 
large deer accidentally strayed into the middle of 
their encampment, which they soon destroyed. 
As this happened just at the new moon, they 
esteemed it a lucky omen ; and having roasted it 
whole, every one in the camp partook of it. After 
their feast, they all joined in a dance, which they 
termed, from its being somewhat of a religious 
nature, a dance of the sacrifice." (See Dr. Hub" 
barcTs Compilation of Indian History.) 

1 Hunting (continues Lewis) is the chief employ 
of the Indians ; they are trained to it from their 
youth, and it is an exercise which is esteemed no less 
honourable than necessary towards their subsistence. 
A dexterous and resolute hunter is held in nearly as 
great estimation by them as a distinguished war 
rior. Scarcely any device, which the ingenuity 
of man has discovered, for ensnaring or destroying 
those animals that supply them with food, or 
whose skins are valuable, is unknown to them. . 
&amp;lt; Whilst they arc engaged in this exercise, they 



shake off the indolence peculiar to their nature, 
and become active, persevering, and indefatigable. 
They are equally sagacious in finding their prey, 
and in the means they use to destroy it. They 
discern the footsteps of the beasts they are in pur 
suit of, although they are imperceptible to every 
other eye, and can follow them with certainty 
through the pathless forest. 

4 The beasts that the Indians hunt, both for their 
flesh, on which they subsist, and for their skins, 
which serve them either for apparel, or to barter 
with Europeans for necessaries, are the buffalo, 
elk, deer, moose, carriboo, bear, beaver, otter, 
martin, &amp;c. I defer giving a description of 
these animals here, and shall only, at present, 
treat of the manner of hunting them. 

1 The route they shall take for this purpose, and 
the parties that shall go on the different expedi 
tions, are fixed in their general councils, which 
are held some time in the summer, when all the 
operations for the ensuing winter are settled. The 
chief warrior, whose province it is to regulate their 
proceedings on this occasion, with great solemnity 
issues out an invitation to those who choose to at 
tend him ; for the Indians, as before observed, ac 
knowledge no superiority, nor have they any idea 
of compulsion ; and every one that accepts the 
invitation, prepares himself by fasting during 
several days. 

4 The Indians do not fast, as some other nations 
do, on the richest and most luxurious food, but 
totally abstain from every kind, either of victuals 
or drink ; and such is their patience and resolu 
tion, that the most extreme thirst could not in 
duce them to taste a drop of water ; yet amidst 
this severe abstinence they appear cheerful and 
happy. 

4 The reasons they give for thus fasting are, 
that it enables them freely to dream, in which 
dreams they are informed where they shall find 
the greatest plenty of game ; also that it averts the 
displeasure of the evil spirits, and induces them 
to be propitious. They also on these occasions 
blacken those parts of their bodies that are un 
covered. 

* The fast being ended, and the place of hunt 
ing made known, the chief, who is to conduct 
them, gives a grand feast to those who are to form 
the different parties ; of which none of them dare 
to partake till they have bathed. At this feast, 
notwithstanding they have fasted so long, they eat 
with great moderation ; and the chief who pre 
sides employs himself in rehearsing the feats of 
those who have been most successful in the busi 
ness they are about to enter upon, They soon] 



MISSOURI. 



[after set out on the march towards the place ap 
pointed, painted or rather bedaubed with black, 
amidst (he acclamations of all the people. 

4 it is impossible to describe their agility or per 
severance, whilst they are in pursuit of their prey ; 
neither thickets, ditches, torrents, pools, nor rivers 
stop them ; they always go straight forward in the 
most direct line they possibly can, and there are 
few of the savage inhabitants of the woods that they 
cannot overtake. 

* When they hunt for bears, they endeavour to 
find out their retreats ; for during the winter, these 
animals conceal themselves in the hollow trunks 
of trees, or make themselves holes in the ground, 
where they continue without food whilst the se 
vere weather lasts. 

When the Indians think they have arrived at 
a place where these animals usually haunt, they 
form themselves into a circle according to their 
number, and moving onward, endeavour, as they 
advance towards the centre, to discover the re 
treats of their prey. By this means, if any lie in 
the intermediate space, they are sure of arousing 
and bringing them down, either with their bows 
or their guns. The bears will take to flight at 
sight of a man or a dog, and will only make re 
sistance when they are extremely hungry, or after 
they are wounded. 

1 The Indian method of hunting the buffalo is, 
by forming a circle or a square, nearly in the same 
manner as when they search for the bear. Having 
taken their different stations, they set the grass, 
which at this time is rank and dry, on fire, and 
these animals, who are extremely fearful of that 
element, flying with precipitation before it, great 
numbers are hemmed in a small compass, and 
scarcely a single one escapes. 

* They have different ways of hunting the elk, 
the deer, and the carriboo. Sometimes they seek 
them out in the woods, to which .they retire dur 
ing the severity of the cold, where they are easily 
shot from behind the trees. In the more n. cli 
mates they take the advantage of the weather to 
destroy the elk ; when the sun has just strength 
enough to melt the snow, and the frost in the night 
forms a kind of crust on the surface, this animal 
being heavy, breaks it with his forked hoofs, and 
with difficulty extricates himself from it : at this 
time, therefore, he is soon overtaken and de 
stroyed. 

Some nations have a method of hunting these 
animals which is more easily executed, and free 
from danger. The hunting party divides into two 
bands, and choosing a spot near the borders of 

VOL. III. 



some river, one party embarks on board their ca 
noes, "whilst the other, forming themselves into a 
semicircle on the land, the flanks of which reach 
the shore, let loose their dogs, and by this means 
rouse all the game that lies within these bounds ; 
they then drive them towards the river, into which 
they no sooner enter, than the greatest part of them 
are immediately dispatched by those who remain, 
in the canoes. 

* Both the elk and buffalo are very furious when 
they are wounded, and will return fiercely on their 
pursuers, and trample them under their feet, if the 
hunter finds no means to complete their destruc 
tion, or does not seek for security in flight to some 
adjacent tree ; by this method they are frequently 
avoided, and so tired with the pursuit that they 
voluntarily give it over. 

* But the hunting in which the Indians, par 
ticularly those who inhabit the n. parts, chiefly 
employ themselves, and from which they reap the 
greatest advantage, is that of the beaver. The 
season for this lasts the whole of the winter, from 
November to April ; during which time the fur of 
these animals is in the greatest perfection. A de 
scription of this extraordinary animal, the con 
struction of their huts, and the regulations of 
their almost rational community, I shall give in 
another place. 

* The hunters make use of several methods to 
destroy them. Those generally practised, are ei 
ther taking them in snares, cutting through the 
ice, or opening their causeways. 

c As the eyes of these animals are very quick, 
and their hearing exceedingly acute, great precau 
tion is necessary in approaching their bodies; for 
as they seldom go far from the water, and their 
houses are always built close to the side of some 
large river or lake, or dams of their own con 
struction, upon the least alarm they hasten to the 
deepest part of the water, and dive immediately 
to the bottom ; as they do this they make a great 
noise by beating the water with their tails, on 
purpose to put the whole fraternity on their 
guard. 

* They are taken with snares, in the following 
manner: though the beavers usually lay up a 
sufficient store of provision to serve for their sub 
sistence during the winter, from time to time they 
make excursions to the neighbouring woods, to 
procure further supplies. 

1 The hunters having found out their haunts, 
place a trap in their way, baited with small pieces 
of bark, or young shoots of trees, which the beaver 
has no sooner laid hold of, than a large log of] 

* p 



290 



MISSOURI. 



[wood falls upon him and breaks his back ; his ene 
mies, who are upon the watch, soon appear, and 
instantly dispatch the helpless animal. 

At other times, when the ice on the rivers and 
lakes is about half a foot thick, they make an 
opening through it with their hatchets, to which 
the beavers will soon hasten, on being disturbed at 
their houses, for a supply of fresh air. As their 
breath occasions a considerable motion in the 
water, the hunter has sufficient notice of their ap 
proach, and methods are easily taken for knock 
ing them on the head the moment they appear 
above the surface. 

6 When the houses of the beavers happen to be 
near a rivulet, they are more easily destroyed : 
the hunters then cut the ice, and spreading a net 
under it, break clown the cabins of the beavers, 
who never fail to make towards the deepest part, 
where they are entangled and taken. But they 
must not be suffered to remain there long, as 
they would soon extricate themselves with their 
teeth, which are well known to be excessively sharp 
and strong. 

4 The Indians take great care to hinder their 
dogs from touching the bones of the beavers. 
The reasons they give for these precautions are, 
first, that the bones are so excessively hard, that 
they spoil the teeth of the. dogs ; and secondly, 
that they are apprehensive they shall so exas 
perate the spirits of the beavers by this permis 
sion, as to render the next hunting season unsuc 
cessful. 

W hen the Indians destroy buffaloes, elks, deer, 
&amp;c. they generally divide the flesh of such as they 
have taken among the tribe to which they belong. 
But in hunting the beaver a few families usually 
unite, and divide the spoil between them. Indeed, 
in the first instance they generally pay some at 
tention in the division to their own familes ; but 
no jealousies or murmurings are ever known to 
arise on account of any apparent partiality. 

Among the Naudowessies, if a person shoots a 
deer, buffalo, &amp;c. and it runs a considerable dis 
tance before it drops, where a person belonging 
to another tribe, being nearer, first sticks a knife 
into it, the game is considered as the property of 
the latter, notwithstanding it had been mortally 
wounded by the former. Though this custom 
appears to be arbitrary and unjust, yet that people 
cheerfully submit to it. This decision is, how 
ever, very different from that practised by the 
Indians on the back of the colonies, where the first 
person that hits is entitled to the best share. 

&amp;lt; The Indians begin to bear arms at the age of 



15, and lay them aside when they arrive at the 
age of 60. Some nations to the 5. I have been in 
formed, do not continue their military exertions 
after they are 50. 

* In every band or nation there is a select num 
ber who are styled the warriors, and who are al 
ways ready to act either offensively or defensively, 
as occasion requires. These are well armed, bear 
ing the weapons commonly used among them,, 
which vary according to the situation of their 
countries. Some make use of tomahawks, knives, 
and fire-arms ; but those who have not an oppor 
tunity of purchasing these kinds of weapons, use 
bows and arrows, and also the casse-tete, or war 
club. 

* The Indians that inhabit still further to the w* 
a country which extends to the S. sea, use in fight 
a warlike instrument that is very uncommon. Hav 
ing great plenty of horses y they always attack their 
enemies on horseback, and encumber themselves 
with no other weapon than a stone of a middling 
size, curiously wrought, which they fasten by a 
string, about a yard and a half long, to their right 
arms, a little above the elbow. These stones they 
conveniently carry in their hands, till they reach 
their enemies, and then swinging them with great 
dexterity, as they ride full speed, never fail of 
doing execution. The country which these tribes 
possess abounding with large extensive plains, 
those who attack them seldom return, as the swift 
ness of the horses on which they are mounted, en 
ables them to overtake even the fleetest of their in 
vaders. 

4 I was informed, that unless they found mo 
rasses or thickets, to which they could retire, they 
were sure of being cut off; to prevent this they 
always took care, whenever they made an onset, 
to do it near such retreats as are impassable for 
cavalry, having then a great advantage over their 
enemies, whose weapons would not there reach 
them. 

1 Some nations make use of a javelin, pointed 
with bone, worked into different forms; but the 
Indian weapons in general are bows and arrows, 
and the short club already mentioned. The latter 
is made of a very hard wood, and the head of it 
fashioned round like a ball, about 3} inches dia 
meter ; in this rotund part is fixed an edge re 
sembling that of a tomahawk, either of steel or 
flint, whichsoever they can procure. 

* The dagger is peculiar to some nations, and 
of ancient construction ; but they can give no ac 
count how long it has been in use among them. 
It was originally made of flint or bone, but since] 



MISSOURI. 



291 



[they have had communication with the European 
traders, they have formed it of steel. The length 
is about 10 inches, and that part close to the 
handle nearly three inches broad. Its edges are 
keen, and it gradully tapers towards a point. 
They wear it in a sheath made of deer s leather, 
neatly ornamented with porcupine quills ; and it 
is usually hung by a string, decorated in the 
same manner, which reaches as low as the breast. 
This curious weapon is worn by a few of the prin 
cipal chiefs alone, and considered both as a use 
ful instrument, and an ornamental badge of supe 
riority. 

( 1 observed among them a few targets, or 
shields, made of raw buffalo hides, and in the form 
of those used by the ancients : but as the number 
of these was small, and I conld gain no intelli 
gence of the era in which they first were intro 
duced among them, I suppose those I saw had 
descended from father to son for many genera 
tions. 

* The reasons the Indians give for making war 
against one another, are much the same as those 
urged by more civilized nations for disturbing the 
tranquillity of their neighbours. The pleas of the 
former are, however, in general more rational and 
just, than such as are brought by Europeans in 
vindication of their proceedings. 

* The extension of empire is seldom a motive 
with these people to invade, and to commit depre 
dations on the territories of those who happen to 
dwell near them. To secure the rights of hunting 
within particular limits, to maintain the liberty of 
passing through their accustomed tracks, and to 
guard those lands which they consider from a long 
tenure as their own, against any infringement, are 
the general causes of those dissensions that so 
often break out between the Indian nations, and 
which are carried on with so much animosity. 

1 Though strangers to the idea of separate pro 
perty, yet the most uncultivated among them are 
well acquainted with the rights of their community 
to the domains they possess, and oppose with 
vigour every encroachment on them. 

Notwithstanding it is generally supposed that 
from their territories being so extensive, the boun 
daries of them cannot be ascertained, yet I am 
well assured that the limits of each nation in the 
interior parts are laid down in their rude plans 
with great precision. By theirs, as 1 have be 
fore observed, was I enabled to regulate my own ; 
and after the most exact observations and in 
quiries 1 found but a very few instances in which 
they erred. 

But interest is not either the most frequent or 



most powerful incentive to their making war on 
each other. The passion of revenge, which is 
the distinguishing characteristic of these people, 
is the most general motive. Injuries are felt by 
them with exquisite sensibility, and vengeance 
pursued with unremitted ardour. To this may 
be added that natural excitation which every In 
dian is sensible of, as soon as he approaches the 
age of manhood, to give proof of his valour and 
prowess. 

* As they are early possessed with a notion that 
war ought to be the chief business of their lives, 
that there is nothing more desirable than the repu 
tation of being a great warrior, and that the scalps 
of their enemies, or a number of prisoners, are 
alone to be esteemed valuable, it is not to be won 
dered at, that the young Indians are continually 
restless and uneasy if their ardour is repressed, 
and they are kept in a state of inactivity. Either 
of these propensities, the desire of revenge or the 
gratification of an impulse, that by degrees become 
habitual to them, is sufficient, frequently, to in 
duce them to commit hostilities on some of the 
neighbouring nations. 

When the chiefs find any occasion for making 
war, they endeavour to arouse their prejudices, and 
by that means soon excite their warriors to take 
arms. For this purpose they make use of their 
martial eloquence, nearly in the following words, 
which never fail of proving effectual : "The 
bones of our deceased countrymen lie uncovered, 
they call out to us to revenge their wrongs, and 
we must satisfy their request. Their spirits cry 
out against us. They must be appeased. The 
genii, who are the guardians of our honour, in 
spire us with a resolution to seek the enemies of 
our murdered brothers. Let us go and devour 
those by whom tht y were slain. Sit here no longer 
inactive, give way to the impulse of your natural 
valour, anoint your hair, paint your faces, fill 
your quivers, cause the forest to resound with your 
songs, console the spirits of the dead, and tell them 
they shall be revenged." 

* Animated by these exhortations, the warriors 
snatch their arms in a transport of fury, sing the 
songs of war, and burn with impatience to imbrue 
their hands in the blood of their enemies. 

* Sometimes private chiefs assemble small par 
ties and make excursions against those with whom 
they are at Avar, or such as have injured them. 
A single warrior, prompted by revenge or a desire 
to show his prowess, will march unattended for 
several hundred miles, to surprise and cut oft a 
straggling party. 

These irregular sallies, however, are not al-] 
p r 2 



29* 



MISSOURI. 



[ways approved of by the elder chiefs, though they 
are often obliged to connive at them. 

* But when a Avar is national, and undertaken 
by the community, their deliberations are formal 
and slow. The elders assemble in council, to 
which ail the head warriors and young men are 
admitted, where they deliver their opinions in so 
lemn speeches, weighing with maturity the nature 
of the enterprise they are about to engage in, and 
balancing with great sagacity the advantages or 
inconveniences that will arise from it. 

* Their priests are also consulted on the subject, 
and even, sometimes, the advice of the most intel 
ligent of their women is asked. 

4 If the determination be for war, they prepare 
for it with much ceremony. 

( The chief warrior of a nation does not on all 
occasions head the Avar party himself, he fre 
quently deputes a warrior of whose valour and 
prudence he has a good opinion. The person thus 
fixed on, being first bedaubed with black, observes 
a fast of several days, during which he invokes the 
Great Spirit, or deprecates the anger of the evil 
ones, holding, Avhilst it lasts, no converse with any 
of his tribe. 

1 lie is particularly careful at the same time to 
observe his dreams, for on these do they suppose 
their success will in a great measure depend ; and 
from the firm persuasion every Indian, actuated 
by his own presumptuous thoughts, is impressed 
with, that he shall march forth to certain victory, 
these are generally favourable to his wishes. 

*. After he has fasted as long as custom pre 
scribes, he assembles the warriors, and holding 
a belt of wampum in his hand, thus addresses 
them : 

* " Brothers! by the inspiration of the Great 
Spirit I now speak unto you, and by him am I 
prompted to carry into execution the intentions 
which I am about to disclose to you. The blood 
of our deceased brothers is not yet wiped away ; 
their bodies are not yet covered, and I am going 
to perform this duty to them." 

* Having then made known all the motives that 
induced him to take up arms against the nation 
with Avhoin they are to engage, he thus proceeds : 
" 1 have therefore resolved to march through the 
war path to surprise them. We will eat their 
Jlcsh, and drink their blood ; we will take scalps, 
and make prisoners ; and should AVC perish in this 
glorious enterprise AVC shall not be for ever hidden 
in the dust, for this belt shall be a recompense to 
him who buries the dead." Having said this, he 
lays the belt on the ground, and he who takes it 
up declares himself his lieutenant, and is con 



sidered as the second in command ; this, how 
ever, is only done by some distinguished Avar- 
rior who has a right, by the number of his scalps, 
to the post. 

Though the Indians thus assert that they will 
eat the flesh and drink the blood of their enemies, 
the threat is only to be considered as a figurative 
expression ; notwithstanding they sometimes de 
vour the hearts of those they slay, and drink their 
blood, by Avay of bravado, or to gratify in a more 
complete manner their revenge. 

* The chief is TIOAV washed from his sable cover 
ing, anointed with bear s fat, and painted with 
their red paint, in such figures as will make him 
appear most terrible to his enemies. He then sings 
the \var song, and enumerates his warlike actions. 
Having done this he fixes his eyes on the sun, and 
pays his adoration to the Great Spirit, in which he 
is accompanied by all the Avarriors. 

This ceremony is followed with dances, such 
as I have before described ; and the Avhole con 
cludes with a feast, Avhich usually consists of dog s 
flesh. 

* This feast is held in the hut or tent of the chief 
Avarrior, to Avhich all those Avho intend to accom 
pany him in his expedition send their dishes to be 
filled ; and during the feast, notwithstanding he 
has fasted so long, he sits composedly with his pipe 
in his mouth, and recounts the valorous deeds of 
his family. 

* As the hopes of having their wounds, should 
they receive any, properly treated and expedi- 
tiously cured, must be some additional induce 
ment to the warriors to expose themselves more 
freely to danger, the priests, who are also their 
doctors, prepare such medicines as will prove effi 
cacious. With great ceremony they carry vari 
ous roots and plants, and pretend that they impart 
to them the poAver of healing. 

1 Notwithstanding this superstitious method of 
proceeding, it is very certain that they have ac 
quired a knoAvledge of many plants and herbs that 
are of a medicinal quality, and which they know 
how to use Avith great skill. 

From the time the resolution of engaging in 
war is taken, to the departure of the Avarriors, the 
nights arc spent in festivity, and their days in 
making the needful preparations. 

* If it is thought necessary by the nation going 
to Avar, to solicit the alliance of any neighbouring 
tribe, they fix upon one of their chiefs, Avho speaks 
the language of that people Avell, and Avho is a 
good orator, and send to them by him a belt of 
Avampum, on which is specified the purport of the 
embassy, iu figures that every nation is Avell ac-] 



MISSOURI. 



293 



[quainted with. At the same time he carries with 
him a hatchet painted red. 

{ As soon as lie reaches the camp or village to 
which he is destined, lie acquaints the chief of the 
tribe with the general tenor of his commission, 
\vho immediately assembles a council, to which 
the ambassador is invited. There having laid the 
hatchet on the ground he holds the belt in his 
hand, and enters more minutely into the occasion 
of his embassy. In his speech he invites them to 
take up the hatchet, and as soon as he has finished 
speaking, delivers the belt. 

4 If his hearers are inclined to become auxilia 
ries to his nation, a chief steps forward and takes 
up the hatchet, and they immediately espouse 
with spirit the cause they have thus engaged to 
support. But if on this application neither the 
belt nor hatchet are accepted, the emissary con 
cludes that the people whose assistance he solicits 
have already entered into an alliance with the foes 
of his nation, and returns with speed to inform his 
countrymen of his ill success- 

The manner in which the Indians declare war 
against each other, is by sending a slave with a 
hatchet, the handle of which is painted red, to the 
nation which they intend to break with; and the 
messenger, notwithstanding the danger to which 
lie is exposed from the sudden fury of those whom 
he thus sets at defiance, executes his commission 
with great fidelity. 

Sometimes this token of defiance lias such an 
instantaneous effect on those to whom it is present 
ed, that in the first transports of their fury a small 
party will issue forth, without waiting for the per 
mission of the elder chiefs, and slaying the first 
of the offending nation they meet, cut open the 
body, and stick a hatchet of the same kind as that 
they just received, into the heart of their slaugh 
tered foe. Among the more remote tribes this is 
done with an arrow or spear, the end of which is 
painted red. And the more to exasperate, they 
dismember the body, to show that they esteem them 
not as men, but as old women. 

4 The Indians seldom take the field in large 
bodies, as such numbers would require a greater 
degree of industry to provide for their subsistence, 
duringtheir tedious marches through dreary forests, 
or long voyages over lakes and rivers, than they 
would care to bestow. 

Their armies are never encumbered with bag 
gage or military stores. Each warrior, besides his 
weapons, carries with him only a rrrat, and, whilst 
at a distance from the frontiers of the enemy, sup 
ports himself with the game he kills or the fish he 
catches. 



* When they pass through a country where they 
have no apprehensions of meeting with an enemy, 
they use very little precaution ; sometimes there 
are scarcely a dozen warriors left together, the rest 
being in pursuit of their game; but though they 
should have roved to a very considerable distance 
from the war path, they arc sure to arrive at the 
place of rendezvous by the hour appointed. 

* They always pitch their tents long before sun 
set ; and being naturally presumptuous, take very 
little care to guard against a surprise. They place 
great confidence in their Manitous, or household 
gods, which they always carry with them ; and 
being persuaded that they take upon them the 
office of centincls, they sleep very securely under 
their protection. 

* These Manitous, as they are called by some 
nations, but which are termed Wakons, that is, 
spirits, by the Naudowessies, are nothing more than 
the otter and martin skins I have already de 
scribed, for which, however, they have a great 
veneration. 

After they have entered the enemy s country, 
no people can be more cautious and circumspect ; 
fires are no longer lighted, no more shouting is 
heard, nor the game any longer pursued. They 
are not even permitted to speak ; but must con 
vey whatever they have to impart to each other, 
by signs and motions. 

They now proceed wholly by stratagem and 
ambuscade. Having discovered their enemies, 
they send to reconnoitre them ; and a council is 
immediately held, during which they speak only 
in whispers, to consider of the intelligence impart 
ed by those who were sent out. 

1 The attack is generally made just before day 
break, at which period they suppose their foes to 
be in the soundest sleep. Throughout the whole 
of the preceding night they will lie flat upon their 
faces, without stirring ; and make their approaches 
in the same posture, creeping upon their hands 
and feet till they are got within bow-shot of those 
they have destined to destruction. On a signal 
given by the chief warrior, to which the whole 
body makes answer by the most hideous yells, they 
all start up, and discharging their arrows in the 
same instant, without giving their adversaries time 
to recover from the confusion into which they are 
thrown, pour in upon them with their war clubs 
or tomahawks. 

The Indians think there is little glory to be 
acquired from attacking their enemies openly in the 
field ; their greatest pride is to surprise and destroy. 
They seldom engage with a manifest appearance 
of disadvantage. If they find the enemy on their] 



294 



MISSOURI. 



[guard, (oo strongly entrenched, or superior in 
numbers, they retire, provided there is an op 
portunity of doing so. And they esteem it the 
greatest qualification of a chief warrior, to be 
able to manage an attack, so as to destroy as many 
of the enemy as possible, at the ex pence of a few 
men. 

* When the Indians succeed in their silent ap 
proaches and are able to force the camp which they 
attack, a scene of horror that exceeds description 
ensues. The savage fierceness of the conquerors, 
and the desperation of the conquered, -who well 
know what they have to expect should they fall 
alive into the hands of their assailants, occasion 
the most extraordinary exertions on both sides. 
The figure of the combatants, all besmeared with 
black and red paint, and covered with the blood 
of the slain, their horrid yells and ungovernable 
fury, are not to be conceived by those who have 
never seen them. Though the Indians are negli 
gent in guarding against surprise, they are alert 
and dexterous in surprising their enemies. To 
their caution and perseverance in stealing on the 
party they design to attack, they add that admi 
rable talent, or rather instinctive qualification I 
bave already described, of tracing out those they 
are in pursuit of. On the smoothest grass, on the 
hardest earth, and even on the very stones, will 
they discover the traces of an enemy, and by the 
shape of the footsteps, and the distance between 
the prints, distinguish not only whether it is a man 
or woman who has passed that way, but even 
the nation to which they belong. However incre 
dible this might appear, yet, from the many proofs 
I received, whilst among them, of their amazing 
sagacity in this point, I see no reason to discredit 
even these extraordinary exertions of it. 

* When they jhave overcome an enemy, and 
victory is no longer doubtful, the conquerors first 
dispatch all such as they think they shall not be 
able to carry off without great trouble, and then 
endeavour to take as many prisoners as possible ; 
after this they return to scalp those who are either 
dead, or too much wounded to be taken with 
them. 

4 At this business they are exceedingly expert. 
They seize the head of the disabled or dead enemy, 
and placing one of their feet on the neck, twist 
their left hand in the hair ; by this means, having 
extended the skin that covers the top of the head, 
they draw out their scalping knives, which are 
always kept in good order for this cruel purpose, 
and with a few dexterous strokes take oft the part 
that is termed the scalp. They are so expeditious 
in doing this, that the whole time required scarcely 



exceeds a minute. These they preserve as monu 
ments of their prowess, and at the same time as 
proofs of the vengeance they have inflicted on their 
enemies. 

* If two Indians seize in the same instant a pri 
soner, and seem to have an equal claim, the con 
test between them is soon decided ; for to put a 
speedy end to any dispute that might arise, the 
person that is apprehensive he shall lose his ex 
pected reward, immediately has recourse to his 
tomahawk or war club, and knocks on the head 
the unhappy cause of their contention. 

4 Having completed their purposes, and made 
as much havoc as possible, they immediately retire * 
towards their own country, with the spoil they 
have acquired, for fear of being pursued. 

* Should this be the case, they make use of 
many stratagems to elude the searches of their pur 
suers. They sometimes scatter leaves, sand, or 
dust over the prints of their feet ; sometimes tread 
in each other s footsteps ; and sometimes lift their 
feet so high, and tread so lightly, as not to make 
any impression on the ground. But if they find 
all these precautions unavailing, and that they arc 
near being overtaken, they first dispatch and scalp 
their prisoners, and then dividing, each endea 
vours to regain his native country by a different 
route. This prevents all farther pursuit ; for their 
pursuers now despairing, either of gratifying their 
revenge, or of releasing those of their friends who 
were made captives, return home. 

* If the successful party is so lucky as to make 
good their retreat unmolested, they hasten with the 
greatest expedition to reach a country where they 
may be perfectly secure ; and that their wounded 
companions may riot retard their flight, they carry 
them by turns in litters, or, if it is in the winter 
season, draw them on sledges. 

* The prisoners, during their march, are guard 
ed with the greatest care. During the day, if the 
journey is over land, they are always held by some 
of the victorious party; if by water, they are fas 
tened to the canoe. In the night time they are 
stretched along the ground quite naked, with their 
legs, arms, and neck fastened to hooks fixed in the 
ground. Besides this, cords are tied to their arms 
or legs, which are held by an Indian, who instantly 
awakes at the least motion of them. 

* During their march they oblige their prisoners 
to sing their death song, which generally consists 
of these or similar sentences : " I am going to die, 
1 am about to suffer : but I will bear the severest 
tortures my enemies can inflict, with becoming 
fortitude. I will die like a brave man, and I shall 
then go to join the chiefs that have suffered on the] 



MISSOURI. 



295 



[same account." These songs are continued with 
necessary intervals, until they reach the village or 
camp to which they are going. 

4 When the warriors are arrived within hearing, 
they set up different cries, which communicate to 
their friends a general history of the success of the 
expedition. The number of the death cries they 
give, declare how many of their own party are 
lost ; the number of war whoops, the number of 
prisoners they have taken. 

Jt is difficult to describe these cries, but the 
best idea I can convey of them is, that the former 
consists of the sounds whoo, whoo, whoop, con 
tinued in a long shrill tone, nearly till the breath 
is exhausted, and then broken off with a sudden 
elevation of the voice. The latter is a loud cry, 
of much the same kind, which is modulated into 
notes by the hand being placed before the mouth. 
Both of them might be heard to a very considerable 
distance. 

1 Whilst these arc uttering, the persons to whom 
they are designed to convey the intelligence, con 
tinue motidnless and all attention. When this 
ceremony is performed, the whole village issue out 
to learn the particulars of the relation they have 
just heard in general terms; and accordingly, as 
the news proves mournful, or the contrary, they 
answer by so many acclamations or cries of lamen 
tation. 

6 Being by this time arrived at the village or 
camp, the women and children arm themselves 
with sticks and bludgeons, and form themselves 
into two ranks, through which the prisoners are 
obliged to pass. The treatment they undergo be 
fore they reach the extremity of the line, is very 
severe. Sometimes they are so beaten over the 
head and face, as to have scarcely any remains of 
life ; and happy would it be for them if by this 
usage an end was put to their wretched beings. 
But their tormentors take care that none of the 
blows they give prove mortal, as they wish to re 
serve the miserable sufferers for more severe in 
flictions. 

After having undergone this introductory dis 
cipline, they are bound hand and foot, whilst the 
chiefs hold a council in which their fate is deter 
mined. Those who are decreed to be put to death 
by the usual torments, are delivered to the chief 
of the warriors ; such as are to be spared, are given 
into the hands of (lie chief of the nation : so that 
in a short time all the prisoners may be assured of 
their fate, as the sentence now pronounced is irre 
vocable. The former they term being consigned 
to the house of death, the latter to the house of 
mace. 



( Such captives as are pretty far advanced in 
life, and have acquired great honour by their war 
like deeds, always atone for the blood they have 
spilt by the tortures of fire. Their success in war 
is readily known by the blue marks upon their 
breasts and arms, which are as legible to the In 
dians as letters are to Americans. 

* The manner in which these hieroglyphics are 
made, is by breaking the skin with the teeth of 
fish, or sharpened flints, dipped in a kind of ink, 
made of the soot of pitch pine. Like those of the 
ancient Picts of Britain, these are esteemed orna 
mental ; and at the same time they serve as regis 
ters of the heroic actions of the warrior, who thus 
bears about him indelible marks of his valour. 

The prisoners destined to death are soon led to 
the phice of execution, which is generally in the 
centre of the camp or village ; where, being stript, 
and every part of their bodies blackened, the skin 
of a crow or raven is fixed on their heads. They 
are then bound to a stake, with faggots heaped 
around them, and obliged, for the last time, to 
sing their death song. 

c The warriors, tor such only commonly suffer 
this punishment, now perform in a more prolix 
manner this sad solemnity. They recount with 
an audible voice all the brave actions they have 
performed, and pride themselves in the number of 
enemies they have killed. In this rehearsal they 
spare not even their tormentors, but strive by every 
provoking tale they can invent, to irritate and 
insult them. Sometimes this has the desired effect, 
and the sufferers aie dispatched sooner than they 
otherwise would have been. 

There are many other methods which the In 
dians employ to put their prisoners to death, but 
these are only occasional ; that of burning is most 
generally used. 

This method of tormenting their enemies is 
considered by the Indians as productive of more 
than one beneficial consequence. It satiates, in a 
greater degree, that diabolical lust of revenge, 
which is the predominant passion in the breast of 
every individual of every tribe, and it gives the 
growing warriors an early propensity to that cruelty 
and thirst for blood, which is so necessary a qualifi 
cation for such as would be thoroughly skilled iu 
their savage art of war. 

Notwithstanding these acts of severity exer 
cised by the Indians towards those of their own 
species who fall into their hands, some tribes have 
been very remarkable for their moderation to such 
female prisoners, belonging to the English colonies, 
as have happened to be taken by them. Women 
of great beauty have frequently been carried off] 



296 



MISSOURI. 



[by them, and (hiring a march of 3 or 400 miles, 
through their retired forests, have lain by their 
sides without receiving any insult, and their chas 
tity has remained inviolate. Instances have hap 
pened, where female captives, who have been 
pregnant at the time of their being taken, have 
found the pangs of child-birth come upon them 
in the midst of solitary woods, and savages their 
only companions ; yet from these, savages as they 
were, have they received every assistance their 
situations would admit of, and been treated with 
a degree of delicacy and humanity they little ex 
pected . 

1 Those prisoners that are consigned to the house 
of grace, and these are commonly the young men, 
women, and children, await the disposal of the 
chiefs, who, after the execution of such as are 
condemned to die, hold a council for this purpose. 

1 A herald is sent round the village or carnp, to 
give notice that such as have lost any relations in 
the late expedition, are desired to attend the dis 
tribution which is about to take place. Those 
women who have lost their sons or husbands, are 
generally satisfied in the first place ; after these, 
such as have been deprived of friends of a more 
remote degree of consanguinity, or who choose to 
adopt some of the youth. 

c The division being made, which is done, as 
in other cases, without the least dispute, those who 
have received any share lead them to their tents 
or huts; and having unbound them, wash and 
dress their wounds, if they happen to have re 
ceived any ; they then clothe them, and give the 
most comfortable and refreshing food their store 
will afford. 

* Whilst their new domestics are feeding, they 
endeavour to administer consolation to them, they 
tell them that as they are redeemed from death, 
they must now be cheerful and happy ; and if they 
serve them well, without murmuring or repining, 
nothing shall be wanting to make them such atone 
ment for the loss of their country and friends as 
circumstances will allow. 

4 If any men are spared, they are commonly 
given to the widows that have Io4 their husbands 
by the hand of the enemy, should there be any such, 
to whom, if they happen to prove agreeable, they 
arc soon married. But should the dame be other 
wise engaged, the life of him who falls to her lot 
is in great danger ; especially if she fancies that 
her late husband wants a slave in the country of 
spirits to which he is gone. 

f When this is the case, a number of young 
men take the devoted captive to some distance, and 
dispatch him without any ceremony. After lie 



has been spared by the council, they consider him 
of too little consequence to be entitled to the tor 
ments allotted to those who have been judged 
worthy of them. 

4 The women are usually distributed to the men, 
from whom they do not fail of meeting with a fa 
vourable reception. The boys and girls are taken 
into the families of such as have need of them, and 
are considered as slaves ; and it is not uncommon 
that they are sold in the same capacity to the 
American traders who come among them. 

* The Indians have no idea of moderating the 
ravages of war, by sparing their prisoners and en 
tering into a negociation with the band from whom 
they have been taken, for an exchange. All that 
are taken captive by both parties, are either put to 
death, adopted, or made slaves of. And so par 
ticular is every nation in this respect, that if any 
of their tribe, even a warrior, should be taken 
prisoner, and by chance be received into the house 
of grace, either as an adopted person or a slave, 
and should afterwards make his escape, they will 
by no means receive him, or acknowledge him as 
one of their band. 

The condition of such as are adopted, differs 
not in any one instance from the children of the 
nation to which they now belong. They assume 
all the rights of those whose places they supply, 
and frequently make no difficulty of going in the 
war parties against their own countrymen. Should, 
however, any of those by chance make their es 
cape, and be afterwards retaken, they are esteemed 
as unnatural children, and ungrateful persons, who 
have deserted and made war upon their parents 
and benefactors, and are treated with uncommon 
severity. 

{ That part of the prisoners which are considered 
as slaves, arc generally distributed among the 
chiefs; who frequently make presents of some of 
them to the American governors of the out-posts, 
or to the superintendants of Indian affairs. I 
have been informed that the Jesuits and French 
missionaries first occasioned the introduction of 
these unhappy captives into the settlements, and 
who, by so doing, taught the Indians that they 
were valuable. 

4 Their views indeed were laudable, as they 
imagined that by this method they should not only 
prevent much barbarity and bloodshed, but find 
the opportunities of spreading their religion among 
them increased. To this purpose they have en 
couraged the traders to purchase such slaves as 
they met with. 

* The good effects of this mode of proceeding, 
were not however equal to the expectations of these j 

2 



M I S S O U R I. 



297 



[pious fathers. Instead of being the means of pre 
venting cruelty and bloodshed, it only caused dis 
sensions between the Indian nations to be carried 
on with a greater degree of violence, and with 
unremitted ardour. The prize they fought for 
being no longer revenge or fame, but the acquire 
ment of spirituous liquors, for which their captives 
were to be exchanged, and of which almost every 
nation is immoderately fond, they sought for their 
enemies with unwonted alacrity, and were con 
stantly on the watch to surprise and carry them 
off. 

It might still be said, that fewer of the captives 
are tormented and put to death, since these ex 
pectations of receiving so valuable a consideration 
for them have been excited, than there usually had 
been ; but it does not appear that their accustomed 
cruelty to the warriors they take, is in the least 
abated; their natural desire of vengeance must be 
gratified : they now only become more assiduous 
in securing a greater number of young prisoners, 
whilst those who are made captive in their defence, 
are tormented and put to death as before. And 
this, even in despite of the disgraceful estima 
tion ; for the Indians consider every conquered 
people as in a state of vassalage to their conquerors. 
After one nation has finally subdued another, and 
a conditional submission is agreed on, it is cus 
tomary for the chiefs of the conquered, when they 
sit in council with their subduers, to wear petti 
coats, as an acknowledgment that they are in a 
state of subjection, and ought to be ranked among 
the women. Their partiality to the French has, 
however, taken too deep root for time itself to eradi 
cate it. 

The wars that are carried on between the In 
dian nations arc in general hereditary, and continue 
from age to age with a few interruptions. If a 
peace becomes necessary, the principal care of 
both parties is to avoid the appearance of making 
the first advances. 

4 When they treat with an enemy, relative to a 
suspension of hostilities, the chief who is commis 
sioned to undertake the negociation, if it is not 
brought about by the mediation of some neigh 
bouring band, abates nothing of his natural haugh 
tiness; even when the affairs of his country are in 
the worst situation, he makes no concessions, but 
endeavours to persuade his adversaries that it is 
their interest to put an end to the war. 

6 Accidents sometimes contribute to bring about 
a peace between nations that otherwise could not 
be prevailed on to listen to terms of accommoda 
tion. 

* Sometimes the Indians grow tired of a war, 

VOL. III. 



which they have carried on against some neigh 
bouring nation for many years without much suc 
cess, and in this case they seek for mediators to 
begiu a negociation. These being obtained, the 
treaty is thus conducted : 

* A number of their own chiefs, joined by those 
who have accepted the friendly office, set out 
together for the enemy s country ; such as arc 
chosen for this purpose, are chiefs of the most ex 
tensive abilities, and of the greatest integrity. They 
bear before them the pipe of peace, A\hich I need 
not inform my readers is of the same nature as a 
flag of truce among the Americans, and is treated 
with the greatest respect and veneration, even by 
the most barbarous nations. I never heard of an 
instance wherein the bearers of this sacred badge 
of friendship were ever treated disrespectfully, or 
its rights violated. The Indians believe that the 
Great Spirit never suffers an infraction of this kind 
to go unpunished. 

* The pipe of peace, which is termed by them 
the cahtmet, for what reason 1 could never learn, 
is about four feet long. The bowl of it is made 
of red marble, and the stern of a light wood, 
curiously painted with hieroglyphics in various 
colours, and adorned with feathers of the most 
beautiful birds; but it is not in my power to 
convey an idea of the various tints and pleasing 
ornaments of this much esteemed Indian imple 
ment. 

4 Every nation has a different method of deco 
rating these pipes, and they can tell at first sight 
to what band it belongs. It is used as an introduc 
tion to all treaties, and great ceremony attends the 
use of it on these occasions. 

The assistant or aid-de-camp of the great war 
rior, when the chiefs are assembled and seated, 
fills it with tobacco mixed with herbs, taking care 
at the same time that no part of it touches the 
ground. When it is filled, he takes a coal that is 
thoroughly kindled, from a /ire Avhich is generally 
kept burning in the midst of the assembly, and 
places it on the tobacco. 

* As soon as it is sufficiently lighted, lie throws 
off the coal. He then turns the stem of the pipe 
towards the heavens, after this towards the earth, 
and now holding it horizontally, moves himself 
round till he has completed a circle. By the first 
action he is supposed to present it to the Great 
Spirit, whose aid is thereby supplicated ; by the 
second, to avert any malicious interposition of 
the evil spirits ; and by the third to gain the pro 
tection of the spirits inhabiting the air, the earth, 
and the waters. Having thus secured the favour 
of these invisible agents, in whose power they] 

Q Q 



298 



MISSOURI. 



[suppose it is either to forwarder obstruct the issue 
of theft present deliberations, he presents it to the 
hereditary chief, \vho having taken two or three 
whiffs, blows the smoke from his mouth, first to 
wards heaven, and then around him upon the 



ground. 

* It is afterwards put in the same manner into 
the mouths of the ambassadors or strangers, who 
observe the same ceremony, then to the chief ot the 
\varriors, and to all the other chiefs in turn, ac 
cording to their gradation. During this time the 
person who executes this honourable office holds 
the pipe slightly in his hand, as if he feared to 
press the sacred instrument ; nor does any one 
presume to touch it but with his lips. 

When the chiefs who are entrusted with the 
commission for making peace, approach the town 
or camp to which they are going, they begin to 
sing and dance the songs and dances appropriated 
to this occasion. By this time the adverse party 
are apprised of their arrival, and, at the sight of 
the pipe of peace, divesting themselves of their 
wonted enmity, invite them to the habitation of the 
great chief, and furnish them with every conveni- 
ency during the negociation. 

A council is then held ; and when the speeches 
and debates are ended, if no obstructions arise to 
put a slop to the treaty, the painted hatchet is 
buried in the ground, as a memorial that all ani 
mosities between the contending nations have 
ceased, and a peace taken place. Among the 
ruder bands, such as have no communication with 
the Americans, a war club painted red is buried, 
instead of the hatchet. 

* A belt of wampum is also given on this occa 
sion, which serves as a ratification of the peace, 
and records to the latest posterity, by the hiero 
glyphics into which the beads are formed, every 
stipulated article in the treaty. 

4 These belts are made of shells found on the 
coasts of New England and Virginia, which are 
sawed out into beads of an oblong form, about a 
quarter of an inch long, and round like other 
beads. Being strung on leathern strings, and 
several of them sewed neatly together with fine 
sinewy threads, they compose what is termed a 
belt of wampum. 

* The shells arc generally of two colours, some 
white and others violet ; but the latter are more 
highly esteemed than the former. They are held 
in as much estimation by the Indians, as gold, 
silver, or precious stones are by the Americans. 

The belts are composed of 10, 12, or a greater 
number of strings, according to the importance of 
the affair in agitation, or the dignity of the person 



to whom it is presented. On more trifling occa 
sions, strings of these beads are presented by the 
chiefs to each other, and frequently worn by them 
about their necks as a valuable ornament. 

i The Indians allow of polygamy, and persons of 
every rank indulge themselves in this point. The 
chiefs in particular have a seraglio, which con 
sists of an uncertain number, usually from six to 
12 or 14. The lower rank are permitted to take 
as many as there is a probability of their being 
able, with the children they may bear, to maintain. 
It is not uncommon for an Indian to marry two 
sisters ; sometimes, if there happen to be more, the 
whole number ; and notwithstanding tins (as it ap 
pears to civilized nations) unnatural union, they 
all live in the greatest harmony. 

1 The younger wives are submissive to the elder; 
and those who have no children, do such menial 
offices for those who arc fertile, as causes their 
situation to differ but little from a state of servi 
tude. However, they perform every injunction 
with the greatest cheerfulness, in hopes of gain 
ing thereby the affections of their husbands, that 
they in their turn may have the happiness of be 
coming mothers, and be entitled to the respect at 
tendant on that state. 

4 It is not uncommon for an Indian, although lie 
takes to himself so many wives, to live in a state 
of continence with some of them for several years. 
Such as arc not so fortunate as to gain the favour 
of their husband, by their submissive and prudent 
behaviour, and by that means to share in his em 
brace?, continue in their virgin state during the 
whole of their lives, except they may happen to be 
presented by him to some stranger chief, whose 
abode among them will not admit of his entering 
into a more lasting connection. In this case they 
submit to the injunction of their husband without 
murmuring, and are not displeased with the tem 
porary union. But if at any time it is known that 
they take this liberty without first receiving his 
consent, they are punished in the same manner as 
if they had been guilty of adultery. 

* This custom is more prevalent among the na 
tions which lie in the interior parts, than among 
those that are nearer the settlements, as the manners 
of the latter are rendered more conformable in some 
points to those of the Americans, by the intercourse 
they hold with them. 

* The Indian nations differ but little from each 
other in their marriage ceremonies, and less in the 
manner of their divorces. The tribes that inhabit 
the borders of Canada, make use of the following 
custom. 

* When a young Indian has fixed his inclinations] 



M I S S O U II I. 



299 



[on one of the oilier sex, he endeavours to gain 
her consent, and if lie succeeds, it is never known 
that her parents obstruct their union. When 
every preliminary is agreed on, and the day ap 
pointed, the friends and acquaintance of both 
parties assemble at the house or tent of the oldest 
relation of the bridegroom, where a feast is pre 
pared on the occasion. 

1 The company who meet to assist at the festival 
are sometimes very numerous : they dance, they 
sing, and enter into every other diversion usually 
made use of on any of their public rejoicings. 

4 When these are finished, all those who attended 
merely out of ceremony depart, and the bride 
groom and bride are left alone witli three or four 
of the nearest and oldest relations of either side ; 
those of the bridegroom being men, and those of 
the bride, women. 

( Presently the bride, attended by these few 
friends, having withdrawn herself for the purpose, 
appears at one of the doors of the house, and is led 
to the bridegroom, who stands ready to receive 
her. Having now taken their station, on a mat 
placed in the centre of the room, they lay hold of 
the extremities of a wand, about four feet long, by 
which they continue separated, whilst the old men 
pronounce some short harangues suitable to the oc 
casion. 

4 The married couple then make a public decla 
ration of the love and regard they entertain for each 
other, and still holding the rod between them, 
dance and sing. When they have finished this 
part of the ceremony, they break the rod into as 
many pieces as there are witnesses present, who 
each take a piece and preserve- it with great care. 

* The bride is then reconducted out of the door 
at which she entered, where her young companions 
wait to attend her to her father s house ; there the 
bridegroom is obliged to seek her, and the mar 
riage is consummated. Very often the wife re 
mains at her fathers house till she has a child, 
when she packs up her apparel, which is all the 
fortune she is generally possessed of, and accom 
panies her husband to his habitation. 

* When from any dislike a separation takes place, 
for they are seldom known &amp;lt;o quarrel, they gene 
rally give their friends a few days notice of their 
intentions, and sometimes offer reasons to justify 
their conduct. The witnesses who were present at 
the marriage, meet on the day requested, at the 
house of the couple that are about to separate, and 
bringing with them the pieces of rod which they 
had received at their nuptials, throw them into the 
fire in the presence of all the parties. 

* This is the whole of the ceremony required, and 



the separation is carried on without any murmur- 
ings or ill will between the couple or their relations; 
and after a few months they are at liberty to marry 
again. 

* When a marriage is thus dissolved, the chil 
dren which have been produced from it, are equally 
divided between them ; and as children are esteem 
ed a treasure by the Indians, if &amp;lt;he number hap 
pens to bo odd, the woman is allowed to take the 
better half. 

Though this custom seems to encourage fickle 
ness and frequent separations, yet there are many 
of the Indians who have but one wife, and enjoy 
with her a state of connubial happiness not to be 
exceeded in more refined socielies. There are also 
not a few instances of women preserving an invio 
lable attachment to their husbands, except in the 
cases before mentioned, which are not considered 
as either a violation of their chastity or fidelity. 

c Although 1 have said that the Indian nations 
differ very little from each other in their marriage 
ceremonies, there are some exceptions. The Nau- 
dowessies have a singular method of celebrating 
their marriages, which seems to bear no resem 
blance to those made use of by any other nation I 
passed through. When one of their young men 
has fixed on a young woman he approves of, he 
discovers his passion to her parents, who give him 
an invitation to corne and live with them in their 
tent. 

* He accordingly accepts the offer, and by so 
doing engages to reside in it for a whole year, in 
the character of a menial servant. During this 
time he hunts, and brings all the game he kills to 
the family ; by which means the father has an op 
portunity of seeing whether he is able to provide 
for the support of his daughter and the children 
that might be the consequence of their union. This 
however is only done whilst they arc young men, 
and for their first wife, and not repeated like Ja 
cob s servitude. 

* When this period is expired, the marriage is 
solemnized alter the custom of the country, in the 
following manner : three or four of the oldest male 
relations of the bridegroom, and as many of the 
bride s, accompany the young couple from their 
respective tents, to an open part in the centre of 
the camp. 

* The chiefs and warriors being here assembled 
to receive them, a party of the latter are drawn up 
in two ranks on each side of the bride and bride 
groom immediately on their arrival. Their prin 
cipal chief then acquaints the whole assembly with 
the design of their meeting, and tells them that the 
couple before them, mentioning at the same time] 

Q Q 2 



300 



MISSOURI. 



[their names, are come to avow publicly their in 
tentions of living together as man and wife. He 
&amp;lt; lien asks the two young people alternately, whe 
ther they desire that the union might take place. 
Having declared with an audible voice that they 
do so, the warriors fix their arrows, and discharge 
them over the heads of the married pair; this 
done, the chief pronounces them man and wife. 

The bridegroom then turns round, and bend 
ing his body, takes his wife on his back, in which 
.manner fie carries her amidst the acclamations of 
the spectators to his tent. The ceremony is suc 
ceeded by the most plentiful feast the new-married 
man can afford, and songs and dances, according 
to the usual custom, conclude the festival . 

1 Among the Indian as well as European nations, 
there are many that devote themselves to pleasure, 
and notwithstanding the accounts given by some 
modern writers of the frigidity of an Indian s con 
stitution, become the zealous votaries of Venus. 
The young warriors that are thus disposed, seldom 
want opportunities for gratifying their passion ; 
and as the mode usually followed on these occa 
sions is rather singular, 1 shall describe it. 

4 " When one of these young debauchees ima 
gines, from the behaviour of the person he has 
chosen for his mistress, that he shall not meet with 
any great obstruction to his suit from her, he pur 
sues the following plan. 

1 " It has been already observed, that the In 
dians acknowledge no superiority, nor have they 
any ideas of subordination, except in the necessary 
regulations of their war or hunting parties ; they 
consequently live nearly in a state of equality, pur 
suant to the first principles of nature. The lover 
therefore is not apprehensive of any check or con- 
troul in the accomplishment of his purposes, if he 
can find a convenient opportunity for completing 
them. 

" As the Indians arc also under no apprehen 
sion of robbers, or secret enemies, they leave the 
doors of their tents or huts unfastened during the 
night, as well as in the day. Two or three hours 
after sunset, the old people cover over their fire, that 
is generally burning in the midst of their apartment 
with ashes, and retire to their repose. 

* u Whilst darkness thus prevails, and all is 
quiet, one of these sons of pleasure, wrapt up 
closely in his blanket, to prevent his being known, 
will sometimes enter the apartment of his intended 
mistress. Having first lighted at the smothered 
fire a small splinter of wood, which answers the 
purpose of a match, he approaches the place where 
she reposes, and gently pulling away the covering 
from the head, jogs her till she awakes. If sue 



then rises up, and WOAVS out the light, he needs no 
further confirmation that his company is not dis 
agreeable ; but if, after he has discovered himself, 
she hides her head, and takes no notice of him, he 
might rest assured thatr any further solicitations 
will prove vain, and that it is necessary imme 
diately for him to retire. During his stay he con 
ceals the light as much as possible in the hollow of 
his hands, and as the tents or rooms of the Indians 
are usually large and capacious, he escapes with 
out detection. It is said, that the young women 
who admit their lovers on these occasions, take 
great care, by an immediate application to herbs, 
with the potent efficacy of which they are Avell ac 
quainted, to prevent the effects ofthese illicit amours 
from becoming visible; for should the natural 
consequences ensue, they must for ever remain un 
married." 

4 The children of the Indians are always distin 
guished by the name of the mother ; and if a wo 
man marries several husbands, and lias issue by 
each of them, they are called after her. The rea 
son they give for this is, that as their offspring are 
indebted to the father for their souls, the invisible 
part of their essence, and to the mother for their 
corporeal and apparent part, it is more rational 
that they should be distinguished by the name of 
the latter, from whom they indubitably derive 
their being, than by that of the father, to which 
a doubt might sometimes arise whether they are 
justly entitled. 

1 There are some ceremonies made use of by the 
Indians at the imposition of the name, and it is 
considered by them as a matter of great import 
ance; but what these are, 1 could never learn, 
through the secrecy observed on the occasion. I 
only know that it is usually given when the chil 
dren have passed the state of infancy. 

Nothing can exceed the tenderness shown by 
them to their offspring ; and a person cannot re 
commend himself to their favour by any method 
more certain, than by paying some attention to the 
younger branches of their families. 

Some difficulty attends an explanation of the 
manner in which the Indians distinguish them 
selves from each other. Besides the name of the 
animal by which every nation and tribe is deno 
minated, there are others that are personal, and 
which the children receive from their mother. 

1 The chiefs are also distinguished by a name 
that has cither some reference to their abilities, or 
to the hieroglyphic of their families ; and these are 
acquired after they arrive at the age of manhood. 
Such as have signalized themselves either in their 
war or hunting parties, or are posses-scd of some] 



MISSOURI. 



SOI 



[eminent qualifications, receive a name that serves 
to perpetuate the fame of those actions, or to make 
their abilities conspicuous. 

6 It is certain the Indians acknowledge one Su 
preme Being, or Giver of Life, who presides over 
all things; that is, the Great Spirit; and they 
look up to him as the source of good, from whom 
no evil can proceed. They also believe in a bad 
spirit, to whom they ascribe great power, and sup 
pose that through his means all the evils which 
bcfal mankind are inflicted. To him therefore do 
they pray in their distresses, begging that he would 
either avert their troubles, or moderate them when 
they are no longer avoidable. 

They say that the Great Spirit, who is infinitely 
good, neither wishes nor is able to do any mischief 
to mankind ; but on the contrary, that he showers 
down on them all the blessings they deserve ; 
whereas the evil spirit is continually employed in 
contriving how he may punish the human race ; 
and to do which, he is not only possessed of the 
will, but of the power. 

4 They hold also that there are good spirits of a 
lower degree, who have their particular depart 
ments, in which they are constantly contributing 
to the happiness of mortals. These they suppose 
to preside over all the extraordinary productions 
of nature, such as those lakes, rivers, or moun 
tains that are of an uncommon magnitude ; and 
likewise the beasts, birds, fishes, and even vege 
tables or stones, that exceed the rest of their species 
in size or singularity. To all of these they pay 
some kind of adoration. 

* But at the same time I fancy that the ideas they 
annex to the word spirit, are very different from 
the conceptions of more enlightened nations. 
They appear to fashion to themselves corporeal re 
presentations of their gods, and believe them to be 
of a human form, though of a nature more excel 
lent than man. 

Of the same kind are their sentiments relative 
to a futurity. They doubt not but they shall exist 
in some future state : they however fancy that 
their employments there will be similar to those 
they are engaged in here, without the labour and 
difficulties annexed to them in this period of their 
existence. 

* They consequently expect to be translated to a 
delightful country, where they shall always have 
a clear unclouded sky, and enjoy a perpetual 
spring ; where the forests will abound wit!) game, 
and the lakes with fish, which might be taken 
without a painful exertion of skill, or laborious 
pursuit ; in short, that they shall live for ever in 



regions of plenty, and enjoy every gratification 
they delight in here, in a greater degree. 

4 To intellectual pleasures they are strangers ; 
nor are these included in their scheme of happiness. 
But they expect that even these animal pleasures 
will be proportioned and distributed according to 
their merit ; the skilful hunter, the bold and suc 
cessful warrior, will be entitled to a greater share 
than those who, through indolence or want of skill, 
cannot boast of any superiority over the common 
herd. 

1 The priests of the Indians are at the same time 
their physicians, and their conjurers ; whilst they 
heal their wounds, or cure their diseases, they in 
terpret their dreams, give them protective charms, 
and satisfy that desire which is so prevalent among 
them, of searching into futurity. 

( How well they execute the latter part of their 
professional engagements, and the methods they 
make use of on some of these occasions, I have 
already shewn in the exertions of the priest of the 
Killistiones, who was fortunate enough to succeed 
in his extraordinary attempt near lake Superior. 
They frequently are successful likewise in admi 
nistering the salubrious herbs they have acquired a 
knowledge of; but that the ceremonies they make 
use of during the administration of them, contri 
butes to their success, I shall not take upon me to 
assert. 

* When any of the people are ill, the person 
who is invested with this triple character of 
doctor, priest, and magician, sits by the patient 
day and night, rattling in his ears goad shell, 
filled with dry beans, called a chichicoue, and 
making a disagreeable noise that cannot well be 
described. 

This uncouth harmony one would imagine 
would disturb the sick person and prevent the 
good effects of the doctor s prescription ; but on 
the contrary they believe that the method made 
use of, contributes to his recovery, by diverting 
from his malignant purposes the evil spirit who 
has inflicted the disorder ; or at least that it will 
take off his attention, so that he shall not increase 
the malady. This they are credulous enough to 
imagine he is constantly on the watch to do, and 
would carry his inveteracy to a fatal length if they 
did not thus charm him. 

I could not discover that they make use of any 
other religious ceremonies than those 1 have des 
cribed ; indeed on the appearance of the new 
moon they dance and sing ; but it is not evident 
that they pay that planet any adoration ; they only 
seem to rejoice at the return of a luminary thutj 



302 



MISSOURI. 



[makes the night cherful,and which serves to light 
them on their way when they travel during the 
absence of the sun. 

4 Notwithstanding Mr. Adair has asserted that 
the nations among whom he resided, observe with 
very little variation all the rites appointed by the 
Mosaic law, 1 o\\n 1 could never discover among 
those tribes that lie but a few degrees to the n. w. 
the least traces of the Jewish religion, except it be 
admitted that one particular female custom, and 
their divisions into tribes, carry with them proof 
sufficient to establish this assertion. 

* The Jesuits and French missionaries have 
also pretended, that the Indians had, when they 
first travelled into America, some notions, though 
these were dark and confused, of the Christian 
institution ; that they have been greatly agitated 
at tfie sight of a cross, and given proofs*by the 
impressions made on them, that they were not 
entirely unacquainted with the sacred nij steries of 
Christ ianity. 1 need not say that these are too 
glaring absurdities to be credited, and could only 
receive their existence from the zeal of those 
fathers, who endeavoured at once to give the pub 
lic a better opinion of the success of their mis 
sions., and to add support to the cause they were 
engaged in. 

* The Indians appear to be in their religious 
principles rude and uninstructed. The doctrines 
they hold are few and simple, and such as have 
been generally impressed on the human mind, by 
some means or other, in the most ignorant ages. 
They, however, have not deviated, as many other 
uncivilized nations, and too many civilized ones, 
have done, into idolatrous modes of worship : they 
venerate indeed and make offerings to the won 
derful parts of the creation, as I have before ob 
served ; but whether those rights are performed 
on account of the impression such extraordinary 
appearances make on them, or whether they con 
sider them as the peculiar charge, or the usual 
places of residence of the invisible spirits they 
acknowledge, 1 cannot positively determine. 

1 The human mind in its uncultivated state is apt 
to ascribe the extraordinary occurrences of nature, 
such as earthquakes, thunder, or hurricanes, to 
the interposition of unseen beings ; the troubles 
and disasters also that are annexed to a savage 
life, the apprehensions attendant on a precarious 
subsistence, and those numberless inconveniences 
which man in his improved state has found means 
to remedy, are supposed to proceed from the in 
terposition of evil spirits ; the savage, consequently, 
lives in continual apprehensions of their unkind 



attacks, and to avert them has recourse to charms, 
to the fantastic ceremonies of his priest, or the 
powerful influence of his Manitous. Fear has of 
course a greater share in his devotions than grati 
tude, and he pays more attention to deprecating 
the wrath of the evil, than to securing the favour 
of the good beings. 

* The Indians, however, entertain these absurdi 
ties in common with those of every part of the 
globe who have not been illuminated with that 
religion, which only can disperse the clouds of 
superstition and ignorance, and they are as free 
from error as people can be, who have not been 
favoured with its instructive doctrines. 

In Pcnobscot, a settlement in the province of 
Maine, in then. c. part of JNew England, the wife 
of a soldier was taken in labour, and notwithstand 
ing every necessary assistance was given her, 
could not be delivered. In this situation she re 
mained for two or three days, the persons around 
her expecting that the next pang would put an end 
to her existence. 

1 An Indian woman, who accidentally passed by, 
heard the groans of the unhappy sufferer, and in 
quired from whence they proceeded. Being made 
acquainted with the desperate circumstance at 
tending the case, she told the informant, that if 
she might be permitted to see the person, she did 
not doubt but that she should be of great service 
to her. 

4 The surgeon that had attended, and the mid 
wife who was then present, having given up every 
hope of preserving their patient, the Indian woman 
was allowed to make use of any methods she 
thought proper. She accordingly took a handker 
chief, and bound it tight over the nose and mouth, 
of the woman : this immediately brought on a 
suffocation ; and from the struggles that conse 
quently ensued, she was in a few seconds deliver 
ed. The moment this was achieved, and time 
enough to prevent any fatal effect, the handker 
chief was taken off. The long-suffering patient, 
thus happily relieved from her pains, soon after 
perfectly recovered, to the astonishment of all 
those who had been witnesses to her desperate 
situation. 

1 The reason given by the Indian for this hazard 
ous method of proceeding, was, that desperate 
disorders require desperate remedies; that as she 
observed the exertions of nature were riot suffici 
ently forcible to effect the desired consequence, she 
thought it necessary to augment their force, which 
could only be done by some mode that was violent 
in the extreme.] 



MISSOURI. 



303 



P An Indian meets death when it approaches him 
in his hut, with the same resolution as he evinces 
iv hen called to face him in the field. His indiffer 
ence under this important trial, which is the source 
of so many apprehensions to almost every other 
nation, is truly admirable. When his fate is pro 
nounced by the physician, and it remains no 
longer uncertain, he harangues those about him 
with the greatest composure. 

{ If he is a chief and has a family, he makes a 
kind of funeral oration, which he concludes by 
giving to his children such advice for the regula 
tion of their conduct as he thinks necessary. He 
then takes leave of his friends, and issues out. or 
ders for the preparation of a feast, which is de 
signed to regale those of his tribe that can come to 
pronounce hiseulogium. 

The character of the Indians, like that of other 
uncivilized nations, is composed of a mixture of 
ferocity and gentleness. They are at once guided 
by passions and appetites, which they hold in com 
mon with the fiercest beasts that inhabit their woods, 
and are possessed of virtues which do honour to 
human nature. 

In the following estimate I shall endeavour to 
forget on the one hand the prejudices of Ameri 
cans, who usually annex to the word Indian, 
ideas that are disgraceful to human nature, and 
"who view them in no other light than as savages 
and cannibals, whilst with equal care I avoid my 
partiality towards them, as some must naturally 
arise from the favourable reception I met with 
during my stay among them. 

* That the Indians are of a cruel, revengeful, in 
exorable disposition ; that they will watch whole 
days unmindful of the calls of nature, and make 
their way through pathless, and almost unbounded 
woods, subsisting only on the scanty produce of 
them, to pursue and revenge themselves of an ene 
my ; that they hear unmoved the piercing cries of 
such as unhappily fall into their hands, and re 
ceive a diabolical pleasure from the tortures they 
inflict on their prisoners, I readily grant: but let 
us look on the reverse of this terrifying picture, 
and we shall find them temperate both in their 
diet and potations, (it must be remembered that I 
speak of those tribes who have little communica 
tion with Americans) ; that they withstand, with 
unexampled patience, the attacks of hunger, or 
the inclemency of (he seasons, and esteem the 
gratification of their appetites but as a secondary 
consideration. 

* \V c shall likewise see them social and humane 
to those whom they consider as their friends, and 
even to their adopted enemies ; acd ready to share 



with them the List morsel, or to risk their lives in, 
their defence. 

* In contradiction to the report of many other 
travellers, all of which have been tinctured with 
prejudice, I can assert, that notwithstanding the 
apparent indifference with which an Indian meets 
his wife and children after a long absence, an in 
difference proceeding rather from custom than in 
sensibility, he is not unmindful of the claims either 
of connubial or parental tenderness. 

* Accustomed from their youth to innumerable 
hardships, they soon become superior to a sense of 
danger, or the dread of death ; and their fortitude, 
implanted by nature, and nurtured by example, 
by precept and accident, never experiences a mo 
ment s allay. 

* Though slothful and inactive whilst their 
stores of provisions remain unexhausted, and their 
foes are at a distance, they are indefatigable and 
persevering in pursuit of their game, or in circum 
venting their enemies. 

* If they are artful and designing, and ready to 
take every advantage, if they are cool and delibe 
rate in their councils, and cautious in the extreme, 
either of discovering their sentiments, or of reveal 
ing a secret, they might at the same time boast of 
possessing qualifications of a more animated na 
ture, of the sagacity of a hound, the penetrating 
sight of a lynx, the cunning of a fox, the agility 
of a bounding roe, and the unconquerable fierce 
ness of the tiger. 

* In their public characters, as forming part of a 
community, they possess an attachment for that 
band to which they belong, unknown to the inha 
bitants of any other country. They combine, as- if 
they were actuated only by one soul, against the 
enemies of their nation, and banish from their 
minds every consideration opposed to this. 

They consult without unnecessary opposition, 
or without giving way to the excitements of envy 
or ambition, on the measures necessary to be pur 
sued for the destruction of those who have drawn 
on themselves their displeasure. No selfish views 
ever influence their advice, or obstruct their con 
sultations. Nor is it in the power of bribes 
or threats to dimmish the love they bear their 
country. 

* The honour of their tribe, and the welfare of 
their nation, are the first and most predominant 
emotions of their hearts ; and from hence proceed 
in a great measure all their virtues and their vices. 
Actuated by these, they brave every danger, endure 
the most refined torments, and expire triumphing 
in their fortitude, not as a personal quality, but as 
a national characteristic.] 



304 



MISSOURI. 



[&amp;lt; From hence also flows that insatiable revenge 
towards those with whom they are at war, and all 
the consequent horrors that disgrace their name. 
Their uncultivated mind being incapable of judg 
ing of the propriety of an action, in opposition to 
their passions, which are totally insensible of the 
controul of reason or humanity, they know not 
how to keep their fury within any bounds, and 
consequently that courage and resolution, which 
would otherwise do them honour, degenerate into 

/&amp;gt; 

a savage ferocity. 

6 But this short dissertation, continues Cap 
tain Lewis, must suffice: the limits of my work 
will not permit rne to treat the subject more 
copiously, or to pursue it with a logical regularity. 
The observations already made by my readers on 
the preceding pages, will, 1 trust, render it unne 
cessary ; as by them they will be enabled to form a 
tolerably just idea of the people I have been des 
cribing. Experience teaches that anecdotes, and 
relations of particular events, however trifling they 
might appear, enable us to form a truer judgment 
of the manners and customs of a people, and are 
much more declaratory of their real slate, than the 
most studied and elaborate disquisition, without 
these aids. 

Statement of the Commerce of the Missouri* 

The following statement of the commerce of the 
Missouri is extracted from the work of the author 
whom we have already so liberally quoted. 

* The products which are drawn from the 
Missouri are obtained from the Indians and hunters 
in exchange for merchandize. They may be class 
ed according to the subjoined table. 

d. c. 



Castor 


12281 Ibs. 


at 1 


Otters - - 


1267 skins 


4 


Foxes ^ 






Pouha Foxes &amp;gt; 


802 skins 





Tiger cats } 






Raccoons 


4248 skins 





Bears, black, 1 






grey, and 


2541 skins 


2 


yellow 3 






Puces 


2541 skins 


2 


Buffaloes 


1714 skins 


3 


Dressed cow 
hides $ 


189 skins 


1 


Shorn deer &amp;gt; 
skins 


96926 Ibs. 





Deer skins, 
with hair S 


6381 skins 






20 



dolls, cts. 
14737 20 
5068 

401 



25 1062 

5089 

5082 

5142 

50 283 50 

50 38770 40 

50 3190 50 



Brought forward 
Tallow and fat 8313 Ibs. 
Bears oil - 2310 galls. 
Muskrats 
Martens - 



d.c. dolls, cts. 
78818 60 

20 1662 60 

1 28 2472 



Total 82953 20 



Carry forward 78818 60 



The calculation in this table, drawn from the 
most correct accounts of the products of the 
Missouri, during fifteen years, makes the average 
of a common year about 77,971 dollars. 

* On calculating, in the same proportion, the 
amount of merchandize entering the Missouri, and 
given in exchange for peltries, it is found that it 
amounts to 61,250 dollars, including expences, 
equal to one-fourth of the value of the merchan 
dize. 

The result is, that this commerce gives an 
annual produce of 16,721 dollars, or about 27 per 
cent. 

If the commerce of the Missouri, without en 
couragement, and badly regulated, gives annually 
so great a profit, may we not rest assured that it 
will be greatly augmented, should government 
direct its attention to it. It is also necessary to 
observe, that the price of peltry fixed by this table 
is the current price in the Illinois : if it were regu 
lated by the prices of London, deducting the 
expences of transportation, the profit, according 
to our calculation, would be much more con 
siderable. 

If the Missouri, abandoned to savages, and 
presenting but one branch of commerce, yields 
such great advantages, in proportion to the capital 
employed in it, what might we not hope, if some 
merchants or companies with large capital, and aided 
by a population extended along the borders of the 
river, should turn their attention to other branches 
of the trade, which they might undertake (I dare 
say) with a certainty of success, when we consider 
the riches buried in its banks, and of which I 
have endeavoured in these notes to give an idea ? 

*AN ESTIMATE Or THE PRODUCE OF THE SEVERAL 
MINES. 

Mine at Burton , 550,0001bs. 
mineral, estimated to pro 
duce 66f-, is 336,666|lbs. 
lead, at 5 dollars, is - 18,333 33 
To which add 30 dollars, 
(on 120,0001bs, manufac- 

Carry forward 18,333 33 J 



M I S 



SOS 



[Brought forward 18,333 33 
tared) to each thousand, 
is - - - - 3,600 



Old Mines, 200,0001bs. mi 
neral, estimated to pro 
duce 66f , is 133,333!ll&amp;gt;s. 
lead, at 5 dollars per cwt. 
is - - - - 6,666 67 

Mine a la Mott, 200,0001bs. 
lead, at 5 dollars per cwt. 
is - - 10,000 

Suppose at all the other 
mines 30,0001bs. lead, at 
5 dollars, is 1,500 



21,933 33 



18,166 67 



Total amount is Dollars 40,100 



When the manufacture of white and red lead is 
put into operation, the export valuation will l&amp;gt;e 
considerably augmented on the quality of lead. ] 

[MISSOURI Indians, properly so called, are the 
remnant of the most numerous nation inhabiting 
the Missouri, when first known to the French. 
Their ancient and principal village was situated in 
an extensive and fertile plain, on the n. bank of 
the Missouri, just below the entrance of the grand 
river. Repeated attacks of the small-pox, together 
with their Avar with the Saukees and Renars, have 
reduced fhem to their present state of dependence 
on the Ottoes, with whom they reside, as well in 
their village as on their hunting excursions. The 
Ottoes view them as their inferiors, and sometimes 
treat them amiss. These people are the real pro 
prietors of an extensive and fertile country lying 
on the Missouri, above their ancient village, for a 
considerable distance, and as low as the mouth of 
the Osage river, and thence to the Mississippi. 
For an account of other nations inhabiting the 
borders of the Missouri, see that river.] 

[M1SSQUASH River. Nova Scotia and New 
Brunswick provinces are separated by the several 
windings of this river, from its confluence with 
Beau Basin (at the head of Chignecto channel) to 
its rise or main source ; and from thence by a due 
e. line to the bay of Vcrte, in the straits of Nor 
thumberland. See NEW BBUNSWICK.] 

[MISTAKE Bay, a large bay on the w. side of 
the entrance of Davis s straits, and to the n. of 
Hudson s straits; from which it is separated by a 
peninsula of the n. main on the w. and Resolution 
island on the s. It is to the n. e. of Nieva island, 
andw. w. of cape Elizabeth.] 

[MISTAKEN Cape, the s. point of the eastern- 
VOL. in. 



most of the Hermit s islands, is about 23 miles n. 
from cape Horn, at the extremity of S. Ame 
rica.] 

[MISTAKEN Point, to the w. of cape Race, at 
the s. e. point of the island of Newfoundland, and 
to the e. of cape Pine, is so called because it has 
been frequently mistaken by seamen for cape Race 
when they first make the island from the s. though 
it is two leagues w. n. w. from i(.] 

MISTAN, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district and alcaldia mayor of Muauchinango 
in Nueva Espana ; situate on the s. side of the 
said head settlement. 

^ MISTASS1NS, a great lake of New France or 
Canada in N. America ; formed from the river 
Rupert, in the country of the Indians of its name, 
and is divided into three parts, which afterwards 
communicate. 

M1STECAPA, a small settlement or ward of 
the head settlement of the district of San Luis, of 
the coast and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa in Nueva 
Espana. It contains 16 families of Indians, and 
is a little more than a league from the settlement 
of Quauzoquitengo. 

MISTEPEC, a settlement and head settlement 
of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Juxtla- 
huaca in Nueva Espana. It contains 232 families 
of Indians, including those of five wards of its 
district. 

MISTEPEC, another settlement, of the alcaldia 
mayor of Guajuapa in the same kingdom; con 
taining 12 families of Indians. 

MISTEPEQUE, SAN AGUSTIN DE, a settle 
ment and head settlement of the district of the al 
caldia mayor of Nexapa in Nueva Espana ; corn- 
posed of six other settlememts. 

MISTEPEQUE, another, with the dedicatory 
title of San Agustin, of this head settlement and 
alcaldia mayor. It is situate on an extensive lofty 
plain, having on either side two very deep and 
craggy glens, in the which the Indians cultivate 
cochineal and other seeds. Every eight clays there 
is celebrated here a tianguis or fair, visited by 
traders as well of other jurisdictions as this, for 
the buying and selling of seeds, household utensils, 
fruit, flesh, mantles, cloths, and cotton stuffs. It 
is 34 leagues s. with a small inclination zo. of its 
capital. 

MISTF.PEQUE, another, with the dedicatory 
title of San Andres, of the same head settlement 
and alcaldia mayor; containing 56 Indian fa 
milies. 

M1STER1OSA, a small island of the N. sea ; 
between the coast of Honduras, or rather between 
the shoal of Santillana and El Placer. 
E n 



306 



MIT 



[MISTIC, or MYSTIC, a short river which falls 
into the ;z. side of Boston harbour by a broad 
mouth on the e. side of the peninsula of Charles- 
town. It is navigable for sloops four miles to the 
industrious town of Medford ; and is crossed a 
mile above its mouth by a bridge 130 rods in 
length, through which vessels pass by means of a 
draw.] 

[MIST1NSINS, an Indian nation who inhabit 
on the s. side of the lake of the same name in 
Lower Canada."] 

[MISTISSINNY Lake, in Canada; on the 
s. e. side of which is a Canadian house, or sta 
tion for trade.] 

MISTLAN, SAN JUAN DE, a settlement of the 
province and alcaldia mayor of Guazacapan in the 
kingdom of Guatemala ; annexed to the curacy 
of Nuestra Senora de la Concepcion of Escu- 
intla; formerly of the monks of St. Domingo. 

Ml TARE, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Venezuela : situate on the shore of the 
river of its name, in the part where this unites 
with the Seco, to the a?, of the city of Coro. 

MIT ARE. The aforesaid river is large, and en 
ters the N. sea near the mouth of the gulf of Mara- 
caibo, in lat. 1 1 27 . 

[MITCHELL S Eddy, the first falls of Mer- 
rimack river, 15 miles from its mouth, and six 
above the new bridge which connects Haverhill 
with Bradford. Thus far it is navigable for ships 
of burden.] 

MITCHIGAMES, abarbarous nation of Indians 
of the province and government of Louisiana in N. 
America. They retired and fled from the Tchicachas 
to the territory of the Arkansas, and these finding 
them valorous and useful to them in their wars al 
lowed them to domesticate, and thus the two tribes 
became confounded, to the extinction of this of 
which we treat. 

MITIC, a settlement of the head settlement of 
the district and alcaldia mayor of Lagos in Nueva 
Espana ; four leagues n. e. of its capital. 

MITIMARES, certain Indians, who removed 
themselves from different provinces to others, a 
practice which was much encouraged and enforced 
by the Incas, when, after taking any new pro 
vinces, they doubted of the loyalty of some of the 
subjects. 

M1TLA, a settlement and head settlement of 
the district of the alcaldia mayor of Teutitlan in 
Nueva Espana. It contains 150 families of In 
dians, and is four leagues w. of its capital. 

MITLAN CONGO, SANTA CRUZ DE, a settle 
ment and head settlement of the district of the alcal- 
itta mayor of Nochiztlan in Nueva Espana ; con- 
1 



M I X 

taining 58 families of Indians, and being eight 
leagues e. and s. of its capital. 

MITLANTONGO-, with the dedicatory title of 
Santiago, another settlement of the same head settle 
ment and alcaldia mayor as the former ; contain 
ing 48 Indian families, and being nine leagues e. 
with an inclination to s. of its capital. 

MITLAZ1NCO, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district of Otengo, and alcaldia 
mayor of Chilapa, in Nueva Espana ; two leagues 
n. of its head settlement. 

M1TMAS, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Chachapoyas in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Chisquilla. 

MITO, a settlement of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Tarmahi Peru ; annexed to the curacy 
ofTapu. 

M1TOTO, a settlement of the province and 
correginriento of Xauja in Peru. 

M1TQUITLAN, a settlement of the province 
of Cuextlan in Nueva Espaiia,. in the time of the 
Indian gentilism ; conquered by the KingAhuit-. 
zotl, although, from the valour of its natives, it 
cost him a great many lives of his best troops. 

M1XAPA, a settlement of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Los Zoques in the kingdom of 
Guatemala. 

MIX ATA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Sonsonate in the kingdom of 
Guatemala ; annexed to the curacy of Sun Pedro 
Chipilapa, and containing 60 Indians. 

MIXCO, a settlement of the province and 
kingdom of Guatemala ; founded in an extensive 
valley, from which it takes its name, and on the 
shore of the river Las Vacas. It contains 300 fa 
milies, and is very rich, being the decided pass 
to Mexico. The opulence of its inhabitants is 
acquired chiefly from the keeping of mule-droves 
for the purposes of forwarding merchandize, and- 
the Father Tomas Gage, who was curate here for 
five years, relates, that one person, named Juan, 
Palomequel, himself kept no less than 300 of these 
animals. What contributes, however, no less to. 
its opulence is, that the Indians here arc very ex 
pert in making earthen-ware articles of great 
beauty, and such as are eagerly bought by a 
greater part of the jurisdictions of the kingdom.. 
It abounds in wheat, fruity seeds, and all sorts of 
fowl. Eleven leagues from Guatemala. 

MIXCO. The aforesaid valley is five leagues 
long and three quarters of a league wide, watered 
by the river Las Vacas, and thereby rendered very 
fertile and delightful. It has some breeds of cat 
tle, and produces the best wheat in the kingdom &amp;gt; 
and from it the capital is supplied. In it are 36 



M I X 

or 40 scattered houses which belong to so mnny 
masters, and all being of the curacy of a church 
which is at a small distance, called Nuestra Sefiora 
del Carmen. 

MIXCONTIQUE, a settlement of the pro 
vince and alcaldia mayor of Chiapa in the king 
dom of Guatemala. 

MIXO, a small river of St. Domingo, rising 
in the mountains of Ciboo, and running s. s. w. 
with the river San Juan to enter the Neiba. 

MIXQUIAHUACAN, a settlement of the pro 
vince of Cempoala, and of the nation of Totona- 
cas Indians, in Nueva Espafia. After the conquest 
of the kingdom by the Spaniards, it changed its 
name to that of San Francisco, which it pre 
serves. 

M1XQUIC, a province of Nueva Esp?na, 
conquered by the Emperor Thechotlatzin, the 
fifth of the Chichimoc;is and Aculhuas. These 
united themselves with Monquihuix, king of the 
Tlatelucas, to defend themselves against Axaya- 
catl, king of Mexico ; who, however, reduced 
them to obedience, and subjected them to the em 
pire. They afterwards entered into an alliance 
with Cortes, and were greatly instrumental to the 
carrying bis purposes, by assisting him with ca 
noes and whatever else they had it in their power 
to afford. 

MIXTAN, a settlement of (he province and al 
caldia mayor of Guazacapan in the kingdom of 
Guatemala ; annexed to the curacy of San Pedro 
Chipilapa, and containing 60 Indian inhabitants. 
MIXTECA, a province of Nueva Espafia; 
situate on the coast of the S. sea, divided into A It a 
and Baxa; the first being in the serrania, and its set 
tlements belonging to the jurisdiction of the bishop 
ric of La Puebla de los Angeles; the second be 
ing of the bishopric of Oaxaca, and lying in the 
llanuras contiguous to the coast ; bounded by the 
province and alcaldia mayor of Xicay an, and by 
Oaxaca, with the province of Fluizo. Its district 
comprehends the settlements of Teposcolula, No- 
chitlan, and others, to the which are subject va 
rious principal settlements, such as Nanguitlan and 
Tlaxiaco. The temperature is for the most part 
cold throughout. It abounds in wheat, maize, 
fruit, and particularly in fine cochineal and silk 
worms: and these, with some manufactures and 
some goat cattle which they kill, constitute the 
chief articles of commerce. In the capital settle 
ments of the alcaldias mat/ores above mentioned 
live some Spaniards ; but in all the others there 
are none but Indians, speaking the Mixtecan 
tongue, the language of this country. These are, 
generally speaking, docile, civil, and industrious, 



M I Z 



and loss averse to labour than other Indians. In 
one of the aforesaid settlements of this province 
was born the illustrious Don Nicolas del Puerto, 
an Indian and celebrated lawyer, and such as me 
rited to become the bishop of Oaxaca, a man of 
great virtue and science, and who destroyed the 
prejudice that no Indian was competent in ability 
to the offices of Europeans. 

MIZANTLA, a jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor 
of Nueva Espafia, called also Vera Cruz Vieja, 
from there being in it the city thus named and 
founded by Ilcrnan Cortes, but which was since re 
moved. It consists of seven settlements, which are, 
Santa Maria Talixcoya, S. Martin Tlacotcpe- 
Cempoala, que, 

S. Francisco Tenampa, Chicontepec y Colipa. 
Santa Maria Tetela, 

All these are small, though heads of districts, 
and to them are annexed different wards; their 
commerce consisting in the several breeds of cattle, 
as also in maize and other seed. The natives 
equally apply themselves to the cultivation of cot 
ton and to fishing, since they are girt by the sea, 
and have a small port which serves only for little 
vessels. In this port Hernan Cortes landed at 
the conquest of this place ; and here he effected the 
stratagem of sending back his vessels as soon as 
his men were ashore, for fear they might be induced 
to fly to them for succour. 

The capital is the settlement of the same name ; 
situate on the spot where the city of Vcra Cruz 
stood. It is of an hot and somewhat moist tempe 
rature, inhabited by 230 families of Spaniards, 
Mustees, and Mulattoes, and 260 of Mexican In 
dians. One hundred and forty-six miles e. of 
Mexico, and 53 n. by w. of Vera Cruz, Lat. 
19 54 n. Long. 96 36 w. 

MIZAPA, PUNT A DE, a very lofty mountain 
of the coast of Nueva Espafia, between the 
river Guazacoalco and the sierras of San Martin, 
and serving as a land-mark to vessels. 

M1ZQUE, a province of the government of 
Santa Cruz de la Sierra in Peru; bounded s. by the 
province of Yarnparaes, the river Grande inter 
secting the two, s. w. by that of Charcas, w. by 
that of Cochabambas, and n. by the serranias of 
the cordillera. Its temperature is for the most part 
hot, although it has some places mild. It pro 
duces wheat, maize, pulse, and garden herbs, 
some sugar-cane, and vines of which wine is made; 
and has various estates of large and small cattle 
brought from Santa Cruz. This province is very 
poor, and all its commerce consists in the. cultiva 
tion of the fields for the mere maintenance of the 
families which inhabit it. It has no mine what- 
R n 2 



308 



M I Z 



ever, and has no person of any consequence re 
siding in it; even those who lived there once be 
ing either dead or removed to Potosi and other 
parts. It has, however, in its woods several sorts 
of trees good for building; such as cedars, carobe 
trees, quinaquinas, and others; also many tigers, 
leopards, foxes, ounces, turkeys, doves, parrots, 
ducks, herons, and other animals and birds. Near 
the settlement of Pocona is a lake two leagues in 
circumference, and is watered by rivers abound 
ing in fish sufficient to supply the jurisdiction. 
The inhabitants amount to 12,000, and its corre~ 
gidor used to enjoy a repartimicnto of 11,512 dol 
lars. The settlements of its district are Pocona, 
Tintin, Aiguile, Totora, Omereque; also those of 
its ecclesiastical jurisdiction, Punata and Tarata, 
which in their civil government belong to the pro 
vince of Cochabamba. 

The capital is of the same name ; a small city, 
founded in a beautiful and extensive valley of 
eight leagues long, abounding in grain, wax, and 
honey. It was formerly large and opulent, as no 
few vestiges of its ancient grandeur testify. It has 
besides the parisli churches convents of monks of 
St. Domingo, San Francisco, San Juan de Dios, 
and of barefooted Augustins, the which, at the 
present day, can scarcely maintain a single monk. 
The principal cause of this decay has arisen from 
the continued affliction of tertian fevers, to which 
these hot valleys are subject, and which are here 
called chuahu. Near the city pass two rivers, 
which come from the province of Cochabamba and 
enter Maranon, in which fish are caught. [It is 
situate on the shore of the river Grande, in lat. 18 
40 s. Long. 56 42 o&amp;gt;.] 

MIZQU1AHUALA, a settlement and head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Tepetango in Nueva Espana; comprehending set 
tlements, and containing 50 families of Indians, 
20 of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattoes. Eigh 
teen leagues n. of Mexico. 

MIZQUITIC, a settlement of the province of 
Zacatecas in Nucva Espana; founded by order 
of the viceroy Don Luis de Velasco, for which 
purpose he sent some Indians from the province 
of TIaxcala. It has in it a convent of the reli 
gious order of San Francisco, under whom it was 
long dependent for religious instruction. Three 
leagues from the settlement of Tlaxcalilla, and 75 

C " 

. of Mexico. 

MIZQUIYAHUALAN, a settlement near the 
city of Mexico in the time of the Indians, cele 
brated for having been one of the places founded 
by the Chichemacas during their peregrinations 
under Xolotl. 



[M KESSENSBURG, a town of Pennsylva 
nia, York county, on Tom s creek, 32 miles w. 
s. w. of York.] 

MOA, CAYO DE, an isle of the N. sea, near the 
coast of the island of Cuba and the point of Las 
Mulas. 

MO ABAS, a settlement of the missions that 
were held by the regulars of the company, in the 
province of Ostiinuri of N. America ; four leagues 
from the river Chico. 

[MOAGES Islands, on the n. coast of S. Ame 
rica, in the entrance of the gulf of Venezuela. 
They extend from n. to s. and lie w. of the island 
ofAruba; are eight or nine in number, and all, 
except one, low, flat, and full of trees. The south 
ernmost is the largest.] 

MO A LC A CHI, a settlement of the missions 
which were held by the Jesuits, in the province 
of Taraumara and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya, s.c. 
of the town and real of mines of Chiguagua. In 
its vicinity are three large cultivated estates called 
Cosaguinoa, lying four leagues to the s. Calichi- 
qui four and an half to the w. and Cochunigui 
eight to the s. w. 

[MOBILE, a large navigable river, formed by- 
two main branches of the Alabama and Tombeck- 
bee, in the s. w. part of Georgia. It pursues a s. 
course into W. Florida ; the confluent stream enters 
the gulf of Mexico at Mobile point, in lat. 30 17 n. 
11 leagues below the town of Mobile. Large ves 
sels cannot go within seven miles of the town. The 
breadth of the bay is in general about three or four 
leagues. Vast numbers of large alligators bask on 
the shores, as well as swim in the rivers and la 
goons. See GEORGIA, ALABAMA, TOMBECK- 
BEE, &amp;c. From the n. e. source of the wafers 
of the Alabama, to Mobile point at the mouth of 
Mobile bay, is, according to the best maps, about 
460 miles: large boats can navigate 350 miles, and 
canoes much farther.] 

[Mo BILK, a city of W. Florida, formerly of 
considerable splendour and importance, but now in 
a state of decline. It is pretty regular, of an ob 
long figure, and situated on the w. bank of the 
river. The bay of Mobile terminates a little to 
the n. e. of the town, in a number of marshes and 
lagoons; which subject the people to fevers and 
agues in the hot season. It is 33 miles n. of Mo 
bile point, about 32 below the junction of the two 
principal branches of Mobile river, and 46 w. n. w. 
of Pensacola. There are many very elegant houses 
here, inhabited by French, English, Scotch, and 
Irish. Fort Conde, which stands very near the 
bay, towards the lower end of the town, is a re 
gular fortress of brick ; and there is a neat square 



M O C 

of barracks for the officers and soldiers. Mobile, 
when in possession of the British, sent yearly to 
London skins and furs to the value of from 12 to 
15,000/. sterling. It surrendered to the Spanish 
forces in 1780.] 

MOBJACK, a bay on the coast, province, and 
colony of N. Carolina, at the entrance of the bay 
of Chesapeak. 

MOOA, a province of Peru in the time of the 
Indian gcntilism, on the confines of the kingdom 
of Quito ; at present confounded in the division 
made by the Spaniards. It was conquered and 
united to (he empire by the Inca Tapac Yupan- 
qui, eleventh emperor. 

MOCALASA, a settlement of Indians of the 
province of S. Carolina ; situate on the shore of 
the river Albania. 

MOCANACO, a point of the coast of the N. 
sea, and kingdom of Nueva Espaila in N. Ame 
rica, two leagues and an half from Vera Cruz. 
At the distance of one league and an half is the 
mouth of the river Medellin, on the shore of which 
is a small settlement inhabited by 30 families of 
Indians, who maintain themselves by the trade of 
fishing in the said river, and carrying their stock 
to the market of the city. It is of a warm and 
dry temperature, in lat. 19 4 n. Long. 96 
3 w. 

MOCHA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Arica in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Cibaya. 

MOCHA, another settlement, of the province and 
forregimienlo of Ambato in the kingdom of Quito, 
on the s. It is near the river Pachanlica, which 
runs by the s. and is of a cold temperature from 
its vicinity to the paramo or mountain desert of 
Chimbocaso, which is always covered with snow. 
The inhabitants are almost all Mustees, and have 
the credit throughout the province of being noto 
rious robbers ; on which account it is said, that in 
Mocha they sow grain and gather mules, mean 
ing that they do not there maintain themselves by 
what they sow, but rather by what they plunder, 
inasmuch as these depredators constantly take the 
mules from passengers proceeding to Guaranda or 
Ambato, which lie in the road from Guayaquil 
and from Quito. In lat. 1 27 s. 

MOCHA, another, with the dedicatory title of 
Santa Lucia, in the province and corregimienlo of 
TruxiUo in Peru. It is very small ; situate near 
the sea, and two leagues from the capital to the 
s . e. in the road leading to Lima. The natives are 
all people of colour, (excepting here and there a 
Spaniard), and living by agriculture ; so that its 
limited district is nothing but a pleasant, culti- 
2 



M O C 



309 



vated garden, of a mild and salutary climate. It 
lies in the direct road to Lima, and is ti e place 
where the passports must be shewn to the lieute 
nant of the corregidor; in default of which no per 
son whatever is permitted to pass. 

MOCHA, another, of the kingdom of Chile ; si 
tuate on the coast, at the mouth of the river Vil- 
lagran. 

MOCHA, an island of the S. sea, belonging to 
the kingdom of Chile, six leagues from the conti* 
nent. It is small, but well peopled with Indians, 
who cultivate it with success, the soil boing ex 
tremely fertile. The climate is benign and salu 
tary, and its water is supplied by a mobt delicate 
fountain. In lat. 3821 5. 

MOCHA, a river of the province and correginii- 
ento of Truxillo in Peru, which rises from the 
lakes Guaigaicocha and San Lorenzo, and, run 
ning 22 leagues, passes through the fertile valley 
of Chimo, where the capital is founded, a league s 
distance from the river. It collects the waters of 
many other rivers and streams, and being united 
with the Trapiche, takes the name of Minocucho. 
It so overflows the valley in the winter time that 
it must be passed in rafts, as by here runs the royal 
road to Lima. It empties itself into the S. sea. 

MOCHA RA, a settlement of the province and 
corre^imiento of Chichas and Tarija in Peru. 

MOCHICAUCHI, or MOCHICAHUT, a settle 
ment of the province and akaldia mayor of Ci- 
naloa in N.America; situate on the shore of the 
river Fuerte, between the settlements of Charay 
and San Miguel. 

MOCHICOS, a very numerous nation of In 
dians of Peru, who used to dwell in the valleys on 
the coast of the S. sea. 

MOCHIMA, a port of the coast of the N. sea, 
in the province and government of Cumana. It 
is large, convenient, and frequented by vessels 
which carry on an illicit trade on those coasts ; si 
tuate between cape Cordera and point Araya. 

MOCO, a river which flows down from the 
mountains of Bogota, in the Nuevo Reyrio de 
Granada, runs e. and, after having collected the 
waters of several others, enters by thew. shore into 
the Orinoco. 

MOCOA, a large and extensive province of the 
kingdom of Quito, in the jurisdiction and corregi- 
mienlo of Pasto, discovered by Hernan Perez de 
Quesada in 1541. In this province the rivers Ca- 
queta to the n. and the Putumayo or Iza to the s. 
take their rise. It has also a large lake of the 
same name as itself, in which are found pearls, 
which, although small, are extremely fine. The 
territory here is but little known and less peopled 5 



M O C 



bounded n. by the province of Popayan, w. by 
that of Pasto, s. w. by the town of Ibarra, s. by 
the province of Sucumbios, and e. by the moun 
tains of the infidel Indians. It is irrigated by the 
two rivers aforesaid, as also by those of Sucia, 
Tango, Pato, Labaquero, Piedras, Guinchoa, Vi- 
des, Quino, Pischilin, Yaca, and others of less 
note. The natives are expert at making beautiful 
wooden utensils, giving them a varnish which 
they fix in by the fire, and having the appearance 
of japan, and which work they call de Mocoa. In 
the mountains is found a small animal of the figure 
of a beetle, which becomes converted into a plant, 
and in the city of Pasto they have frequently been 
seen half in an animal and half in a vegetable state, 
previous to the perfect metamorphosis of the ani 
mal to the plant with roots and tendrils. The ca 
pital of this province was the city of the same 
name, the which is at present destroyed, though 
once situate on the s. shore of the river Caqueta, 
in lat. 132 n. At the present day the capital is 
the settlement of Sibundoy. 

MOCOBI, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito. It runs 
. w. near the settlement of La Santisima Trinidad, 
and empties itself into the Marmore, in lat. 14 
b3 s. 

MOCOBIS, a barbarous nation of Indians, of 
the province and government ofTucuman in Peru, 
to the n. of the city of Cordoba. These Indians 
are ferocious, and in their incursions infest the 
whole province. They extend e. as far as the 
river Ocloyas, and n. as far the district of the city 
of Salta, to the w. as far as the river Salado, and 
to the s. as the fort of San Joseph. They go in 
troops through the woods, and burst suddenly upon 
a settlement and destroy it. In 1668, the go 
vernor Don Alonso Mercado attempted their re 
duction by means of the Jesuits the Fathers Agus- 
tin Fernandez and Pedro Patricio : these succeeded 
in forming with them a treaty of peace, but which 
was soon broken, and when they immediately re 
turned to their hostilities. The Jesuits of the col 
lege of the town of Santa Fe catechised in 1744 
one of their principal caciques named Anacaiqui, 
and he returned a short time after, requesting the 
Spaniards would send back with him a missionary 
of the Jesuits, and found a settlement to which he 
might induce those of his nation to come. The 
governor of Buenos, Don Miguel de Salcedo, ac- 
eecded to his wishes, and giving his commands to 
the provincial of the abolished order of the Jesuits, 
the Father Francisco Burgher was nominated to 
the mission, and he established a numerous reduc- 
cion y with the name_of San Francisco Xavier, 



M O C 

when he was afterwards joined by a brother of 
his order, Miguel dc Zea. What operated against 
a great number of conversions, was the circum 
stance of the continuity of this new settlement to 
the city of Santa Fe ; for the Indians, who had fre 
quent occasion to go to this city, and observing the 
customs there, would tell their instructors that the 
Spaniards acted very differently from what they 
were told to do. This induced the missionaries to 
remove the settlement to a greater distance; and 
then the Mocobis and many Abiporis and other 
nations of Indians flocked to it, and embraced 
the Christianity, in which they have since per 
severed . 

^ MOCODONE, a port of the 5. coast of Nova 
Scotia or Acadia in N. America, between the 
islands Poland and Liscornb. 

MOCOMO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Larecaja in Peru. 

[MOCOMOKO, or LITTLE ORINOCO, a river 
to the s. e. of the great river Orinoco, on the e. 
coast of S. America. Four leagues w. of Amacum.] 

MOCONDINO, called by some Mojonditio, a 
settlement of the province and corregimiento of 
Pasto in the kingdom of Quito. 

MOCORCA, a lake qf the province and ronr- 
gimienlo of Collahuas in Peru, of the district of 
Arequipa, belonging to the settlement of Caba- 
condo. It is three leagues in circumference, and 
in it breeds a certain fish serving as a common 
food for the natives, and which in their language 

II J ? =&amp;gt; O 

is called iipi. 

MOCORETA-GUAZU, a small river of the 
province and government of Buenos Ayres, which 
runs e. and enters the Uruguay between the Tim- 
boy and the following river. 

MocoRETA-RiMi, or MIXT, a small river of the 
same province and government as the former, also 
entering the Uruguay, between the former river 
and the Maudozobo. 

MOCORIPE, a port on the coast of the pro 
vince and captainship of Seara in Brazil, between 
the cape of Las Sierras and the river Koko. 

MOCORITO, a settlement of the missions 
which were held by the Jesuits of the province and 
government of Ginuloa in N. America. 

MOCOYAGUI, a settlement of the missions 
that were held by the Jesuits in the same province 
and government as the former. 

MOGTUN, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district and alcaldia mayor of Villalta in 
Nucva E pana, of a cold temperature, and contain 
ing 15 Indian families. Seven leagues e. of its 
capital. 

MOGUL, a settlement of the province and cor- 



M O H 

regimiento of Maule in tlie kingdom of Chile ; si 
tuate on the shore of the river Colorado. 

MOCUPE, a settlement of the province and 
corrcgimiento of Sana in Peru. 

[MODER AND DAUGHTERS Islands, a long 
islurid t\\o leagues e. by s. of the Father, or 
Vaader island, with two small ones, so called, 
near Cayenne, on the e. coast of S. America, not 
far froni the Constables, and in about lat. 5 n. 
Long. 52 w.~\ 

[MOGHUI.BUGHK1TUM, or MUHULBUCK- 
TITUM, a creek which runs w. to Alleghany river 
in Pennsylvania. It is passable in flat-bottomed 
boats to the settlements in Northumberland county. 
Wheeling is its n. branch.] 

MOCII, a small river of the province and cap 
tainship of San Vicente in Brazil. It rises in 
the mountains near the coast, and runs n. to enter 
the Sapocay. 

MOG1ROIRI, a settlement of the same pro- 
vince and kingdom as the former ; situate on the 
. of the bay of Sun Vicente. 

MOGOTES, SANTA BAUBA HE, a settlement 
of the province and corregiwiento of Tunja in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of an hot tem 
perature, but subject to wet, with frequent tem 
pests of thunder and lightning. It produces 
maize, yucas^ plantains, and sugar canes, of which 
are made good sugars and conserves, called here 
panelas ; this being its principal article of com 
merce, though not without some woven cotton 
stuffs. It is a very healthy country, and where 
people generally live to the age of SO years, and 
some to 100. The inhabitants of this settlement 
amount to 400, who are very poor, and it is 93 
miles n. e. of Tunja, and three e. of the town cf 
San Gil. 

MOGOTES, a river, called also De las Fortelezas, 
in the province and government of Clioco, and 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It rises in the grand 
cordillcra, and traverses the whole kingdom of 
Tierfa Firme ; running n. w. it follows its course 
to Peru, and enters the S. sea near the" cape Cor- 
rientcs. 

MOHANET, a settlement of Indians of the 
province and colony of Pennsylvania in N. Ame 
rica ; situate on the bank of the e. arm of the river 
Susquehannah. 

[MOHAWK River, in New York, rises about 
40 miles to the e. of lake Ontario, about eight 
miles from Black or Sable river, a water of lake 
Ontario, and runs s, 25 miles to fort Schuylcr, 
then c. 80 miles, and after receiving many tribu 
tary streams, falls into Hudson river, by three 
mouths opposite to the cities of Lansinburgh and 



M O H 



Troy, from 7 to 10 miles n. of Albany. The pro 
duce that is conveyed down this river is landed at 
Schenectady, on its s. bank, and is thence con 
veyed by land J6 miles over a barren, sandy, 
shrub plain to Albany. It is in contemplation 
either to cut a canal from Schenectady to the na 
vigable waters of Hudson river, or to establish a 
turnpike road between Schenectady and Albany. 
This fine river is now navigable for boats, from 
Schenectady, nearly or quite to its source, the 
locks and canals round the Little falls, 56 miles 
above Albany, having been completed in the au 
tumn of 1795; so that boats full loaded now pass 
them. The canal round them is nearly three 
quarters of a mile, cut almost the whole distance 
through an uncommonly hard rock. The opening- 
of this navigation is of great advantage to the com 
merce of the state. A shore of at least 1000 miles 
in length is, in consequence of it, washed by boat- 
able waters, exclusive of all the great lakes; and 
many millions of acres of excellent tillage land, 
rapidly settling, are accommodated with water 
communication for conveying their produce to 
market. The intervales on both sides of this 
river are of various widths ; and now and then, in 
terrupted by the projection of the hills quite to the 
banks of the river, are some of the richest and best 
lands in the world. The fine farms which em 
brace these intervales, are owned and cultivated 
principally by Dutch people, whose mode of 
managing them would admit of great improve 
ment. The manure of their barns they consider as 
a nuisance, and instead of spreading it on their up 
land, which they think of little value, (their mea 
dow lands do not require it) they either let it re 
main for years in heaps, and remove their barns, 
when access to them becomes difficult, or else 
throw it into the river, or the gullies and stream* 
which communicate with it. The banks of this 
river were formerly thickly settled with Indians. 
At the period when Albany was first settled, it has 
been said by respectable authority, that there were- 
800 warriors in Schenectady ; and that 300 war 
riors lived within a space which is now occupied 
as one farm. The Cohoez in this river are a great 
curiosity. They are three miles from its entrance 
into the Hudson. The river is about 1000 feeir 
wide ; the rock over which it pours, as over a 
mill-dam, extends from s.w. to n.e. almost in a 
line from one side of the river to the other, and is&amp;gt; 
about 40 feet perpendicular height; and including 
the descent above, the fall is as much as 60 or 70 
feet. About a mile below the falls, is a handsome- 
bridge, finished in July 1795. It is 1100 feet in 
length, 24: iu breadth 3 and 15 feet above the bed of) 



M O H 

the river, which for the most part is rock, and is 
supported by 13 solid stone pillars. It is a free 
bridge, and including the expence of cutting 
through a ledge on the n. e. side of the river, 
cost 12,000 dollars. The river, immediately below 
the bridge, divides into three branches, which form 
several large islands. The branches are fordable 
at low water, but are dangerous. From the bridge 
you have a fine view of the Cohoez on the n. w.] 

[MOHAWK, a branch of the Delaware river. 
Its course from its source in lake Uttayantha is 
s. w. 45 miles, thence s. e. 12 miles, when it min 
gles with the Popachton branch ; thence the con 
fluent stream is called Delaware.] 

[MOHAWK., a town on the s. side of the river of 
its name in Montgomery county, New York ; si 
tuated in one of the most fertile countries in the 
world. It was abandoned by the Mohawk Indians 
in the spring of 1780. See HUNTER Fort. The 
township is bounded n. by Mohawk river, e. and 
s. by Albany county. In 1790, it contained 4440 
inhabitants, including 1 1 1 slaves.] 

[MOHAWKS, an Indian nation, acknowledged 
by the other tribes of the Six Nations to be " the 
true old heads of the confederacy." They were 
formerly very powerful, and inhabited on Mohawk 
river. As they were strongly attached to the 
Johnson family, on account of Sir William John 
son, a part of them emigrated to Canada with Sir 
John Johnson, as early as the year 1776. About 
300 of this nation now reside in Upper Canada. 
See HUNTER Fort and Six NATIONS.] 

[MOHEGAN, situated between Norwich and 
New London in Connecticut. This is the resi 
dence of the remains of the Mohegan tribe of In 
dians. A considerable part of the remains of this 
tribe lately removed to Oneida with the late Mr. 
Occom. See BROTHERTOWN.] 

[MOHICCONS, a tribe of Indians who inhabit 
on a branch of the Susquehannah, between C hag- 
net and Owegy. They were reckoned by Hut- 
chins, about 50 years ago, at 100 ; but by I inlay, 
in 1773, at only 70 fighting men. They were 
formerly a confederate tribe of the Delawares. 
Also an Indian tribe, in the N. W. territory, who 
inhabit near Sandusky, and between the Sciota 
and Muskingum ; warriors, 60.] 

MOII1CKANS, a settlement of Indians, of the 
same province and kingdom as the former ; situate 
on the shore of the river Bever. 

MOHOCAMAC, a settlement of the province 
and colony of New York in N. America ; situate 
on the shore of the e. arm of the river Delaware. 

MOHOSA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Cochabamba in Peru. 



M O L 

MO1NA, a small lake of the province and cor 
regimiento of Quispicanchi in Peru, where a fort 
has been built to restrain the incursions of the in 
fidel Indians. See OROPESA. 

MOINES, a small island within the bay of the 
Cul de Sac Royal in Martinique, very close to the 
coast. 

MO1NGONA, an abundant river of the pro 
vince and government of Louisiana, its origin not 
being known for certain. It runs s. e. for many 
leagues, and enters the Mississippi, traversing some 
immense llanuras^ which abound with buffaloes. 

[MO1NS, a river of Louisiana, which empties 
from the n. w. into the Mississippi, in hit. 393S n. 
The Sioux Indians descend by this river.] 

[MO1SIE River, on the n. shore of the St. 
Lawrence, is about three leagues w. s. w. of Little 
Saguena river, from which to the w. n. w. within 
the Seven Islands, is a bay so called from these 
islands.] 

MO1 FACO, a settlement of the missions that 
were held by the religious observers of San Fran 
cisco, in the province and government of Gnayana. 
It is the first of the establishments which were 
formed there on the shores of the Orinoco, and 
near the mouth of the Caura. 

MOJIBIO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Popayan in the NuevoReynode 
Granada. 

MOJICA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Venezuela ; situate on the shore of 
the river Guarico. 

MO JO IN, a settlement of the province and 
country of Las Ama/onas ; situate on the coast, 
near the entrance of this river into the sea, at the 
cape of Miguari and territory of the Portuguese. 

MOLANGO, SANTA MARIA DE, a settlement 
of the jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor of Meztitlan 
in Nueva Espana. It contains a very good con 
vent of the religions order of San Agustin, and 
480 families of Indians. Fifteen leagues n. n. e. of 
its capital. 

MOLCOCHINECON,asmall river of the pro 
vince and colony of Virginia, running w. and en 
tering the Ohio. 

[1V1OLE, The, is the n. w. cape of the island of 
St. Domingo, to the n. of cape St. Nicholas, and 
is often called by that name. The Mole, though 
inferior, by a great deal, to cape Francois and 
Port au Prince, is the first port in the island for 
safety in time of war, being strongly fortified both 
by nature and art. Count D Estaing, under whose 
direction, these works were constructed, intended 
to have established here the seat of the French go 
vernment ; but the productions of its dependencies 



M O L 

\\cre of too little value to engage his successors to 
carry his plan into effect ; so that it is now no 
more than a garrison. It has a beautiful and safe 
port, and is considered as the healthiest situation 
in St. Domingo, by reason of the purity of its 
springs. The exports from January 1, 1789, 
to December 31, of the same year, were only 
265,615 Ib. coffee, 26,861 Ib. cotton, 2,823 Ib. 
indigo, and olhcr small articles to the value of 
129 livres. The value of duties on exportation 
J,250 dollars, 21 cents. It is 14 miles s. by zv. of 
Jean Rabel, 69 re. of cape Francois, and 48 w. by 
s. of Port de Paz. Lat. 19 51 n. Long. 73 
26 30" a?.] 

MOLEQUES, Rio DE LOS, a small river of 
the district of Matogroso in Brazil, which rises in 
the mountains, and runs s.w. to enter the Itenes. 

MOLINA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Esrneraldas in the kingdom of Quito. It 
runs between the rivers Santiago and Vainillas to 
the n. w. and enters the Pacific or S. sea, to the n. 
of the equator. 

MOLINA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Costarica in the kingdom of Guate 
mala ; situate on the shore of the river of Los An- 
zuelos, on the coast. 

[MOLINE S Gut, on the s.w. side of the 
island of St. Christopher s in the W. Indies, is 
the first rivulet to the s. e. of Brimstone hill, near 
the mouth of which is anchorage in five and 10 fa 
thoms, and a clear shore ; but to the e. of it are 
some sunken rocks.] 

MOLINO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of lea in Peru, annexed to the cu 
racy of San Juan de lea. 

MOLINO, another settlement, of the kingdom 
of Chile ; situate on the shore of the river Cauten. 

MOLINO, a small island, situate near the n. coast 
of the island St. Domingo, and the promontory of 
Monte Christi, between the islands Arenosa and 
Crisin. 

MOLl-TATUBA,asmalI river of the province 
and captainship of Seara in Brazil. It runs n. and 
enters the sea on the coast of Los Ilumos, between 
the island of Coruban and the settlement of Mana- 
pirange. 

MOLLEAMBATO, SAN MIGUEL DR, a set 
tlement of the province and corrtgimierito of Lu- 
tacunga in the kingdom of Quito. 

MOLLEBAMBA, a settlement of the province 
and correginiieHlo of Airmtrnc/ in Peru. 

MOLLEBAYA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Moquchua in Peru ; annex 
ed to the curacy of Pocsi. 

MOLLEPATA, a settlement of the province 

VOL. III. 



MOM 



and corregimiento of Guamachuco in Peru; one 
of the four districts into which the curacy of Es- 
tancias is divided. 

MOLLKPATA, another settlement, in the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Abancai of the same 
kingdom. 

MOLLEPATA, another, of the province and 
corregimiento of Conch ucos in the same kingdom; 
situate on the shore of the river Tablachica. 

MOLLEPONGO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Chimbo in the kingdom of 
Quito, of the district of Alausi. 

MOLLETUROj a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Cuenca in the kingdom of 
Quito. 

MOLLOBAMBA, a settlement of the pro- 
vince and corregimiento of Chancay in Peru ; an 
nexed to the curacy of Canchas. 

MOLOACAN, SANTIAGO DE, a settlement 
and head settlement of the district of the alcaldia 
mayor of Acayuca in Nueva Espafia. It con 
tains 1 09 families of Ah ualulcos Indians, including 
those of its adjoining ward. It is 18 leagues e. 
4- s. e. of its capital. 

MOLUEDEC, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Chilian in the kingdom of 
Chile ; opposite the lakes of the Desaguadero on 
the ro. 

MOMAS, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district of Tlaltenango, and alcaldia mayor 
of Colotlan, in Nueva Espana. Three leagues 
n. n. w. of its head settlement. 

MOMBACIIA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Nicaragua in the kingdom of 
Guatemala! 

MOMIL, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Cartagena in the JVuevo Reyno de 
Granada, of the district of the town of Sinu ; 
situate on the shore of the river of this name, be 
tween the settlements of San Juan and San Andres. 
MOMOSTENANGO, a settlement of the pro 
vince and alcaldia mayor of Gueguetenango in the 
same kingdom as the former. 

MOMPON, SENAL DE, a .mountain of the coast 
of Peru, in the province and corregimienlo of Santa; 
serving as a land-mark for vessels off that coast. 

MOM POX, SANTA CRUZ DE, a great and rich 
town of the province and government of Carta 
gena in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada; founded 
on the fr. shore of the river of La Magdalena, on 
the n. of Honda and 5. e. of Cartagena, by Gero- 
nimo de Santa Cruz, who gave it his name, in 
loiO. It is of an healthy temperature, although 
warm and very moist, as being surrounded with 
swamps. It is the embarking place of the river 



314 



M O N 



which leads to the provinces of the NuevoReyno ; by 
a commerce v. itli which it is rendered very rich and 
flourishing. It is fertile and abounds in vegetable 
productions, and especially in cacao, cotton, sugar 
cane, and tobacco. The natives make mats of 
straw which they call petatcs, fans, and other 
articles, much esteemed for their beauty through 
out the kingdom. In this town is a royal custom 
house, where goods and merchandize going to the 
Nuevo Reyno pay a certain duty. It has a very 
good parish church, some convents of the religious 
orders of San Francisco, San Agustin, San Juan 
de Dios, and had a college of the Jesuits. It is 
inhabited by various noble and rich families, but 
the natives have the character of being haughty 
and litigious. It is greatly infested with rnusqui- 
toes and by alligators, which come up the river to 
feed upon what is thrown from the city and the 
albarrada, which is a strong stone wall to keep the 
water from running into the streets, indeed, this 
city has been frequently inundated by the swelling 
of the waters, and particularly in J762, when 
the inhabitants were obliged to desert their houses 
and save themseves in canoes. 

[MONA, or LA GUENON, or The M.ONE, a 
small island, 38 miles 5. e. of cape Engano, which 
is the most e. point of the island of St. Domingo, 
and SS miles w. by n. of cape Morrilos hi the island 
of Porto Rico. It is five miles from e. to o&amp;gt;. and 
a little less from n. to s. It has several ports for 
small vessels, plenty of good water, and all that 
would be necessary for settlements of culture, and 
the breeding of cattle. Its fruit-trees, and parti 
cularly the orange, are much extolled. Two miles 
and a half n. w. of Mona is a very small island, 
called Monito, or the Little Monkey. The king 
Don Fernando the Catholic gave this island as a 
property tothe admiral Don Christopher Columbus, 
with a repartimienfo of 200 Indians. The English 
disembarked upon it in 1521. It is at an equal 
distance from St. Domingo and Puerto Rico.J 

MONACACI, a small river of the province 
and colony of Maryland in N. America, of the 
district of Frederick county. It runs s. and en 
ters the Patowmac. 

[MONADNOCK, GREAT, amountain, situated 
in Cheshire county, New Hampshire, between the 
towns of Jafiray and Dublin, 10 miles n. of the 
Massachusetts line, and 22 miles e. of Connecti 
cut river. The foot of the hill is 1395 feet, and 
its summit 3254 feet above the level of the sea. 
Its base is five miles in diameter from n. to s. and 
three from e. to w. On the sides are some appear 
ances of subterraneous fires. Its summit is a bald 
rock.] 



M O N 

[MONADNOCK, UPPER GREAT, a high moun 
tain in Canaan, in the n. e. corner of the state 
of Vermont.] 

[MONAllAN, a township in York county, 
Pennsylvania.] 

MON ATOMY, a town of the county of Mid 
dlesex and bay of Massachusetts, three miles n. of 
Waterton, and four n. w. of Cambridge. 

MONBATECEl, a river of the province and 
government of Paraguay, risjng in the serranias 
between the rivers Paraguay and Parana. It runs 
w. and enters the former between the Monbemboi 
and the Taquari. 

MONBEMBOI, a small river of the same pro 
vince and government as the former. It has the 
same rise and course, and also enters the Para 
guay- 

MONCLOUA, a town and capital of the pro 
vince and alcaldia mayor of Coaguila or Coha- 
huiln, founded by order of the viceroy of Nueva 
Espaiia, with this title. It has in it a garrison of 
troops for the defence of the frontiers, and to re 
strain the infidel Indians. It contains 150 fami 
lies of Spaniards, and is 258 leagues to the n. of 
Mexico, in lat. 27 50 . Long. 270 5 . [This 
military post is now, accord ing to Humboldt, under 
the intendancy of San Luis Potosi.] 

MONDAHU, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Seara in Brazil, which rises near 
the coast, runs n. and enters the Guru in its mid- 
course. 

MON DAI, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Paraguay, running s. e. and entering the 
Parana. 

MONDAQUE, a settlement of Indians of the 
province and government of Louisiana ; situate in 
the road which leads to Nuevo Mexico, not far 
from the river of La Trinidad. 

[MONDAY Bay, on the s. shore of the straits 
of Magellan, in that part of the straits called the 
Long Reach, and four leagues w. of Pisspot bay. 
It is nearly s. of Buckley point, on the n. side of 
the strait, and affords good anchorage in 20 fa- 
thorns.] 

[MONDAY, a cape in the above straits, seven 
leagues w. n. w. of cape North. Lat. 53 12 s. 
Long. 73 30 ei&amp;gt;.] 

MONFEIIRATO, NUESTRA SBXORA DE, a 
settlement of the province and captainship of Per- 
nambuco in Brazil ; situate on the coast, on the 
shore of the Bahia Grande or Puerto Calvo. 

MONGA-AGUA, a river of the province and 
captainship of San Vicente in Brazil. It enters 
the sea opposite the island of Nucstra Senora. 

MONGANGAPE, a small river of the pro- 



M O N 

vince and captainship of Paraiba in Brazil. It 
rises near the coast, runs e. and enters the sea at 
the cape of Led a and settlement of Jorge Pinto. 

MONGAGUABA, a settlement of the province 
and captains/lip of Pernambuco in Brazil ; situate 
on the coast and at the point of Las Piedras. 

MONGAGUEIRA, SIERRA DE, a cordillera 
of mountains of the province and captainship of 
Tod os Santos in Brazil. It runs n. n. e. following 
the course of the river Del Real. 

MONGAUE1RAS, a settlement of the island 
of Joanes or Marajo in Brazil ; situate on an arm 
of the river of Las Amazonas, opposite the Gran 
Para. 

MONGE, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres. It runs e. and enters the 
Parana close to the settlement of Calchaqui. 

MONGES, some farallones or isles of the N. 
sea ; situate near the coast of the province and go 
vernment of Santa Maria, 10 leagues from the 
point of Mazola. 

MONGES, a river of the kingdom of Brazil, 
which rises at the foot of the Sierra Grande, runs 
n. n. e. and enters the Tocantines between that of 
Santa Lucia and that of Corijas. 

MONGON, a cape or point and extremity of 
the island of Cuba, close to the Caico Grande or 
del N. looking s. and near to that of Caico Pe- 

o 

queno. 

[MONGON, on the coast of Peru and province 
of Santa, on the S. Pacific ocean, is 20 miles n. 
of the harbour of Guarmey, and four leagues 
from Bermejo island, which lies between the former 
places. Casma is four leagues n. of it. Mongon 
is known at sea by a great mountain just over it, 
which is seen farther than any others on this part 
of the coast. Lat. 9 49 .] 

[MONGON, Cape, on thcs. side of the island of 
St. Domingo, is 3000 fathoms n. of point Baho- 
ruco and the river Nayanco, and nearly s. of the 
little port of Petit Trou.] 

MONGRAUE, a small island of the N. sea, 
one of the Lucayas, and the last at the mouth or 
entrance of the canal of Bahama. 

MONGUA, a settlement of the province and 
correghnienlo of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It is of a very cold temperature, 
abounding in wheat, barley, beans, maize, and 
pig-nuts, the which when put into a hole with 
water, and this being often changed, make a kind 
of fetid oil, which they call futes, and which is 
taken as an excellent stomachic. Its population 
may amount to 80 persons, and about as many In 
dians. Ten leagues n. e. of Tunja. 

MONGUI, NUESTKA SENOUA DE, a settle- 



M O N 



315 



ment of the province and correghnienlo of Tunja 
in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada; of a cold tem 
perature, producing some fruits of this climate. 
It has a good convent of monks of San Francisco, 
in which is venerated an image of the Virgen del 
Rosario, with the child Jesus in her arms, and St. 
Joseph on the side, the same having been painted 
by the Emperor Charles V. who sent it to this 
settlement with some rich ornaments, as an ac 
knowledgment to it as having been the first settle 
ment of that kingdom which had voluntarily offered 
obedience to the crown of Castillo. At its en 
trance runs a large river called La Quebrada, over 
which there is a stone bridge of beautiful archi 
tecture. Eight leagues n. e. of Tunja. 

MONGUI, another settlement, with the addi 
tional title of Charala, to distinguish it from the 
former ; in the jurisdiction and district of the town, 
of San Gil and of the same kingdom. It is a large 
population, of a moderately hot temperature, and 
healthy, though subject to rains ; produces great 
quantity of cotton, maize, and tartu files, with 
which the neighbouring towns are provided, espe 
cially that of Socorro. It abounds equally in 
plantains, uyamaS) and a variety of fruits, as also 
in exquisite kinds of woods. Some cotton-stuffs 
are made here, though little esteemed. Its popu 
lation consists of 2000 souls, and it is situate be 
tween two fine rivers abounding with delicious 
water. It is seven leagues s. e. of San Gil, and 
three e. of Socorro. 

MoNGur, another, of the province and corrc- 
gimienlo of Parinacochas in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Pampamarca. 

[MONHEGAN, or MENIIEGAN, a small 
island in the Atlantic ocean, 12 miles s. e. of PC- 
maquid point, in Lincoln county, district of Maine, 
and in lat. 43 42 . North of it are a number of 
small isles at the mouth of St. George s river. 
Captain Smith landed his party here in 1614. The 
chimneys and remains of the houses are yet to be 
seen.] 

[MONHETOU Islands, in the N, W. terri 
tory, lie towards the e. side of the Michigan lake, 
towards its n. end, and s. of Beaver islands.] 

MONI, a large and copious river of the pro 
vince and government of Maraiian in Brazil. Its 
shores are delightfully pleasant, and the imme 
diate soil yields the best sugar-cane in the whole 
kingdom. It empties itself in the gulf of San. 
Luis de Maranan. On the w. near its source and 
amidst some very thick woods, dwells a nation of 
barbarian Indians, the Tapayos. 

MONICA, SANTA, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 

8 S 2 



316 



M O N 



Marinalco in Nueva Espana, from whence it is a 
little more than half a league s distance. 

MONICA, SANTA, another, a small settlement 
or ward of the head settlement of the district of 
Ocuila, and of the same alcaldia mayor and king 
dom as the former. 

MONICA, SANTA, a port on the s. coast of the 
strait of Magellan, close to cape Pilares, and at 
its entrance by the S. sea. 

MONIGOTE, a settlement of the province and 
government of Buenos Ay res ; situate on the shore 
of the river Saladillo, between this river and the 
lake Brava. 

MON IQ UI RI, a settlement of the corregimiento 
of the jurisdiction of Velez in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, of an hot temperature, but healthy, fer 
tile, and abounding in all the fruits of a warm 
climate, especially sugar-canes, of which are made 
great quantities of sugar by the engines or mills for 
the purpose. It also abounds in excellent water, 
i/ucas, plantains, and mnize, and they make here 
delicate conserves, sweet-meats, and honey, which 
are much esteemed in the other provinces where 
they are sold. It contains 500 house-keepers, and 
is eight leagues to the e. of Velez, and four from 
Leiba. 

MON1TO, EL, a small island of the N.sea; 
situate close to that of La Mona, to the n. between 
those of Saona and Puerto Rico. 

MONK S-NECK, a small river of the province 
and colony of Virginia, in the county of Bruns 
wick. It runs 5. e. and enters the Nottaway. 

[MONKTON, a township in Addison county, 
Vermont, e. of Ferrisburgh, and contains 450 in 
habitants.] 

[MONKTON, a township in Annapolis county, 
Nova Scotia, inhabited by Acadians, and a few 
families from New England. It lies partly on the 
basin of Annapolis, and partly on S. Mary s bay, 
and consists chiefly of wood-land and salt-marsh. 
It contains about 60 families.], 

MONLEO, a settlement of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of San Miguel in the kingdom of 
Guatemala; annexed to that of Yayantique. 

[MONMOUTH, a large maritime county of 
New Jersey, of a triangular shape, SO miles in 
length, and from 25 to 40 in breadth ; bounded n. 
by part of Rariton bay, n. w. by Middlesex county, 
s. w. by Burlington, and e. by the ocean. It is 
divided into six townships, and contains 16,918 
inhabitants, including 1596 slaves. The face of 
the country is generally level, having but few hills. 
The most noted of these are the highlands of 
Navcsink and Centre hill. See MIDDLETOWN. 
A great part of the county is of a sandy soil, but 



other parts are fertile. There is a very curious 
cave, now in ruins, at the mouth of Navcsink 
river, 30 feet long and 15 wide, and contains three 
arched apartments.] 

[MONMOUTH, or FREEHOLD, a post-town of 
New Jersey, and capital of the above county ; 
situated 18 miles n. e. by e. of Allentown, 25 e. 
of Trenton, 12 s. w. by s. of Shrewsbury, and 46 
n. e. bye. of Philadelphia. It contains a court 
house and gaol, and a few compact dwelling- 
houses. This town is remarkable for the battle 
fought within its limits- on the 27th of June 1778, 
between the armies of General Washington and 
Sir Henry Clinton. The latter having evacuated 
Philadelphia, was on his march to New York. 
The loss of the Americans, in killed and woundcdj 
was about 250 ; that of the British, inclusive of 
prisoners, was about 350. The British pursued 
their march the night after, without the loss of 
their covering party or baggage. See FREE- 
HOT,]).] 

[MONMOUTH, a small post-town in Lincoln 
county, district of Maine; situated to the e. of 
Androscoggin river, 10 miles w. of Hallowell 
court-house, five w. of Winthrop, seven n. e. by 
n. of Greene, 39 w. of Portland, and 125 n. by e. 
of Boston.] 

[MONMOUTH Cape, on the .?. e. side of the straits 
of Magellan, about halfway from the 5. entrance 
of the second narrows, to the s. e. angle of the 
straits opposite cape Forward.] 

[MONMOUTH Island, one of the four islands of 
Royal reach, in the straits of Magellan, and the 
second from the r&amp;lt;y.] 

MONO and MONA. Some small barren and 
desert isles of the N. sea, amongst the Antilles ; 12 
leagues to the w. of the point of La Aguada of 
Puerto Rico, in long. 308 4 . Lat. 18 4 . 

[MONOCACY, a river which after a s. s. z&amp;. 
course, empties into the Patowmac, about 50 miles 
above Georgetown.] 

MONONEP1OUI, a small river of New 
France or Canada, which runs s. w. and enters 
lake Superior. 

[MONONGAHELA River, a branch of the 
Ohio, is 400 yards wide at its junction witii the 
Alleghany at Pittsburg. It is deep, gentle, and 
navigable with batteaux and barges beyond Red 
Stone creek, and still further with lighter craft. 
It rises at the foot of the Laurel mountain in Vir 
ginia, thence meandering in a n. by e. direction, 
passes into Pennsylvania, and receives Cheat river 
from the s. s. e. thence winding in a n. by w. 
course, separates Fayette and Westmoreland from 
Washington county, and passing into Alleghany 



M O N 

county, joins the Alleghany river at Pittsburg, and 
forms the Ohio. It is 300 yards wide 12 or 15 
miles from its mouth, where it receives the You- 
ghiogany from the s. e. which is navigable with 
batteaux and barges to the foot of Laurel hill. 
Thence to Red Stone, at fort Byrd, by water, is 
50 miles, by land 30, and 18 in a straight line. 
Thence to the mouth of Cheat river, by water 40 
miles, by land 28 ; the width continuing at 300 
yards, and the navigation good for boats. Thence 
the width is about 200 yards to the w. fork, 50 
miles higher, by water, and the navigation fre 
quently interrupted by rapids ; which, however, 
with a swell of two or three feet, become very 
passable for boats. It then admits light boats, 
except in dry seasons, 65 miles farther, by water, 
to the head of Tygart s valley, presenting only 
some small rapids and falls of one or two feet per 
pendicular, and lessening in its width to 20 yards. 
The w. fork is navigable in the winter, towards the 
n. branch of the Little Kanhaway, and will admit 
a good waggon road to it. From the navigable 
waters of the s. easternmost branch of the Monon- 
gahela, there is a portage of 10 miles to the s. 
branch of Patowmac river. The hills opposite 
Pittsburg on the banks of this river, which are at 
least 300 feet high, appear to be one solid body of 
coal. On the Pike run of this river, a coal-hill 
has been on fire 10 years, yet it has burnt away 
only 20 yards.] 

[MONONGALIA, a county in the n. w. part 
of Virginia, about 40 miles long and 30 broad, 
and contains 4768 inhabitants, including 154 
slaves.] 

MONOS, ISLAS DE. Some islands in the N. 
sea, near the coast of the kingdom of Tierra Firme, 
in the bay of Garrote, in the jurisdiction and go 
vernment of Portovelo. They are many, all small, 
barren and desert, and peopled only by monks ; 
from whence the_y are so called. 

MONOS, one of the mouths of Los Dragos to 
enter the gulf Trieste, between the point of Paria 
on the coast of Tierra Firme, and the w. point of 
the island Trinidad ; situate between this island 
and a very small isle lying at the same rhumb and 
mouth. 

MONPATAR, a settlement of the island and 
government of La Margarita; situate at the 
point of Ballenas, opposite the coast of Tierra 
Firme. 

[MONPOX, a city of Tierra Firme, about 75 
miles s. e. by e. of Tolu.] 

MONQUIRA, a settlement of the corrcgi- 
m/cnto of Sachica, in the jurisdiction of the town 
of Leiba and Nuevo Reyno de Gianada, only a 



M O N 



quarter of a league distant from the latter; of a 
benign temperature, and producing wheat and 
seeds. 

MONSAUILACIIA, a small river of the pro 
vince and government of Buenos Ayres, which 
runs n. n. w. and enters the Cota. 

[MONSEAG Bay, in Lincoln county, district 
of Maine, is separated from Sheepscut river by the 
island of Jeremysquam.] 

MONSEFU, a small but pleasant and pretty 
settlement of the province and corrcgimiento of 
Sana in Peru, and of the district of Larnbaycque, 
from whence it is five leagues distant. 
MONSERRAT. [See MONTSEHRAT.] 
[MONS1ES, the third tribe in rank ofthc Dela 
ware nation of Indians.] 

MONSIEUR, a small isle of the N. sea, 
situate near the s.c. coast of Martinique. It forms, 
with two other islands and the point of Rose, a 
great port called Cul de Sac Robert. 

[MONSON, a Jownshipin Hampshire county, 
Massachusetts, e. of Brimfield, and 55 miles s. a. 
by w. of Boston. It was incorporated in 1760, 
and contains 1331 inhabitants.] 

MONT Louis, a road of the river St. Law 
rence in New France or Canada. It is the mouth 
of a river which enters into the aforesaid river, and 
offers a good sounding, though exposed to the n. 
wind, but this seldom blows in the spring. It is 
capable of admitting vessels of ICO tons, where 
they may lie secure from tempests and from ene 
mies, but they cannot enter but at high tide, since 
at the ebb there is no more than two feet water. It 
is equally easy to be defended, having on one side 
inaccessible mountains, and on the other a penin 
sula, on which might be built a fort. From these 
advantages, Mr. lliverin was induced in 1697 to 
establish a cod-fishery, for which purpose he esta 
blished a company ; but just as he was about to 
put his design into execution, and the ships with 
all their necessaries were setting sail for the new 
establishment, the Count of Frontenac received 
advice of a probable rupture with the English, 
and he broke up the expedition. In 1700, the 
same Mr. Riverin attempted it again, but having 
arrived at Mont Louis at a late season for the fish, 
and those engaged with him not deriving ihe ;id- 
vantages they were led to expect, he found him 
self, through want of assistance, to abandon, for 
the second time, his project. 

[MONTAGUE, a township in Hampshire 
county, Massachusetts, on the e. bank of Con 
necticut river, between Sunderland and Wcndel, 
about 18 miles n. of Northampton, and 70 miles 
w. by n. of Boston. It was incorporated in 1753, 

2 



M O N 



and contains 906 inhabitants. A company was 
incorporated in 1792, to build a bridge over here. 
The work has not yet been completed.] 

[MONTAGUE, the northernmost township in 
New Jersey, is situated in Sussex county, on the 
e. side of Delaware river, about five miles n. e. of 
Minisink, and 17 n. of Nevvtown. It contains 543 
inhabitants, including 25 slaves.] 

[MONTAGUE, the largest of the small islands in 
Prince William s sound, on the n. to. coast of N. 
America.] 

MONTALUAN, S. BAPTISTA DEL PAO DE, 
a town of the province and government of Vene 
zuela in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, founded 
in this century (1700), after the establishment of 
the company of Guipuzcoa. 

MONTANA, S. FRANCISCO DE LA, a settle 
ment of the province and government of Santiago 
de Veragua in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. It 
is of an hot temperature, fertile, abounding in 
vegetable productions, and in gold mines, which 
are named De la Libertad of Aguacatal and of San 
Francisco, and in the vicinity of which there is a 
mill for grinding metals, erected in 1749 by Don 
Geronimo Sancho. The settlement is situate on 
the top of a mountain towards the n. coast, three 
leagues from its capital. 

MONTANA, another settlement, in the province 
and government of Popayan, of the district of the 
city of Pasto. 

MONTANAS, SANTIAGO DE LAS, a city of 
the province and government of Jaen de Braca- 
moros in the kingdom of Quito, founded by the 
Captain Juan de Salinas ; of a very unequal tem 
perature, and of a rough and rocky territory, as 
its name shews, and so reduced and poor that it 
does not deserve the name of a city. The soil is, 
however, fertile ; nor is it without mines of gold 
of excellent quality, but which are not worked 
through scarcity of hands and means. One hun 
dred and fifty-eight miles e. of Loyola, on the n. 
bank of the river S. Yago, and six miles n. w. of 
S. Borja. 

[MONTAUK Point, the e. extremity of Long 
island, New York. A tract here, called Turtle 
Hill, has been ceded to the United States for the 
purpose of building a light-house thereon.] 

MONTE, [the Spanish word for mountain : 
for the chief mountains in America, see MOUN 
TAINS.] 

[MONTE, a fort of the province and government 
of Buenos Ayres ; situate near a small lake, about 
60 miles s. w. of Buenos Ayres. Lat. 35 25 40". 
Long. 59 50 54".] 

[MONTE CHRIST, a cape, bay, town, and river, 



on the n. side of the island of St. Domingo. 

of a 



The 

cape is a very high hill, in the form of a tent, 
called by the French Cape la Grange, or Barn. It 
is situated in lat. 19 54 30" n. and in long. 71 
44 w. A strip of level land joins it to the territory 
of Monte Christ, and it is owing to this that the 
cape has been taken for an island. It is 29 miles 
n. e. by e. of cape Francois, where it may be seen 
in a clear day with the naked eye. After doubling 
this cape, we find the bay of Monte Christ running 
nearly s. w. It is formed by cape La Grange on 
one side, and point Des Dunes (Down point) on 
the other, about 6500 fathoms asunder. The bay 
is about 1400 fathoms deep, and its winding is 
nearly four leagues. About 900 fathoms from the 
cape, descending the bay, we find the little island 
of Monte Christ, 350 fathoms from the shore. 
One may sail between the two, with two, four, and 
five fathoms water ; and about 250 fathoms further 
on, is anchorage in from six to ten fathoms. A 
league and a quarter from cape La Grange, is a 
battery intended to protect a landing place of 100 
fathoms wide, which is below and opposite the 
town of Monte Christ. The town of Monte Christ^ 
standing at 800 fathoms from the sea-side, rises in 
form of an amphitheatre on the side of the coast, 
which is very high all round this bay. The town 
is 200 fathoms square, which space is divided 
into nine parts, cut by two streets running from e. 
to w. and two others from n. to s. It was founded 
in 1533, abandoned in 1606, and now but a poor 
place, destitute of every resource but that of cattle 
raised in its territory, and sold to the French. The 
town and territory contain about 3000 souls. There 
is a trifling garrison at Monte Christ. About a 
league from the battery, following the winding of 
the bay, is the river of Monte Christ, or more 
properly, the river Yaqui. The land round the 
town is barren and sandy, and the river contains 
great numbers of crocodiles. Monte Christ is a 
port well known to American smugglers, and car 
ries on a great commerce from its vicinity to the 
French plantations. In the time of peace, all the 
produce of the plain of Mariboux, situated be 
tween port Dauphin and Mancenille bay, is ship 
ped here, and in a war between France and Bri 
tain, it used to be a grand market, to which all 
the French in the n. part of the island sent their 
produce, and where purchasers were always 
ready.] 

[MONTE CHRIST, a chain of mountains which 
extend parallel to the w. coast of the island of St. 
Domingo, from the bay of Monte Christ to the 
bay of Samana on the e. Two large rivers run in 
opposite directions along the s.. side of this chain i 



M O N 

ijie river Monte Christ or Yaqui in a w. by s. 
direction, and Yuna river in an e. by s. course to 
the bay of Samana. They both rise near La Vega, 
and have numerous branches.] 

MONTE CHIUSTI, a settlement of the district 
of the Puerto Viejo, in the province and govern 
ment of Guayaquil, and kingdom of Quito ; situate 
on the sea-shore. It was formerly in Manta, and 
large and populous, from traffic done here by the 
vessels going from Panama to the ports of Peru ; 
but having been destroyed and sacked by pirates, 
with whom those seas at that time were covered, 
the inhabitants retired to the spot where the settle 
ment now stands, at the foot of the mountain from 
whence it takes its name, and which serves as a 
land-mark to vessels for making the port of Manta, 
it being one of the loftiest mountains on that coast. 
MONTE CHRISTI, a small island close to the n. 
coast of St. Domingo, between the island Madera 
and the port La Granja. 

MONTE DE PLATA, a port on the coast of Cali 
fornia of the S. sea, discovered by General Sebas 
tian, a Biscayan, in 1602, when he was sent by the 
viceroy of Nueva Espana, the Count de Monterrey, 
to reconnoitre that coast, and in honour of whom 
he thus named it. It is large, convenient, and shel 
tered from all the winds, abounds in wood, and 
has some fine straight firs fit for ship-masts, oaks, 
beech, and various other kinds of fine timber ; also 
many fountains of rich water, lakes, fertile glens 
and meadows, and excellent land for agriculture. 
In its woods are found a variety of animals, and 
particularly great bears, and some animals as large 
as a young ox, in shape like a stag, with hair like 
a pelican of a quarter of a yard in length, long 
neck, and on the head some very large horns, with 
a tail of a yard long and half a yard wide, and the 
hoof cleft like that of an ox. Here are also deer, 
stags, hares, rabbits, wild cats, bustards, ducks, 
swallows, geese, doves, thrushes, sparrows, gold 
finches, cardenals, quails, partridges, feldfares, and 
various other birds, also Indian fowl of a large sort, 
measuring from the extremity of one wing to the 
other seven palms. On the sea-shore are various 
sorts of shell-fish, and some with shells of most 
beautiful mother of pearl : here are also taken 
oysters, lobsters, crabs, marine wolves, and whales. 
The whole of the port is surrounded by Indians ; 
who live in huts, are of a docile disposition, kind 
and liberal, and using the bow and arrow for wea 
pons. They seemed to express great sorrow when 
the Spaniards left them. 

MONTE DE PLATA, a settlement of the island of 
St. Domingo, taking its name from a lofty moun 
tain of white stone discovered by Admiral Don 



M O N 



319 



Christopher Columbus in his first voyage in 1493, 
and who thought it was silver. It has a good port, 
which the French call Portoplate, from the name 
that had been given it by the Spaniards of Puerto 
de Plata, and which was also the name of the settle 
ment. This, on account of its being exposed to 
the incursions of pirates, was removed in 1606 to 
the place where it now stands, and nearer to the 
mountain. 

MONTE ESTANCIA, a lake of the province and. 
government of Buenos Ay res, between the rivers 
Hueque Leuvu and Saladillo. 

MONTE LEON, a settlement and head settlement 
of the district of the ulcaldia mayor of Tepozcolula 
in Nueva Espana ; of a cold temperature, inha 
bited by 52 families of Indians, who maintain 
themselves by cultivating and selling seeds. Five 
leagues s.e. of its capital. 

MONTE, REAL DEL, a settlement of the jurisdic 
tion and alcaldia mayor of Pachuca in Nueva 
Espana. It contains 80 families of Spaniards, 
Mustees, and Mulattoes, employed in mining and 
preparing the silver when extracted. This is their 
principal commerce. The Indians are also, some 
of them, employed in this labour, although they are 
rather dedicated to agriculture, the sowing of wheat, 
maize, and other seeds. This settlement is much 
frequented by traders who carry to Mexico cloths 
and other articles, taking silver in exchange. Two 
leagues e.n.e. of its capital. 

MONTE, REAL DEL, another settlement, \vithth 
dedicatory title of San Rafael, in the head settle 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Guejo- 
zingo in the same kingdom ; contains 54 families 
of Indians, and is to the w. of its capital. 

MONTE, REAL DEL, another, with thededicatory 
title of San Miguel, of the head settlement of the 
district ofEtequaro, and alcaldia mayor of Valla- 
dolid,of the province and bishopric of Mechoacan. 
It is six leagues to the n. Of its head settlement, and 
in its district are some cultivated estates, by which 
and the cutting of wood the natives maintain 
themselves. 

MONTE, REAL DEL, another, of the province and 
government of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. 

MONTE, REAL DEL, another, called Boca del 
Monte, in the province and government of Mnra- 
caibo, and Nuevo Reyno de Granada; situates, 
of the city of Pedraza. 

MONTE, REAL DEL, another, with the addition 
of San Juan, in the province and captainship of 
Rey in Brazil ; situate on the shore and at the 
source of the river Tajay. 

MONTE, REAL DEL, a town of the province ami 



320 



M O N 



M O N 



correginn ento of Mdipilla in the kingdom of Chile; 
situate to the w. of its capital. 

MONTE REDONDO, a settlement of the province; 
and government of Tucuman, in the jurisdiction 
of the city of Cordoba; situate on the bunk of a 
small river. 

MONTE TRIGO, a small island of the N. soa ; 
situate near the coast of the province and captain 
ship of San Vicente in Brazil; between the island 
San Felipe and Santiago, and the great island of 
San Sebastian. 

MONTE VIDEO, a city of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayres i" Peru : founded on 
the n. shore of the river La Plata, at its month or 
entrance, by order of the field-marshal Don Bruno 
de Zavala, in 17^6, by Don Domingo de Vasavil- 
vaso. It is a small place, having only one parish 
and a convent of the religious order of San Fran 
cisco, although it had once an house of entertain 
ment of the regulars of the company of Jesuits. It 
is situate on a lofty spot, upon a great and conve 
nient bay, which is frequented by vessels going to 
Buenos Ayres. It has a citadel or castle, which is 
badly constructed, with four bulwarks and some 
batteries for its defence: the same is the residence 
of the governor. The town, which is well for 
tified with a strong wall and sufficient artillery, is 
inhabited by more than 1000 souls, amongst whom 
are some rich and noble families. The climate is 
excellent, cheerful, and healthy, the soil fertile and 
abounding in vegetable productions, and flesh and 
fish are so plentiful as to cost almost nothing. Its 
principal commerce consists in the hides of cattle, 
and these are killed merely for the above per 
quisites. It is 111 miles e. s. e. from Buenos 
Ayres, in lat. 34 50 30" s. and long. 56 16 ro. 

[Few places in Spanish America have experienced 
a greater change in their political consequence 
and physical energies, since the time Alcedo wrote, 
than that of which we are now treating. Inde 
pendently of its present litigations with Buenos 
Ayres, it has been rendered famous in history by 
the English expedition which visited the river La 
Plata in 1806. It was for some little time in pos 
session of the British troops, and finally evacuated 
at the beginning of September 1807. The follow 
ing description of Monte Video and the adjoining 
country is extracted from the Travels of Mr. Maw r c ; 
Vic divide the information under the following heads. 
Site of the town. Population. Character of the, 
inhabitants. Trade. Geological remarks. 
Ditto on the country n. e. of Monte Video.- 
lAmeslone^ and mode of burning it. Peons. 
Horses. Defective state of agriculture. Man 
ners and dress of the natives. Wild animals. 



Monte Video is a tolerably well-built town, 
standing on a gentle elevation at the extremity 
of a small peninsula, and is walled entirely 
round. Its population amounts to between 15,000 
and 20,000 souls. The harbour, although shoal, 
and quite open to the pamperos , is the best in 
the Rio de la Plata ; it has a very soft bottom of 
deep mud. When the wind continues for some 
time at n. e. ships drawing 12 feet water are fre 
quently aground for several days, so that the 
harbour cannot be called a good one for vessels 
above 300 or 400 tons. 

There are but few capital buildings ; the town 
in general consists of houses of one story, paved 
with brick, and provided with very poor conveni 
ences. In the square is a cathedral, very handsome, 
bnt awkwardly situated ; opposite to it, is an edi 
fice divided into a town-house or cabildo, and a 
prison. The streets, having no pavement, are al 
ways either clouded with dust or loaded with mud, 
as the weather happens to be dry or wet. In sea 
sons of drought the want of conduits for water is a 
serious inconvenience, the well, which principally 
supplies the town, being two miles distant. 

Provisions here are cheap and in great abund 
ance. Beef in particular is very plentiful, arid, 
though rarely fat or fine, makes excellent soup. 
The best parts of the meat may, indeed, be called 
tolerable, but they are by no means tender. The 
pork is not eatable. Such is the profusion of flesh- 
meat, that the vicinity for two miles round, and 
even the purlieus of the town itself, present filthy 
spectacles of bones and raw flesh at every step, 
which feed immense flocks of sea-gulls, and in 
summer breed myriads of flies, to the great annoy 
ance of the inhabitants, who are obliged at table to 
have a servant or two continually employed in 
fanning the dishes with feathers, to drive away those 
troublesome intruders. 

The inhabitants of Monte Video, particularly 
the Crcolians, are humane and well disposed, when 
not actuated by political or religious prejudices. 
Their habits of life are much the same with those 
of their brethren in Old Spain, and seem to pro 
ceed from the same remarkable union of two oppo 
site, but not incompatible qualities, indolence and 
temperance. The ladies are generally affable and 
polite, extremely fond of dress, and very neat and 
cleanly in their persons. They adopt the English 
costume at home, but go abroad usually in black, 
and always covered with a large veil or mantle. 
At mass they invariably appear in black silk, bor 
dered with deep fringes. They delight in con 
versation, for which their vivacity eminently quali 
fies them, and they are very courteous to strangers.] 



MONTE VIDEO. 



321 



[The chief trade of Monte Video consists in hides, 
tallow, and dried beef; the two former of these 
articles are exported to Europe, and the latter is 
sent to tire W. Indies, especially to the Ha-vannah. 
Coarse copper from Chile in square cakes is some 
times shipped here, as well as a herb called matte 
from Paraguay, the infusion of which is as com 
mon a beverage in these parts as tea is in Eng 
land, 

The inhabitants were by no means opulent before 
the English took the garrison, but through the 
misfortunes of the latter at $uenos Ayrcs, and the 
losses of our commercial adventurers by ill-judged 
and imprudent speculations, they were considerably 
enriched. The great prospects indulged in Engr 
land, before the expedition to the Plata, of im 
mense profits by trade to that river, have generally 
ended in ruin ; very few, indeed, of the specula 
tors have escaped without considerable loss. Pro 
perty, once litigated, might be considered in a fair 
way for confiscation; and in case of its having 
been deposited until certain questions were decided, 
restitution was generally obtained at the loss of one 
half. It frequently happened that goods detained 
in the custom-houses or lodged in private stores in 
the river were opened, and large quantities stolen. 
The party on whom suspicion seemed most rea 
sonably to fall was the consignee, who, even with 
a few cargoes, was generally observed to get rich 
very rapidly. Not contented with the profits ac 
cruing from his commission, he seldom scrupled to 
take every advantage which possession of the pro 
perty afforded him, of furthering his own interests 
at the expence of his correspondent. The dread 
of a legal process could be but a slight check upon 
him ; for in the Spanish courts of justice, as .well as 
in others, a native and a stranger are seldom upon 
equal terms. Other circumstances have concurred 
to enrich the inhabitants of Monte Video. It is a 
fact that the English exported thither goods fo 
the amount of a million and a half sterling, a small 
portion of which, on the restoration of the place to 
the Spaniards, was re-shipped for the cape of Good 
Hope and the W.Indies; the remainder was for 
the most part sacrificed at whatever price the Spa 
niards chose to give. As their own produce ad 
vanced in proportion as ours lowered in price, 
those among them who speculated gained consi 
derably. The holders of English goods sold their 
stock at upwards of fifty per cent, profit imme 
diately after the evacuation of the place. 

The climate of Monte Video is humid. The 

weather, in the winter months (June, July, and 

August), is at times boisterous, and the air in that 

season is generally keen and piercing. In summer 

VOL. m. 



the serenity of the atmosphere is frequently inter 
rupted by tremendous thunder-storms, preceded 
by dreadful lightning, which frequently damages 
the shipping, and followed by heavy rain, which 
sometimes destroys the harvest. The heat is 
troublesome, and is rendered more so to strangers 
by the swarms of mosquitoes, which it engen 
ders in such numbers that they infest every apart 
ment. 

The town stands on a basis of granite, the feld 
spar of which is for the most part of an opaque 
milk-white colour, in a decomposing state ; in 
some places it is found of a flesh-red colour and 
crystallized. The mica is generally large and fo 
liated, in many places imperfectly crystallized. It 
is obvious that the excessive quantity of mud in the 
harbour and throughout the banks of the river can 
not have been formed from this stratum. The high 
mount on the opposite side of the bay, which is 
crowned with a liyht- house, and gives name to the 
town, is principally composed of clay-slate in la 
minae perpendicular to the horizon. This sub 
stance appears much like basalt in texture, but its 
fracture is less conchoidal ; it decomposes into 
an imperfect species of wakke, and ultimately into 
ferruginous argil. Beds of clay, from which flows 
much water, are observable in various parts of the 
mountain. 

The vicinity of Monte Video is agreeably diver 
sified with low gently-sloping hills, and long 
valleys watered by beautiful rivulets ; but the 
prospects they afford arc rarely enlivened by traces 
of cultivation ; few enclosures are seen except the 
gardens of the principal merchants. The same 
defect appears in a n.e. direction from the town, 
where similar varieties of hill, valley, and water 
prevail, and seem to want only the embellishment 
of silvan scenery to complete the landscape. Some 
wood, indeed, grows on the margin of the Ria- 
chuelo, which is used for the building of hovels 
and lor fuel. There is a pleasant stream about 10 
leagues from Monte Video called the Louza, the 
banks of which seem to invite the labour of the 
planter, and would certainly produce abundance 
of timber. It is to be remarked that the almost 
entire want of this article hero, occasions great in 
convenience and expence : wood for mechanical 
purposes is extremely scarce, and planks are so 
dear that hardly one house with a boarded floor is 
to be found. 

About 25 leagues n. e. from Monte Video, is an 
irregular ridge of granite mountains in a direction 
nearly n. and s. and the country from this distance 
gradually assumes a rugged appearance. Mica is 
very common upon the road, and in some places] 
T T 



MONTE VIDEO. 



( quartz ; on one liill are found several detached 
crystals of the latter substance. The ravines of 
these stony wilds and the wooded margins of the 
rivers afford shelter to many ferocious animals, 
such as jaguars, here culled tigers, lions, end 
ounces. Here are also great numbers of wild dogs 
which breed in the rocks, and at times make great 
havoc among the young cattle. The farms in this 
district, for the most part, include tracts of land 
from 20 to SO miles in length by half that extent 
in breadth, watered by pleasing streams. Vast 
herds of cattle are bred upon them ; it is calculated 
that each square league sustains 1500 or 2000 
head. 

At the distance of about 40 leagues from Monte 
Video, in the direction above mentioned, the range 
of hills gradually lessens and disappears; the 
country opens finely on the left, and is intersected 
by numerous rivulets. After crossing several of 
these you arrive at the head of a little brook called 
Polancos, which a few miles below assumes the 
name of Harriga Negra. It there receives several 
small streams, and in the course of 10 leagues is 
augmented by the confluence of some others : be 
coming thus a considerable river, about as large as 
the Trent at Gainsborough, it is denominated Go- 
doy, but on passing into the Portuguese territories 
it changes its name to that of Zebolyati and flows 
into the Lagun Meni. 

The country here in general may be termed 
stony and mountainous, though its inequalities do 
not exceed those of Derbyshire. No traces of 
either volcanic or alluvial inalter are to be found ; 
the solid rock frequently appears on the surface, 
and in many places projects in masses of various 
sizes. The mountains and rocks are of granite ; 
TIO veins of metallic substance have hitherto been 
discovered, but fine red and yellow jasper, chalce 
dony, and quartz, are not unfrequently found loose 
on the surface. Some fossils of the asbestos kind, 
and some very poor oxides of iron, are likewise to 
be met with occasionally. The bases of many of 
the conical granite mountains are overlaid with 
(apparently) primitive lime-stone of an obscure 
blue colour, in lamina? ; Mavve found in this sub 
stance many capillary veins of calx-spar, and 
sometimes crystals of pyrites. In one part of the 
Vicinity there is a plain about half a mile square, 
on the surface ol which are found large quantities 
of white lime-stone in nodules ; it is of a very close 
texture, but being considered interior in quality to 
the other species it is never converted into lime. 
The summits of these mountains are no where cal 
careous, excepting those of one ridge, the singular 
appearance of which induced the above traveller 



to trace it as far as was practicable. The lime 
stone on these summits is of a close compact kind, 
united to transparent quartz in a tabular form, 
standing, as it were, in lamina} perpendicular to 
the horizon, and thus presenting to the view a 
number of upright slabs somewhat similar to the 
grave-stones in a country church-yard. This sin 
gular ridge apparently commences at a mountain 
of very unusual form, and, extending about two 
miles, in which it crosses two or three valleys, ter 
minates in a ravine of considerable depth. No 
vestige of calcareous crystallization appeared in 
this lime-stone. It is singular to remark, that the 
cavities formed by the lamina; afford refuge for 
reptiles, particularly rattle-snakes : it is said that 
a person employed here in getting the stone, de 
stroyed upwards of 27 serpents of that species in 
the course of a few weeks. 

The lime-stone is loosened by the wedge and 
lever, and brought away in large slabs to the kilns, 
where it is broken into fragments of a convenient 
size, and burnt with wood. The kilns are capa 
cious, but so badly constructed that the process of 
calcination is very slow and- tedious. The lirne, 
when slaked, is measured, put into sacks made 
of green hides, and sent in large carts, drawn by 
oxen, principally to Colonia, Monte Video, and 
Buenos Ayres. 

B r !rriga Negra is distant about 160 miles n. e. 
from Monte Video, about 120 from Maldonado, 
and 90 from the town of Minas. The country 
around it is mountainous, well watered, and not 
destitute of wood. The banks of the streams arc 
thickly covered with trees, rarely, however, of 
large size ; for the creeping plants, interweaving 
with the shoots, check their growth and form an 
impenetrable thicket. Here are numbers of great 
breeding estates, many of which are stocked with 
from 60,000 to ^00,000 head of cattle. These are 
guarded principally by men from Paraguay called 
Peons, who live in hovels built for the purpose at 
convenient distances. Ten thousand head are al 
lotted to four or five Peons, whose business it is to 
collect them every morning and evening, and once 
or twice a month to drive them into pens where 
they are kept for a night. The cattle by this 
mode of management are soon tamed ; a ferocious 
or vicious beast is never seen among them. Breed 
ing is alone attended to ; neither butter nor cheese 
is made, and milk is scarcely known as an article 
of food. The constant diet of the people, morn 
ing, noon, and night, is beef, eaten almost always 
without bread, and frequently without salt. This 
habitual subsistence on strong food would probably 
engender diseases, were it not corrected by copious j 
2 



MONTE VIDEO. 



[draughts of an infusion of tlicir favourite herb 
matte, which arc frequently taken. 

The dwellings of the Peons are in general very 
wretched, the walls being formed by a few upright 
posts interwoven with small branches of trees, 
plastered with mud inside and out, and the roof 
thatched with long grass and rushes. The door 
is also of wicker-work, or, in its stead, a green 
hide stretched on sticks and removable at plea 
sure. The furniture of these poor hovels consists 
of a few scalps of horses, which are made to serve 
for seats ; and of a stretched hide to lie upon. 
The principal, if not the sole, cooking utensil is a 
rod or spit of iron stuck in the ground in an ob 
lique position, so as to incline over the fire. The 
beef when spitted on this instrument is left to roast 
until the part next the fire is supposed to be done 
enough, then a twist is given to the rod, which is 
occasionally repeated, until the whole is cooked. 
The juices of the meat, by this mode of roasting, 
help to mend the fire, and indeed the people seem 
to think that they arc fit for nothing else. The 
meat, which is naturally poor and coarse, being 
thus dried to a cake, bears little affinity to the 
boasted roast beef of England. Fuel, in some 
parts, is so extremely scarce that the following 
strange expedient is resorted to for a supply. As 
the mares in this country are kept solely for breed 
ing, and are never trained to labour, they gene 
rally exceed the due proportion ; a flock of them 
is frequently killed, and their carcases, with the 
exception of the hides and tails, are used as 
firing. 

The Peons are chiefly emigrants from Paraguay, 
and it is a singular fact that, among the numbers 
that are here settled, very few women are to be 
found. A person may travel in these parts for 
days together without seeing or hearing of a single 
female in the course of his journey. To this cir 
cumstance may be attributed the total absence 
of domestic comfort in the dwellings of these 
wretched men, and the gloomy apathy observable 
in their dispositions and habits. It is true that 
the mistress of an estate may occasionally visit it 
for a few months, but she is obliged, during her 
stay, to live in great seclusion, on account of the 
dreadful consequences to be apprehended from 
being so exposed. 

The dexterous mode in which the Peons catch 
their cattle, by throwing a noose over them, has 
been frequently detailed, but certainly no descrip 
tion can do full justice to their agility. They 
throw with equal precision and effect, whether at 
full gallop or at rest. Their method of catching 
horses by means of balls attached to leather thongs, 



is as unerring as it is surprising ; and scarcely an 
instance has been known of its failure, except in 
those frequent trials which are requisite to acquire 
perfect skill in the practice. 

They have a very singular and simple way of 
training mules and horses to draw light carts, 
coaches, &amp;c. No harness is made use of: a saddle 
or pad is girted on, and a leather thong is fastened 
to the girth on one side, so that the animal moving 
forward with his body in a rather oblique direc 
tion, keeps his legs clear of the apparatus which 
is attached to him, and draws with a freedom and 
an agility that in a stranger excite great surprise. 
A similar contrivance is used in the catching of 
cattle. The Peon fastens one end of his Inzo (or 
noosed thong) to the girth of his horse, who soon 
learns to place himself in such an attitude as to 
draw the ox which his rider has caught, and even 
should the latter dismount, he keeps the thong on 
the stretch. 

The horses in this country are very spirited, 
and perform almost incredible labour. They sel 
dom work longer than a week at a time, being 
then turned out to pasture for months together. 
Their sole food is grass, and the treatment they 
meet with from their masters is most harsh and un 
feeling. They are frequently galloped until their 
generous fire is spent, and they drop through ex 
haustion and fatigue. The make of the bridle is 
alone sutlicicnt to torture the animal, being of the 
heavy Spanish fashion. They are never shod. 
The girths of the saddles are of a curious construc 
tion ; they are generally formed of shreds of green 
hide, or of the sinew of the neck ; the middle part 
is 20 inches broad, terminated at each end by an 
iron ring. One of these ends is made fast to the 
saddle by its ring ; to the other side of the saddle 
is attached a third ring and a pliable strap, which, 
being passed through it and the girth-ring three or 
four times, affords the rider great purchase, and 
enables him to gird the saddle very tight, which 
is thus kept so firm in its place that a crupper is 
unnecessary, and indeed is never used. 

Trained horses are here from five to seven dol 
lars each ; horned cattle, in good condition, by the 
herd of JOOO, at two dollars a head ; mares at three 
rials (l.v. (id. sterling) each. Sheep are very 
scarce, and never eaten ; they are kept by some 
families merely for the sake of their wool, which 
is made into flocks for bedding. It is worthy of 
remark, that in the remote parts of the interior, 
where no settlements have been made, the cattle 
are found of a dark dirty brown colour, except on 
a small part of the belly, which is white, but when 
they become domesticated they produce breeds of] 
T T 2 



MONTE VIDEO. 



[a lighter colour, with hides beautifully spotted 
and variegated. The fine herds bred in many 
parts of this district have often tempted the Por 
tuguese to make predatory incursions, and the 
country being accessible by fine open passes to the 
frontier, as well as to the n. side of the Plata, these 
violations of territory have been carried on to a 
very serious extent. So frequent were they at one 
period that it became necessary to appoint a mili 
tary force to parade the boundaries, and to defend 
the Spanish settlements against these inroads. 

In taking .a general view of the country, a 
stranger cannot but observe, with regret, that 
while Nature has been profuse in her blessings, the 
inhabitants have been neglectful in the improver 
ment of them. Here is, for instance, abundance 
of excellent clay and plenty of wood on the margin 
of the rivers, yet it is rare to meet with an enclo 
sure, even for a kitchen-garden, much more so 
for a corn-field. They generally choose their 
grounds for tillage by the bank of a rivulet, so as 
to have one side or sometimes two sides bounded 
by it ; the remainder is fenced in the most clumsy 
and bungling manner imaginable. Ploughing is 
performed by the help of two oxen yoked to a 
crooked piece of wood, about four inches in dia 
meter, and pointed at the end. After the ground 
has been rooted up, the wheat is sown, without 
any previous attempt to clear it from noxious seeds. 
While it grows up, it is never weeded ; so that 
wild oats, poppies, and other pernicious herbs, 
thriving among it in thick luxuriance, obstruct the 
sun s rays and hinder it from ripening kindly. 
Indian corn, beans, melons, &amp;c. are all treated in 
a similar way. The wheat, when ripe, is cut 
down with sickles and gathered into heads or 
sheaves. A circular pen of from 40 to 60 yards 
in diameter is then formed with rails and hides; 
in the centre of this enclosure is placed a quantity 
of about 100 or 200 quarters of wheat in the straw. 
The pile is so formed as to have the ears- on the 
outside as much as possible. A small quantity is 
pulled down towards (he circumference of the cir 
cle, and a herd of about 20 mares are driven in, 
which, being untamed, are easily frightened and 
made to gallop round. At this pace they are 
kept by means of whips for four or five hours, 
until the corn is trod out of the ears, and the straw 
is completely reduced. Another parcel of the 
sheaves is then pulled down, and a fresh herd 
of mares is let in, and this operation is repeated 
until the whole heap is reduced, and the straw is 
broken as small as chaff. In this stole it is left 
until a brisk wind happens to rise; and then the 
winnowing is performed by emptying baskets of 



the mixed grain and chaff at an elevation of eight 
feet from the ground. While the chaff is borne 
away by the current of air, the grain falls, and at 
the close of the operation is sewed up in green 
hides. In this state it is scut to the sea-ports, 
where a considerable quantity of biscuit is pre 
pared for shipping. It is obvious, that by the 
above mode of separating the grain, a considerable 
quantity must be lost by abrasion, and by mixture 
with a large portion of earth which cannot be 
blown away by the wind. 

The climate and soil are equally favourable for 
the growth of grapes, apples, peaches, and in short 
every species of fruit belonging to the temperate 
zone, but these are known here only as rarities. 
That inestimable root, the potato, would thrive 
abundantly, if once introduced ; but, though 
much has been said in recommendation of it, the 
people remain totally averse to this or any other 
proposal forimproving their means of subsistence, 
and seem to wish for nothing beyond the bare ne 
cessaries of life. Indeed the state of society among 
them weakens those ties which naturally attach 
men to the soil on which they are accustomed to 
subsist. The Peons, brought from Paraguay in 
their infancy, grow up to the age of manhood in 
a state of servitude, uncheered by domestic coin- 
fort; at that period they generally wander in 
search of employment toward the coast, \\here 
money is in greater plenty. They are for the most 
part an honest and harmless race, though equally 
as liable, from the circumstances of their condition, 
to acquire habits of gambling and intoxication, 
as the higher classes of the people, numbers 
of whom fall victims to those seductive vices. 
Such is their excessive propensity to gambling, 
that they frequently carry cards in their pocket, 
and, when an opportunity occurs, form parties, 
and retire to a convenient place, where one of them 
spreads his pancho or mantle on the ground, in 
lieu of a table. When the loser has parted with 
his money, he will stake his clothes, so that the 
game generally continues until one of them goes 
away almost naked. This bad practice often lead.s 
to serious consequences. On one occasion, a party 
playing in the neighbourhood of a chapel after 
mass had been said, the clergyman came and 
kicked away the cards in order to put an end to 
the game. On this one of the Peons rose up, and 
retiring a few paces, thus accosted the intruder: 
" Father, 1 will obey you as a priest ; but (draw 
ing his knife) you must beware how you molest 
our diversion." The clergyman knew the despe 
rate character of these men too well to remonstrate, 
and retired very hastily, not a little chagrined. ItJ 



MONTE VIDEO. 



325 



[is usual for a Peon who has been fortunate at play, 
to go to Monte Video and clothe himself anew in 
the shop of a slop-seller. While the man is look 
ing out the articles he calls for, he deliberately 
places his dollars on the counter, in separate piles, 
assigning each to its destined purpose. He then 
retires to a corner, and attires himself; an unfor 
tunate comrade invariably attends him, who exa 
mines his cast clothes, and, if better than his own, 
puts them on. After passing a few days in idle 
ness, he sets out on his return home, where he ap 
pears in his new dress. The various evils resulting 
from the above vices are multiplied by the lax admi 
nistration of the laws ; even in case of murder the 
criminal has little to fear if he can escape to a dis 
tance of 20 or 30 leagues ; he there lives in obscu 
rity, probably for the remainder of his life, with 
out ever being brought to justice. It is to be 
feared that this want of vigilance in the magistracy 
is a temptation for the numerous refugees who seek 
shelter here, such as European Spaniards, who 
have deserted from the service, or have been ba 
nished for their crimes. These wretches, loaded 
with guilt, flee into the interior, where they sel 
dom fail to find some one or other of their country 
men who is willing to give them employment, 
though frequently at the peril of his life, By the 
corrupt example of these refugees, the innocent 
Creolian is soon initiated in vice, and becomes a 
prey to all those violent passions which are en 
gendered and fostered by habitual intoxication. 

The common dress of the people is such as might 
be expected from their indolence and poverty. 
They generally go without shoes and stockings ; 
indeed, as they rarely goon foot they have seldom 
occasion for shoes. Some of them, particularly 
the Peons, make a kind of boots from the raw 
skins of young horses, which they frequently kill 
for this sole purpose. When the animal is dead, 
they cut the skin round the thigh, about 18 inches 
above the gambrel; having stripped it, they 
stretch and dress it until it loses the hair and be 
comes quite white. The lower part, which co 
vered the joint, forms the heel, and the extremity 
is tied up in a bunch to cover the toes. These 
boots, when newly finished, arc of a delicate co 
lour, and very generally admired. The rest of 
their apparel consists of a jacket, which is univer 
sally worn by all ranks, and a shirt and drawers 
made of a coarse cotton cloth brought from the 
Brazils. Children run about with no dress but 
their shirts until their fifth or sixth year. Their 
education is very little attended to, and is confined 
to mere rudiments; a man who is able to read and 



write is considered to have all the learning he can 
desire. 

Among the many natural advantages which this 
district possesses, are the frequent falls in the rivu 
lets and larger streams, which might be converted 
to various mechanical purposes, if the population 
were more numerous and better instructed. Some 
of these streams, as was before stated, join the va 
rious branches of the Godoy, and flow into the 
lake Meni ; those on the other side the mountains 
in a w. direction empty themselves principally 
through the Riachuelo and the St. Lucia, into 
the Plata. 

The want of cultivation in this vast territory 
may be inferred from the numbers and varieties of 
wild animals which breed upon it. Tigers, 
ounces, and lions are common. The former are 
heavy sluggish animals ; their chief prey is the 
young cattle, which they firtd in such abundance 
that they rarely attack a man. Hence little danger 
is to be apprehended from them by any person tra 
velling on horseback, unless when inadvertently 
approaching the haunt of a female with young. 
The ounce has the same character, and the lion is 
considered less vicious than either. Among the 
many daring and active feats performed by the 
Peons, we cannot forbear commemorating one of 
the most extraordinary of late years, being the 
capture of a tiger by a female of that tribe. She 
was a mulatto woman, brought up in the vicinity 
of BarrigaNegra. She was accustomed at an early 
age to ride horses, and prided herself in doing of 
fices which belonged to the stronger sex, such as 
catching cattle with the noose, killing them, &amp;c. 
Her form was masculine, and she became so inured 
to men s work that she was hired as a Peon, and 
fulfilled that oflice much to the satisfaction of her 
employers. She was noted for selecting spirited 
horses, and for riding them at full speed. One 
day on her return from labour, as she was passing 
a rivulet, she observed a large tiger at no great 
distance. Surprised that the animal did not steal 
away, as is generally the case when he sees a per 
son mounted, she drew nearer, still keeping her 
horse s head from him, so as to be ready to gallop 
off if he should make a spring. He was still in 
attentive and motionless ; the woman observing 
this, and thinking he ailed something, alter some 
minutes pause, backed her horse until she came 
within 20 yards of him, loosening at the same 
time her noose from the saddle, which she threw 
most dexterously over his neck, and immediately 
galloped away with him to a considerable distance. 
Whether ill or not before, she knew he must now] 



M O N 



[be dead; she therefore alighted, flayed him, and 
carried home the skin as atrophy. The animal was 
above the ordinary size, and not smaller than a 
calf of six weeks old. This exploit was long the 
talk of the neighbourhood, and Mawe, the travel 
ler, asserts that he heard the -woman herself relate 
it. Besides the animals above mentioned there is 
one of the pig kind, called the pig of the woods, 
which has an aperture on its back, whence it emits 
a most intolerable stench when closely pursued. 
If on killing the animal the part be instantaneously 
cut out, the flesh affords good eating, but should 
that operation be neglected, even for a short pe 
riod, the taint contaminates the whole carcase. 
The domestic pigs are by no means good, for 
they feed so much upon beef that their flesh is very 
hard and coarse. There is an animal of the opos 
sum kind, about the size of a rabbit, called a zu- 
rilla, the skin of which is streaked black and white, 
and is considered of some value. When attacked, 
it ejects a fetid liquor, which is of so pungent a 
nature that if it falls on any part of the dress of its 
pursuers, there is no possibility of getting rid of the 
stench but by continual exposure to the weather for 
some months. The zurilla is very fond of eggs 
and poultry, and sometimes enters a house in 
quest of its prey ; the inhabitants immediately 
hasten out and leave their unwelcome visitant in 
quiet possession as long as she chooses to stay ; 
well aware that the slightest attempt to drive her 
out would expose them to an ejectment from the 
premises for ever. Eagles, both of the grey and 
blue species, as well as other birds of prey, are 
found here in great numbers. Here are also par- 
roquets in immense flocks, pigeons, great red-leg 
ged partridges, small partridges, wild ducks, and 
wild turkeys. Ostriches of a large species are 
very numerous ; they are so fleet and active that 
even, when well mounted, it is impossible to get 
near them but by surprise ; the stroke of their 
wing is said to be inconceivably strong 1 . 

Here are considerable herds of small deer, which 
in this fine country would afford the sportsman ex 
cellent diversion, but unfortunately the dogs are 
good for nothing, as there is no attention paid to 
the preservation of the breed. The rivers pro 
duce tortoises and other amphibious animals, but 
they are chiefly noted for a variety of singularly 
ugly fish, which afford tolerable, but by no means 
good eating.] 

MONTE VIDEO, a mountain of the same pro 
vince and government, on the coast of the river 
La Plata, from whence the former city takes its 
name. 



M O N 

MONTEGA, a bay on thew. coast of the island 
of Jamaica. 

( MONTEGO Bay is on the rt. side of the 
island of Jamaica, 12 miles e. of Lucca harbour, 
and 19 w. of Falmouth harbour. This Avas for 
merly a flourishing and opulent town ; it consisted 
of 225 houses, 33 of which were capital stores, 
and contained about 600 white inhabitants. The 
number of topsail vessels which cleared annually 
at this port were about 150, of which 70 were ca 
pital ships ; but in this account are included part 
of those which entered at Kingston. This fine 
town was almost totally destroyed by an accidental 
fire, in July 1795; the damage was estimated at 
200,000/. sterling.] 

MONTEREI, a city and capital of the Nuevo 
Reyno de Leon in N. America; founded in J599 
by order of the Count de Montcrei, viceroy of 
NucvaEspana, who gave it his name. It has two 
parishes, one for Spaniards, and another, which is 
a convent of San Francisco, for the Indians. In 
its ecclesiastical concerns it belongs to the bishop 
ric of Guadalaxara, and in its civil to the audience 
of Mexico. [Three hundred and ninety-seven 
miles n. of the latter, and 198 n. n. e. of Zacate- 
cas, in lat. 25 59 n. Long. 100 7 a?.] 

MONTEHEI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Coquimbo in the kingdom of 
Chile, where there is a fort and garrison to restrain 
the incursions of the Araucanos Indians, who 
border on that part. It is situate on the shore and 
at the source of the river Limari. In 1612, a 
flourishing mission was established here by the 
Father Luis de Valdivia, of the extinguished com 
pany, he having been sent by the King Philip III. 
to make a treaty of peace with the Indians, the 
which he effected. He was accompanied by a 
brother of the same order, Orazio Vecchi ; and 
lie was the first who moistened these territories 
with the blood of a martyr, having suffered under 
the hands of the Cazique Ungunamon, in the place 
of Elicura, that same year. 

[MONTEREY, a town of the intendancy of 
San Luis Potosi, the seat of a bishop, in the small 
kingdom of Leon.] 

[MONTERO, a diamond-work of the province 
and captainship of Rio de Janeiro in Brazil ; a few 
miles up the river Jigitonhonha, and very near to 
Tejuco, the capital of Minas Novas. It was vi 
sited by Mawe, the traveller, in 1809 ; for an ac 
count of whose journey thither, see VIT.LA RICA.] 

M.ONTES, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Parnguay in Peru. 

MONTES-CLAROS, JESUS DE, a city, also 



M O N 

called Valle Grande, of the province and govern 
ment of Santa Cruz deLa Sierra in Peru ; bounded 
by the province of Tomina. It contains 3500 
souls, the greater part people of colour. It was 
founded by the viceroy of Peru, the Marquis 
Montes Claros, \vho gave it his name. Jt is small 
and poor, and is 12 leagues s. of the settlement of 
Samapaita. 

MONTES-CLAROS, a town of the province and 
government of Cinaloa in N. America. 

[MONTES-CLAROS, a town of the intendancy of 
Sonora ; the same as Villa del Fuerte.] 

MONT ESI LLO, S. CHRISTOVAL DE, a small 
settlement or ward of the alcaldia mayor of San 
Luis del Potosi. It contains 30 families of In 
dians, and eight of Musices, all of whom are 
weavers, shoe-makers, and hat-makers. It is 
very close to its capital between n. and s. 

[MOiNTGOMEltY, a new county in the up 
per district of Georgia.] 

[MONTGOMERY, a county of New York, at 
first called Tryon, but its name was changed to 
Montgomery in 1784, by act of the legislature. It 
consisted of 11 townships, which contained 28,848 
inhabitants, according to the census of 1791. 
Since that period the counties of Herkemer and 
Otscgo have been erected out of it. It is now 
bounded n. and w. by Herkemer, e. by Saratoga, 
s. by Schoharie, and s. w. by Otsego county. By 
the state census of 1796, it is divided into eight 
townships ; and of the inhabitants of these 3379 
arc qualified electors. Chief town, Johnston.] 

[MONTGOMERY, a township in Ulster county, 
New York, bounded e. by New Windsor and 
Newburgh, and contains 3563 inhabitants, includ 
ing 236 slavesr By the state census of 1796, 497 
of the inhabitants were qualified electors.] 

[MONTGOMERY, a fort in New Y ork state ; 
situated in the high lands, on the a?, bank of Hud 
son s river, on the n. side of Popclop s creek, on 
which are some iron works, opposite to St. An 
thony s Nose, six miles s. of W. point, and 52 
from New York city. The fort is now in ruins. 
It was reduced by the British in October J777. 
See ANTHONY S NOSE.] 

[MONTGOMERY, a township in Franklin coun 
ty, Vermont.] 

[MONTGOMERY, a township in Hampshire 
county, Massachusetts, 100 miles from Boston. 
It was incorporated in 1780, and contains 449 in 
habitants.] 

[MONTGOMERY, a county in Pennsylvania, 33 
miles in length and 17 in breadth, n. w. of Phila 
delphia county. It is divided into 26 townships, 
and contains 22,929 inhabitants, including 114 



M O N 



327 



slaves. In this county are 96 grist mills, Gl saw 
mills, four forges, six fulling mills, and 10 paper 
mills. Chief town, Norritown.] 

[MONTGOMERY, a township in the above 
county. There is also a township of this name in 
Franklin county.] 

[MONTGOMERY, a county in Salisbury district, 
N. Carolina, containing 4725 inhabitants, includ 
ing 854 slaves.] 

[MONTGOMERY, a county of Virginia, *. of 
Botetourt county. It is about 100 miles in length, 
44 in breadth, and contains some lead mines. 
Chief town, Christiansburg.] 

[MONTGOMERY Court-house, in Virginia, is 
28 miles from VVythe court-house, and 81 from 
Salisbury, in N. Carolina. It is on the post- road 
from Richmond to Kentucky. A post-office is 
kept here.] 

[MONTGOMERY, a county of Maryland, on 
Patowmac river. It contained 18,003 inhabi 
tants, including 6030 slaves.] 

[MONTGOMERY Court-house, in the above 
county, is 22 miles s. e. by s. of Frederickstown, 
12 n. by za. of George-town on the Patowmac, and 
23 s. w. of Baltimore.] 

[MONTGOMERY, a new county in Tennessee 
state, Mero district. This and Robertson county 
are the territory formerly called Tennessee county, 
the name of which ceases since the state has taken 
that name.] 

[MONTGOMERY, a court-house in N. Carolina, 
28 miles from Salisbury and 18 from Ansou court 
house. It is now known by the name of Stokes 
Court- house.] 

MONT I.JO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Veragua in the kingdom of Tierra 

i* 

r irme. 

j MONTMORENCY, Fall of. The fall of 
Montmorency, which is situated about eight miles 
to the n, e. of Quebec, derives its elegant and ma 
jestic appearance more from its height than from 
the body of water that flows over the precipice. 
According to the most accurate computation, it is 
250 feet high and 80 feet wide. Its breadth is, 
however, increased or diminished according to 
the quantity of water supplied by the river, which 
is a narrow stream, and in many parts extremely 
shallow. In spring and autumn, when the melting 
of the snow, or much rain, swells the current, the 
fall is increased, and seen at those periods to great 
advantage: In winter but a small portion ot the 
fall is visible, in consequence of the cones of ice 
which are formed by the rising spray, and inter 
cept the view nearly halfway up. 

The river Montmorency falls between a large 



328 



M O N 



cleft in the mountain, which appears (o have been 
formed by the shock of an earthquake. The 
waters thus precipitate themselves into a kind of 
basin, upwards of 300 yards wide, many parts of 
which are fordable towards the entrance at low 
water; but under the fail there is an immense 
chasm. The mountain consists of the black lime 
slate, which as it becomes exposed to the air con 
tinually moulders away. Near the summit of the 
falls, the banks of the cleft are ornamented with a 
variety of shrubs, fir-trees, and other evergreens, 
whose dark foliage form an agreeable contrast to 
the snowy whiteness of the fall, and give to the 
tout ensemble a pleasing and romantic appearance. 
The fall of Montmorency has, however, more of the 
elegant and beautiful in it than of the " awfully 
grand, or wonderfully sublime!" 

If, turning your attention altogether from the 
fall of Montmorency, you direct it up the river, 
the scenery is not to be surpassed any where. 
After viewing the fall, if you turn j our attention 
towards the St. Lawrence and the island of Or 
leans, and, following the course of the river, di 
rect your view towards the lower end of the island, 
by Chateau Riche, till you reach the mountain 
called Cap Tourment, it must be allowed that it 
is difficult to imagine an assemblage of objects 
more interesting, or better calculated to inflame 
the fancy of the poet, or give life to the canvas of 
the painter. 

Both the Montmorency and the Chaudiere may 
be viewed either from the top or bottom of the fall. 
The latter, it is generally thought, is seen to 
greatest advantage from below. The Montmo 
rency, too, viewed from below, is truly sublime, as 
it is thought to be so much the more famous than 
the Chaudiere, in as much as it is seen at a dis 
tance by all who sail up the St. Lawrence.] 

[MONTMOR1N, a new town on the . bank 
of Ohio river, 18 miles below Pittsburgh ; situated 
on a beautiful plain, very fertile, and abounding 
with coal.] 

MONTOOK, PUNT A I&amp;gt;E, an extremity or e. 
head of Long island, in the province and colony 
of New York, running many leagues into the sea. 

[MONTPEL1ER, a township in Caledonia 
county, Vermont, on then. e. side of Onion river. 
It has 118 inhabitants, and is 27 miles from lake 
Champlain.] 

MONTREAL, a large island of the river St. 
Lawrence in New France or Canada ; situate at the 
conflux of the two rivers Utawas and Cataxakui. 
It is 27 miles long and 12 wide, takes the name of 
a very lofty mountain, situate in the middle of the 
ulund, appearing to command the island, and so 



called by the French, Mont-Real. The river St. 
Lawrence is here a league wide, and its shores are 
covered with trees and settlements, and many smalt 
islands, some cultivated, others uncultivated, and 
altogether affording a very pleasing prospect. 
From the city of Quebec to this island the French 
have many establishments upon very level roads, 
as also several towns and settlements of different 
lordships ; but the river is navigable only as far as 
Montreal from the number of cascades and rocks 
which there impede its course. The territory pro 
duces much maize, and all the European fruits 
thrive here ; although the French have fixed on 
none of these as a principal branch of commerce, 
being employed in a traffic with the Indians for 
skins of castors, foxes, racoons, deer, and other 
articles of the same class, by which they make a 
good profit, and live very agreeably in this de 
lightful country. The Indians barter the skins for 
brandy, tobacco, muskets, powder and ball, and 
the French have certain traders whom they call 
Runners of the Woods, who, traversing immense 
lakes and rivers in their canoes made of the barks 
of trees with an incredible patience and ingenuity, 
carry their effects to the most remote parts of Ame 
rica, amongst nations to us entirely unknown ; and 
these, on the other band, establish a fair at Mont 
real, at which people assemble from 100 miles 
distance. This fair is celebrated in the month of 
June, and sometimes is kept up for three months 
with great solemnity : guards are stationed at dif 
ferent parts, and the governor himself assists to 
restrain any incursion that so numerous a nation of 
savages might make : but these precautions are 
more particularly to guard against jLhe violent be 
haviour, which generally partakes of something 
like madness, common to the Indians when they 
are inebriated. Notwithstanding this, the fair has 
been carried on at Montreal for many years in a 
very flourishing manner ; and although many of 
the tribes of Indians who assemble here must ne 
cessarily pass the English establishments of New 
York, Albany, &amp;c. where they might provide 
themselves with what they want much more readily 
and at half the price for which they can obtain 
them at Montreal, owing to the great expences of 
a long land-carriage, yet do they prefer buying 
them there at the increased rate, and at the second 
hand. This is curious, and the French have 
lately found it more to their advantage to buy the 
goods and merchandize for sale at New York than 
in their own country, which only proves that the 
French have a greater skill in conciliating and 
pleasing these barbarians than have the English. 
The capital of this island is of the same name* 



MONTREAL. 



329 



It is of an oblong form, having Ions: and straight 
streets, and buildings of a good construction. It 
is surrounded by a strong wall and flanked by 1 1 
redoubts serving as bastions. The ditch which 
surrounds the whole wall, except the part which 
is opposite the river, is about eight feet deep and 
of a proportionate width : besides this it lias a ci 
tadel or fortress, the batteries of which command 
the streets of the city on either side; and upon 
the river called San Pedro there is a bridge. The 
shore of the river St. Lawrence, upon the which 
the city stands, has a gradual slope from the 
water s edge to the further end of the city. This 
is divided into two parts, the superior and infe 
rior, although the pass from the one to the other 
is scarcely perceptible. The merchants commonly 
dwell in the inferior part, and here is the place of 
arms, the hospital, and the king s storehouses; 
but the chief buildings are in the superior part, 
together with the convent of the reformed Fran 
ciscans, the parish church, the public school, the 
college which belonged to the Jesuits, the gover 
nor s palace, and the greater part of the houses of 
the officers of the garrison. The convent, of 
which we have spoken, of the religious order of 
St. Francis, is very large, and has a numerous 
commutiity. The parish church is large and of 
beautiful architecture, entirely of cut stone, and 
the public school, which is contiguous to it, is 
very convenient. The church, which belonged 
to the Jesuits, is small, but richly adorned. The 
governor s palace is a magnificent building, as are 
also many other edifices with which the city is 
adorned ; but, amongst the rest, we must not for 
get to mention the hospital, assisted by the reli 
gious lay-sisters from the city of Fleche, in the 
county of Anjou. Outside of the city and on the 
other side of the river St. Pedro, are some pretty 
country houses, especially one belonging to Mr. 
de Calliere, and the public hospital called Char- 
ronBretheren, from having been founded by a per 
son of this name, who, in conjunction with other 
pious and devout persons, undertook this work of 
charity, as also the providing with masters the 
school for the instruction of Indian children, hav 
ing had the satisfaction before his death, which 
occurred in 1719, to see the hospital established, 
although his companions had abandoned him in 
the undertaking. This city belongs to the semi 
nary of the St. Sulpice, of Paris. The English 
took possession of it in 1760, after they took Que 
bec, and remained in the enjoyment of it, toge 
ther with the greater part of the country. [It is 
116 miles s. w. of Quebec, in lat. 46 33 n. 
Long. 7-3 IS 30" .] 

VOL. III. 



[INDEX TO ADDITIONAL INFORMATION RE 
SPECTING MONTREAL, AND FURTHER DE- 

SCRII riON OF THE ISLAND AND TOWN. 

Inhabitants.-- Mechanics. Markets. Water car 
riage. Government stores. Indians of Cachc- 
nnnaga&amp;gt;~ -Boundary line between Canada and 
the tlnited States. Commerce. 
MONTREAL is justly considered at the pre 
sent day the second city in rank in Lower Canada. 
While the French had possession of Canada, 
both the city and island of Montreal belonged to 
private proprietors, who had improved them so 
well that the whole island had become a delightful 
spot, and produced every thing that could admi 
nister to the convenience of life. The city, around 
which is a very good wall, built by Louis XIV. 
of France, forms an oblong square, divided by 
regular and well formed streets ; and when taken, 
by the British, the houses were built in a very 
handsome manner ; and every house might be 
seen at one view from the harbour, or from the 
southernmost side of the river, as the lull on the 
side on which the town stands falls gradually to 
the water. Montreal contains at present about 
1200 houses, few of them elegant ; but since it fell 
into the hands of the British in 1760, it has suf 
fered much from fire. A regiment of men are sta 
tioned here, and the government of the place bor 
ders on the military. It is about half a league 
from the 5. shore of the river, 120 miles s. w. of 
Quebec, Trois Rivieres being about half way, 98 
n. of Crown point, 220 n. by w. of Boston, and 
286 n. e. of Niagara. The lat. and long, are men 
tioned above. Sec ST. LAWRENCE. The river St. 
Lawrence is about three miles wide at Montreal. 

Near Bout de 1 lsle, or the end of the island 
of Montreal, the river is intersected by a num 
ber of small isles and islets. One, named 
Eagle island, is the property of Captain Cart- 
wright of the Canadian fencibles, and was cele 
brated for some excellent horses which he reared 
upon it. It contains only his own house, in which 
he resided for several years with his family. The 
surrounding scenery is beautiful, and must afford a 
delightful retreat to those who are fond of rural feli 
city. Within view of this island is the ferry 
which crosses from the post-road at Repent igny 
to the end of the island of Montreal. A bridge 
was formerly built over the river in the vicinity of 
this place by Mr. Port cons, of Terrebonrie, but 
was carried away two or three years ago by the 
ice. The provincial parliament have recently 
passed an act permitting him to build another from 
Kepentigny to isle Bourdon. 

The shores of the island of Montreal are elevated] 
u u 



330 



MONTREAL. 



[several feet above the level of the river. The soil 
is uncommonly rich and fertile, and yields more 
abundant harvests than any other part of Lower 
Canada. The price of land averages from 20 to 
30 dollars per acre. The island is SO miles in 
length and about seven in breadth. 

The opposite island of St. Helen belongs to the 
Baroness de Longneil : this lady married a gentle 
man of the name of Grant, and brought him very 
extensive and valuable landed properly. Since 
his death it has been divided between her and the 
children. The eldest son goes by the familiar ap 
pellation of Baron Grant. 

The town of Montreal has a singular appear 
ance when viewed from the water, in consequence 
of the light-grey stone of the new buildings, and 
the tin-covered roofs of the houses, which emit a 
strong glare when the sun shines. The shipping 
lie close to the shore, which is very steep, and 
forms a kind of natural wharf, upon which the ves 
sels discharge their cargoes. About 20 yards 
back the land rises to the height of 15 or 20 feet; 
and an artificial wharf has been constructed and 
faced with plank ; the goods are, however, all 
shipped from, and landed upon, the beach below. 
A great many English vessels arrive annually at 
Montreal, but it is a voyage that few captains are 
willing to make a second time, if they can possi 
bly avoid it, the navigation up the river above 
Quebec being very hazardous, and the pilots un 
skilful and inattentive. 

The interior of Montreal is extremely heavy and 
gloomy. The" buildings are ponderous masses of 
stone, erected with very little taste and less judg 
ment. They are seldom more than two stories 
above the ground floor, including garrets. The 
doors and window-shutters are covered with large 
sheets of tin, painted of a red or lead colour, cor 
responding with the gloomy darkness of the stone 
of which most of the old houses are built. There 
is a heavy sameness of appearance which pervades 
all the streets, whether new or old, nor are they 
rejrnarkable for width, though they are for the 
most part laid out in a regular manner. The only 
open place or square in the town, except the two 
markets, is the Place d Armes, and which, under 
the French government, was the place where the 
garrison troops paraded. The French Catholic 
church occupies the whole of the e. side of the 
square, and on the s. side, adjoining some private 
houses, is a very good tavern, called the Montreal 
Hotel, kept by Mr. Dillon. 

The town walls and fortifications which were 
erected to protect the inhabitants against the irrup 
tion* of the Iroquois and other hostile Indians, 



are now falling to decay. A great part have been 
levelled with the ground, and an act has lately 
passed the provincial parliament to remove the 
remainder. 

At the back of the town, just behind the new 
court-house, is the parade, where the troops are 
exercised. The ground is considerably elevated 
along this part, and forms a steep bank for several 
hundred yards in length. Here the inhabitants 
walk of an evening, and enjoy a beautiful view of 
the suburbs of St. Lawrence and St. Antoine, and 
the numerous gardens, orchards, and plantations 
of the gentry, adorned with neat and handsome 
dwelling-houses. Large green fields are inter 
spersed amidst this rich variety of objects, which 
are concentrated in an extensive valley, gradually- 
rising towards a lofty mountain, that stands about 
two miles and a half distant, at the back of the 
town : from this mountain the island has taken its 
name of Montreal, or Royal Mount. It is said 
by some recent authors, but most erroneously, to 
be elevated 700 miles above the level of the river; 
it is upwards of two miles in length from n. to s. 
It is covered with trees and shrubs, except towards 
its base, where some parts have been cleared and 
cultivated. A large handsome stone building, be- 
longingto the widow of the late Mr. M Tavish, of 
theN.W. company stands at the foot of the moun 
tain, in a very conspicuous situation. Gardens 
and orchards have been laid out, and considerable 
improvements made, which add much to the beauty 
of the spot. Mr. M Tavish is buried in a tomb a 
short distance from his house on the side of the 
mountain, in the midst of a thick shrubbery. A 
monumental pillar is erected over the vault, and 
may be seen a long way off. 

The town, including all its suburbs, occupies 
a considerable extent of ground, and the number 
of inhabitants is computed at 12,000. The prin 
cipal public buildings are, the general hospital; 
the Hotel Dieu; the convent of Notre Dame ; the 
French cathedral ; the English church, an unfi 
nished building ; the old monastery of Franciscan 
friars, converted into barracks ; the seminary ; the 
court-house ; government-house, &amp;c. 

The general hospital was founded by Madame 
Youville, a widow lady, in 1753, and contains a 
superior and 19 nuns ; it is situated on the banks 
of the river, near a small rivulet, Avhich divides 
it from the town. There is also a college for the 
education of young men, founded in 1719 by the 
Sieur Charron. 

The Hotel Dieu was established in 1644, by 
Madame de Bouillon, for the purpose of adminis 
tering relief to the sick poor ; it contains a superior] 
2 



MONTREAL. 



[and 39 nuns, who attend and nurse the patients. 
An apartment in the upper part of the house is 
appropriated to the females, and a large room be 
low for the men. The establishment is now chiefly 
supported by a slender income, arising from 
landed property : the funds, upon which it for 
merly relied, being vested in Paris, were lost du 
ring the revolution. 

The con vent of Notre Dame contains a superior 
and upwards of 40 nuns. It was founded about 
the year 1650, by Mademoiselle Marguerite Bour 
geois, for the instruction of female children. The 
sisters of this situation are not confined in so strict 
a manner as at the other convents, but have the li 
berty of going out. They attend mass at the 
French church on Sunday morning and afternoon. 
They arc dressed in black gowns and hoods, and 
are chiefly elderly women. 

There are two of the old Franciscan friars still 
living in one corner of their monastery, the re 
mainder of which has been converted into barracks 
for the troops quartered in the city. Upon the 
arrival of several additional regiments at Quebec, 
the 49th and 100th were sent up to Montreal to do 
duty in that town, and to garrison the out-posts 
near the American line. 

The French cathedral in the Place D Armes is 
a large substantial stone building, built with little 
taste. The interior is, however, plentifully deco 
rated in the Catholic style, with all the appropriate 
decorations of that religion ; and the size of the 
building renders it a very commodious place of wor 
ship, and well adapted for the accommodation of its 
numerous congregation. In summer a great many 
people kneel outside the church in preference to 
being within. The service of the English church 
is performed at present in a small chapel, which is 
also used by the Presbyterians. A handsome new 
church is partly built, but for want of funds re 
mains in an unfinished state. 

The court-house is a neat and spacious building, 
and an ornament to the town ; a gaol is building 
on one side- of it, upon the site of the old college 
of the Jesuits. The city (as before observed) is 
divided into Upper and Lower Towns, though 
there is very little difference in their elevation. 
The principal streetof the latter extends from n. ins. 
the whole length of the city, nearest the water-side, 
and is called Paul-street. Here are situated the 
wholesale and retail stores of the merchants and 
traders ; the lower market-place ; the post-office ; 
the Hotel Dieu ; and a large tavern, formerly kept 
by Hamilton, but now in the possession of Mr. 
Holmes. There are several smaller taverns in this 
street and in the market-place, but they are fre 



quented principally by the American traders who 
visit Montreal. Paul-street, though narrow, pre 
sents a scene of greater bustle than any other part 
of the town, and is the chief mart of the trade and 
commerce carried on in Montreal. 

Several short streets proceed w, from Paul-street, 
and communicate with that of Notre Dame, which 
runs in a parallel line, extending the whole length 
of the city. This street forms what is called the 
Upper Town, and contains the Rccollet monastery, 
the French seminary, the Catholic church, the 
Place d Armes; the new English church, the 
convent of Notre Dame, the court-house and gaol, 
and the old building called the government-house, 
which latter has no claim to particular notice. 
The dwelling-houses of the principal merchants 
are mostly situated in Notre Darne street, and 
other parts of the Upper Town, their stores being 
stationed near the water-side. These two parallel 
streets are considerably lengthened to the n. by the 
suburb of Quebec ; and to the s. by the suburbs of 
St. Antoine and Recollet. In the centre of Notre 
Dame street, a long street branches off to the w. 
and forms the suburb of St. Lawrence. It is alsf&amp;gt; 
the high road to the interior of the island, and 
crossing the intermediate valley, passes over the 
foot of the mountain. In one of the short streets 
leading to the Upper Town, and situated opposite 
the court-house, a new market-place, and rows of 
convenient stalls, have been recently constructed i 
it will be a great accommodation to the town, as 
the old market in Paul-street is too much confined 
for the increased population of the place. The 
streets of Montreal are, for the most part, well 
paved, and the improvements which are going on 
throughout the town, will render it more commo 
dious and agreeable than it is at present. The 
town itself will always be gloomy, but the envi 
rons are beautiful. 

All the principal N. W. merchants reside at 
Montreal, which is the emporium of their trade, and 
the grand mart of the commerce carried on be 
tween Canada and the United States. They, and 
other respectable merchants, have country-houses 
a few miles from the city, which, with their nume 
rous orchards and gardens, well stocked with 
every variety of fruit-trees, shrubs, and flowers, 
render the surrounding country extremely beauti 
ful and picturesque. The succession of rich and 
variegated objects that are presented to the eye of 
the spectator, from the base of the neighbouring 
mountain, cannot be surpassed in any part of 
Canada, with the exception, perhaps, of the view 
from cape Diamond, at Quebec. They arc, how 
ever, both of a different nature, and may be dcs-] 
u u 2 



332 



MONTREAL. 



[cribcd like Homer and Virgil; the one grand, 
bold, and romantic, the other serene, beautiful, 
and elegant. Quebec has more of the majesty of 
nature, Montreal more of the softness of art. 

A large store has been converted into a theatre, 
in which Mr. Prigmore s company occasionally 
perform. Society is reckoned more friendly and 
agreeable in Montreal than in any other town in 
Lower Canada. The N.W. merchants live in a 
superior style to the rest of the inhabitants, and 
keep very expensive tables. They are friendly 
and hospitable to strangers who are introduced to 
them, and whom they entertain in a sumptuous 
manner. The envious, however, consider their 
apparent generosity as flowing more from pride 
and ostentation than from real hospitality, and 
they have often been the subjects of newspaper 
criticism. 

A public assembly is held at Holmes s tavern 
during the winter ; and these, with private dances, 
tea, and card parties, and cariole excursions out of 
town form the whole amusements of that season. 
In summer pleasure gives way to business, which 
at that period of bustle a fiords full employment 
to all. A few excursions, and dinner parties in 
the country, occur sometimes to relieve the weight 
of mercantile affairs. Concerts are very rare, and 
never take place unless the regimental bands are 
in town. The inhabitants, like those of Quebec 
and Three Rivers, possess very little knowledge of 
the polite and liberal accomplishments necessary 
to form the complete lady or gentleman. They 
however labour under the disadvantage of the 
want of proper masters, and institutions to instruct 
and complete them in the higher branches of edu 
cation ; yet it is, perhaps, their fault that they 
have them not, for without proper reward and en 
couragement they never can have them. 

Ship-building is successfully carried on by Mr. 
Munn, who generally launches two or three ves 
sels from 200 to 500 tons every year. They have 
of late taken French Canadians as apprentices, 
who are highly praised for their capacity. This 
is a very good plan, for European ship-builders 
Lave very high wages, and are besides a very 
drunken dissolute set. The Canadian workmen, 
on the contrary, are sober, steady men, and at 
tend regularly to their work from break of day to 
sun-set. There is an island near the middle of the 
river opposite the city, at the lower end of which 
is a mill with eight pair of stones, all kept in mo 
tion, at the same time, by one wheel. The works 
are said to have cost 11,000/. sterling. A large 
mound of stone, &amp;c. built out into the river, stops 
a sufficiency of water to keep the mill in continual 



motion. And what is very curious, at the end of 
this mound or dam, vessels pass against the stream, 
while the mill is in motion. Perhaps there is not 
another mill of the kind in the world. 

One of the greatest errors committed by persons 
who go to Canada to settle, is the taking of Euro 
pean servants with them ; for experience has fully 
proved, in innumerable instances, that no obliga 
tions whatever are sufficient to ensure a master the 
labour of his European servants, more especially 
if he is in advance to them for any part of their 
wages. The inducements to leave him, in such 
cases, become so great, that the servant must be 
more than commonly virtuous, or have strong mo 
tives for staying, if he does not break his engage 
ment. This complaint is so general at Quebec, 
that little or nothing is done to remedy the griev 
ance, which seems to set the laws at defiance: 
yet the magistrates have sufficient power to pu 
nish both masters and servants ; but they seldom 
or never give a satisfactory decision in cases 
where the latter are to blame. 

One very great mischief in this town is occa 
sioned by the low price of spirits, particularly 
rum, which may be obtained for less than 5*. a 
gallon. Hence few of the lower order of Euro 
peans who arrive at Quebec, but become drunk- 
ards in a very short time, and drunkenness never 
fails to precipitate them into worse vices. If they 
have a little money, it is soon squandered, either 
in liquor with their dissolute companions, or in 
going to law with their masters, in which case it 
seldom fails to find its way into the pocket of the 
before mentioned advocate, and the account is ge 
nerally wound up by some crimp for the shipping, 
or recruiting serjeant for the army. 

The scarcity of hands for labour is certainly 
considerable, yet by no means so great as is gene 
rally represented ; it is therefore more to the in 
terest of gentlemen settling in Canada, to engage 
the native artisans, than to take out men who will 
never remain in their service. The French me 
chanics and farmers may be, and indeed are, 
greatly inferior in abilities to Europeans; but they 
are superior to them in sobriety, industry, and ci 
vility. The French Canadians, however, have 
great ingenuity, and it only requires cultivation 
to render them excellent artists. Some clever Ame 
rican mechanics are also frequently to be met with 
in Canada, particularly mill-wrights ; these peo 
ple are sometimes steady workmen, but they will 
often give their employers the slip in the middle 
of their work, if they happen to meet with a more 
lucrative offer from another person. The practice 
of enticing away each other s servants, is but too] 



MONTREAL. 



333 



[much the custom in Canada, and it is owing as 
much to this want of good laith, that strangers on 
their arrival find it so difficult to retain their ser 
vants, as to any other cause. 

The markets of Montreal are plentifully sup 
plied with all kinds of provisions, which are sold 
much cheaper than at Quebec or Three Kivers : 
large supplies arc brought in every winter from the 
States, particularly cod-fish, which is packed in 
ice and conveyed in sleighs from Boston. Hay 
and wood are sold in the Place d Armes. Two 
newspapers arc printed weekly at Montreal, the 
Gazette, and Canadian Courant, both on Monday 
afternoon. 

From Montreal to La Chine is a turnpike road, 
about seven or eight miles in length. This is the 
only turnpike in Lower Canada, and the road 
is not very well kept up for the toll that is de 
manded ; tburpence is charged for a horse, and 
eightpence for a horse and chaise ; but for a sub 
scription of one or two dollars per annum, an in 
habitant of the island may be exempted from the 
daily toll. A great traffic is maintained on this 
road by the carters who carry all the goods for the 
upper country, from Montreal to La Chine, where 
they are put on board batteaux. 

For the first mile or two out of town, the road 
passes partly over a common, which is beginning 
to be inclosed and cultivated. After passing 
through the turnpike, the road proceeds up a 
steep ascent, and continues along a lofty height 
for nearly four miles, when it descends rather ab 
ruptly, and passes again over a low, flat country, 
until it reaches La Chine, which is situated along 
the shore of the river St. Lawrence. The road is 
lined with the houses and farms of the habitans, 
and along the height, the eye wanders with plea 
sure over an extensive cultivated valley, bordered 
by the St. Lawrence, which disappears amidst the 
thick foliage of the trees, while a small serpentine 
stream meanders prettily through the fields. Tins 
low country was, o&amp;lt;jes ago, probably a part of the 
river, and the high land, along which the turnpike 
road now runs, was most likely the boundary 
within which it was confined. Its flat and marshy 
soil afibrds some foundation for this conjecture. 
There is another road to La Chine which winds 
along the shore of the St. Lawrence, and passes 
the rapids of St. Louis; situated about half way. 
It is about a league longer than the turnpike road. 
A few years ago, before the road was made, it was 
nearly a day s journey for carts to go from Mont 
real to La Chine. The road is certainly now in 
a better condition, but there is still room for im 
provement. 



La Chine is delightfully situated upon the 
banks of the river. It is of considerable extent, 
in consequence of the houses being built in the 
same straggling manner as the other small set 
tlements in Canad-i, where the dwellings are re 
gulated by the situations of the farms, and are 
seldom formed into an assemblage of houses laid 
out in streets. All the goods and merchandise 
sent to Upper Canada arc embirked at this vil 
lage, to which they are carted from Montreal, as 
the rapids of St. Louis prevent vessels from pass 
ing up the river from that city. The goods are 
put on board large batteaux, or flat-bottomed 
boats, each of which is worked by four men and 
a guide, who make use of paddles and long poles, 
as the depth or rapidity of the current requires. 
A gentleman of the name of Grant, who resides 
at La Chine, is the owner of the batteaux, and 
shipper of the goods for the merchants, who pay 
him freight for the transportation of their merchan 
dise. Upwards of 50 batteaux are employed in 
the voyage to and from Kingston, on lake On 
tario, in the course of the year. Mr. Grant also 
ships off the goods for the N.W. merchants in 
large bark canoes belonging to the company ; 
these goods, which consist of provisions, cloth, 
blankets, fowling-pieces, powder and shot, and 
other articles for the Indian trade, are exchanged 
for furs. 

Between 40 and 50 canoes, deeply laden with 
the above articles, and navigated by Canadian 
and Indian voyagers, are dispatched in the 
course of the spring from La Chine, and proceed 
up the Outaouais, or Grand river, through ra 
pids, and over portages or carrying places, into 
lake Nipissing. From thence they pass through 
Riviere des Francois into lake Huron, and arrive 
at the company s post in lake Superior, from- 
whence the goods are afterwards transported to 
the Lake of the Woods, and distributed to the 
several trading posts, far in the interior of the 
continent. 

The government stores belonging to the Indian 
department are kept at La Chine, under the 
care of Mr. Hawdon the store-keeper general. 
About 30 batteaux, laden with Indian presents, 
are dispatched every spring to Kingston, York, 
Niagara, and other posts belonging to the king 
in Upper Canada, as far as lake St. Joseph s, 
near Michillimakinak ; where store-keepers and 
clerks reside, for the delivery of the presents in 
their respective districts. The presents are de 
livered out of the stores at La Chine, by an order 
from Sir John Johnson, who is the superintcndant- 
general of the Indian department. They consist] 



334 



MONTREAL, 



[chiefly of the following articles: Scarlet and 
blue cloth, strouds, molton, blankets of various 
sizes, Irish linen, flannel, Russia and English 
sheeting, hats, laced coats, rifles and fowling- 
pieces, powder, shot and flints, swords, spears, 
harpoons, hooks and fishing-linos, copper and tin 
kettles, vermilion, looking-glasses, pins, needles, 
tapes, thread, scissars, knives, nests of trunks, 
boxes, &amp;c. 

Jn the stores are sometimes also included man} 
pieces of fine French cambric, a quantity of tea, 
Jew s harps, razors, &amp;c. ; but it is thought that 
articles of this description seldom or never reacli 
the Indians, being much oftener used by the store 
keepers and agents of the Indian department for 
their own families. The great abuses which for 
merly existed in that branch of the public service 
were shameful, but are now greatly abolished. 
The former enormous requisitions are also re 
duced to little more than 10,000 /. for Upper 
and Lower Canada ; and together with the sa 
laries of the officers and agents of the Indian de 
partment, the expences do not amount to half the 
sum stated by Mr. Weld in 1796, which he com 
puted at 100 ,000 /. 

Opposite to La Chine stands the Indian village 
of Cachcnonaga. Its inhabitants, who amount in 
all to 1200, are descended from the Agniers, one 
of the Iroquois nations, who, though bitter ene 
mies to the French, were, by the indefatigable 
zeal and abilities of the Jesuits, partly civilised, 
and converted to the Christian faith. They were 
originally settled at La Prairie, but the land 
producing very indifferent maize, they removed 
to Sault St. Louis, and from thence to the situation 
they now occupy. Idleness reigns in every part of 
their village, nor is there man, woman, or child to 
be found ever employed at any sort of work. 
Their habitations are dirty, miserable, and desti 
tute of furniture; and the whole village, which is 
divided into two or three streets, presents a most 
forlorn and wretched appearance. 

These Indians are under the care of Mr. Vanfel- 
son the cure of the village. He lives in a tolerable 
house adjoining a small chapel, in which service is 
regularly performed by him on Sundays and fes 
tivals. The Indians, who happen to be at home, 
attend with their wives and children, and behave 
in a very respectful and becoming manner. The 
women, particularly, are solemn and devout in 
their deportment, and are strongly attached to the 
Holy Virgin ; for whom they seem to have a re 
markable veneration. They have good voices, 
and sing their Indian hymns in an agreeable man 
ner. 



Mr. Vanfelson is a most respectable younj 
priest, and attends, with much diligence, to the 
improvement of the Indians. His brother at Que 
bec is an advocate of some eminence. 

The Indiana of Cachenonaga cultivate a little 
corn, and breed hogs and poultry ; but the prin 
cipal part of them subsist upon hunting and fish 
ing. A chief resides among them, called Captain 
Thomas : his house is but little better furnished 
than the rest ; and he is a very drunken character. 

The boundary line between Canada and the 
United States is about 18 miles from St. John s, 
and passes across the Richlieu river, within a few 
miles of lake Champlain. Hence the Canadians 
are completely shut out from the lake in case of 
war, and even from the water communication with 
their own territory in Missisqui bay. The greatest 
part of this bay lies in Canada, and is thus cut oft 
by the line of demarcation allowed by the English 
negotiators in the treaty of peace with the Ame 
rican states in 1783. In case of war, the Ameri 
cans have every advantage over the Canadians, by 
confining them to the narrow channel of Richlieu 
river ; and the ill effects of it have been already- 
experienced since the embargo, as the rafts of tim 
ber were not permitted to come out of Missisqui 
bay, for the purpose of passing down the Richlieu 
river. The laws however were broken in several 
instances ; but the parties were liable to fine and 
imprisonment. If the line had been drawn across 
the wide part of lake Champlain, the Americans 
could -never have stationed their gun-boats with 
such effect, as they have of late years, in the Rich- 
lieu river, by which means they interrupted the 
communication between the two countries by water, 
and seized great quantities of goods. 

From St. John s to the entrance of the lake, 
there are scarcely any settlements. Both shores 
are lined with woods, consisting chielly of pines, 
which grow to a great height. A few straggling 
log-huts are seen at intervals, but otherwise it is 
completely in a state of nature. The Isle au 
Noix is situated near the line. Upon it are the 
remains of a small fortification, which had been 
successively occupied by the French, English, 
arid American armies, during the several wars 
which have occurred in that country. The name 
of the island used sometimes to be given out for 
the parole upon those occasions ; and it is related 
of an English officer during the American war, 
that upon being challenged by the sentinel, he gave 
the word, " Isle au Noix," in the true pronun 
ciation, but the sentinel refused to let him pass. 
The officer persisted he was right, and the soldier 
maintained he was wrong ; till at length the for-] 



M O N 

[mer recollecting himself, cried out, " Isle of Nox." 
" Pass," said the soldier ; " you have hit it at 
last !" 

For account of the commerce of Montreal, see 
the section of this title under article CANADA.] 

[MONTREAL, a river which runs n.e. into lake 
Superior, on the s. side of the lake.] 

[MONTREAL Bay lies towards the e. end of lake 
Superior, having an island at the n. w. side of its 
entrance, and n. e. of Caribou island.]] 

MONTRON1S, a river of the island of St. Do 
mingo, in the part possessed by the French. It 
rises in the w. head, near the mountains of Tapion, 
runs to that rhumb, and enters the sea in the port 
of T rou Forban. 

MONTROUIS, a bay of the a?, coast of the 
island of St. Domingo. 



335 



damage done by which, without counting that 
which affected the vessels, amounted to 50,000/. 
sterling. 

The first who established themselves on this 
island were Irish, [in the year 1632,] whose de 
scendants, and some persons from other countries, 
are its present inhabitants ; but the common lan 
guage is Irish, even amongst the Negroes. In the 
war of 1700 it was sacked ten days successively by 
the French, but in the llth article of the treaty of 
Utrecht, it was stipulated, that they should render 
satisfaction to the English, although it does not 
appear that such was the case. [It was again in 
vaded, and with most of the other islands captured 
by the French in the late war, and restored with 
the rest.] Its government is composed of a lieu 
tenant-governor, and a council or assembly of eight 



[MONTROUIS, a town in the w. part of the representatives, two for each of the four districts 



island of St. Domingo, at the head of the Bight of 
Leogane, 14 miles s. e. of St. Marcos, and 33 n.w* 
of Port au Prince.] 

MONTSERRAT, an island of the N.sea, one 
of the Caribes, of the Atlantic ocean, discovered 
by Christopher Columbus in 1493. It is of an 
oval figure, and is nine miles long, and five and an 
half wide, and from 18 to 20 in circumference. 
The mountains are covered with cedar, co6, and 
other trees, and the valleys are fertile and pleasant, 
and similar to those of the other islands; the cli 
mate is also the same. The principal productions 
are cotton, although of an inferior quality, indigo, 
tobacco, and a great quantity of sugar and spirit, 
made of the sugar-cane, which is very general. It 
is surrounded by shouls and rocks, which render 
its navigation in tempestuous weather very dan 
gerous ; for, indeed, it cannot be said to have any 
port whatever. Its population consists of 5000 
Europeans, and of about 10 to 20,000 Negro 
slaves. In 1733 it experienced an hurricane, the 



into which it is divided. 

It has only three open roads for vessels ; and 
these are called Plymouth, Old-harbour, and 
Kers, where, both in the embarking and disembark 
ing, the same precaution is necessary to be observed 
as in the road of San Christoval, and as we have 
noticed under that article. In 1770 the produc 
tions which were sent to England and Ireland 
amounted to 90,000/. sterling, and those to N. 
America to I2,000/. 

[In the report of the privy council on the slave 
trade, in 1788, the British property vested here is 
estimated at 38,400 taxed acres of patented estates, 
and the Negroes are computed at 9500, to the 
value of 50/. each Negro. The cultivation of 
sugar occupies GOOO acres; cotton, provision, and 
pasturage have 2000 acres allotted for each. No 
other tropical staples arc raised. The produc 
tions were, on an average, from 1784 to 1788, 
2737 hhds. of sugar, of J6 cwt. each, 1107 pun 
cheons of rum, and 275 bales of cotton.] 



The following is an account of the number of vessels, &amp;c. that have cleared outwards from the islands 
of Montserrat and Nevis, between the 5th January 1787, and the 5th January 1788 ; together with 
an account of their cargoes, and the value thereof. 



Whither bound. 


SHIPPING. 


Sugar. 


Rum 


Molas. 


Indigo. 


Cotton. 


Dying Woods, 
in Value. 


Miscellaneous 
Articles, in 
Value. 


TOTAL. 


\ i 
tfJreat Britain 
^mei ic;in States 
Biit. Col. in Anier. 
Foreign VV. Indies 
Africa 

Yot.from Mont- ) 
serrat and Nevis. J 


No. 
23 
20 
7 
71 
1 


Ivn. 
5371 

1850 
379 
3085 

102 


Men. 
341 

138 
40 
377 
8 


Cwt. qrs. Ibs 
108,325 21 
1,895 
61 


(Mis. 
4,406 
122.710 
21,300 
140,660 


Galls. 
1313 


Ibs. 
140 


ll&amp;gt;s. 
91,972 

500 


. s. d, 

35* 7 6 


. t. d. 
1162 3 2 
70 10 
41 6 3 
89 4 


. s. d. 
135,709 10 11 
13,981 12 fc 
2,053 14 .-; 
12,S96 19 


122 


10,787 


904 


110,284 21 


289,076 


1313 


140 


92,472 


352 7 6 


1363 3 5 


^14,141 16 8 



336 



M O N 



MOO 



By return to house of commons 1806, the hogs- The official value of the imports and exports of 

heads of sugar of 13 cwt. exporled, were as follows, Montserrat were, in 

Jn 1789. 3150 Imports. Exports. 

1799, 2595 1809, .35,407 ^10,460 

1805, 2000 1810, .62,462 ,16,816. 

And the quantities of the principal articles imported into Grejtt Britain were, in 



Coffee. 


Sugar. 


Rum. 


Cotton Wool. 


Brit. Plant. 


For. Plant. 


Brit. Plant. 


For. Plant. 


Cwt. 

1809, 
1810, 


Cwt. 


Cwt. 
21,915 
41,112 


Cwt. 


Gulls. 
51,132 
4,880 


Lbs. 
39,455 

48,313 



By report of the privy council in 1788, and by a 
subsequent estimate, the population of Montser 
rat amounted to 



Years. 


Whites. 


People of 
Colour. 


Slaves. 


In 1787 
1805 


1300 
1000 


260 
250 


10,000 
9,500 



Montserrat is 26 miles s. w. of Antigua, about 
the same distance s. e. ofNieves, and lies in lat. 
16 45 n. and long. 62 17 w. 

MONTSERRAT, another island, of the gulf of 
California or Mar lloxo de Cortes ; situate near 
the coast, between those of Carmen and La Cata- 
lina. 

MONTSRRRAT, a settlement of the island and 
government of Trinidad ; situate near the w. 
coast. 

MONTSERRAT, another, of the province and 
captainship of San Vicente in Brazil ; situate on 
the shore at the source of the river Tiete or 
Anembi. 

MONTSINERI, a river of the province of 
Guayana, in the part possessed by the French. 

[MONTS1OUGE, a river or bay in Lincoln 
county, district of Maine, which communicates 
with the rivers Shcepscutand Kennebeck.] 

[MOVrV ILLE, a township in New London 
county, Connecticut, about nine miles n. of New 
London city. It has 2053 inhabitants.] 

MONTUOSA, a real of gold mines of the dis 
trict of the city of Pamplona, in the jurisdiction of 
the alcaldia mayor of mines of the Nuevo Rey no de 
Granada, established at Bocaneme. It is of a very 
cold temperature, and produces some vegetable 



productions, but with scarcity, since the principal 
labour is confined to the gold mines ; and from 
these much riches have been extracted ; some 
silver mines have also been discovered in its terri 
tory. 

MONTUOSA, a small island of the S. sea, near 
the coast of the province and government of Ve- 
ragua, in the kingdom of Tierra Firmc. 

[MONUMENT Bay, on the e. coast of Massa 
chusetts, is formed by the bending of cape Cod. 
It is spacious and convenient for the protection of 
shipping.] 

MON/ON, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Guamalies in Peru; annexed to 
the curacy of Chavin de Pariarca. 

[MOORE, a county of N. Carolina, in Fayette 
district. It contains 3770 inhabitants, including 
371 slaves. Chief town, Alfordston.] 

[MoouE Court-house, in the above county, 
where a post-office is kept, is 38 miles from 
Randolph court-house, and 40 from Favette- 
Tille/j 

[MooRE Fort, a place so called in S. Carolina, 
is a stupendous bluff, or high perpendicular bank 
of eartli on the Carolina shore of Savannah river, 
perhaps 90 or 100 feet above the common surface 
of the water, exhibiting the singular and pleasing 
spectacle to a stranger, of prodigious walls of 
party-coloured earths, chiefly clays and marl, as 
red, brown, yellow, blue, purple, white, &amp;c. in 
horizontal strata, one over the other. A fort for 
merly stood here, before the erection of one at 
Augusta, from which it stood a little to the n. e. 
The water now occupies the spot on which the fort 
stood.] 

[MOORK S Creek is 16 miles from Wilmington, 
in N. Carolina. Here General M Donald with 
about 2000 royalists were defeated (aflef a retreat 
of 80 miles, and a desperate engagement) by Ge- 



MOO 

neral Moore, at the head of 800 continentals. 
General M Donald and the flower of his men were 
killed.] 

[MOORFIELD, in New Jersey, 11 miles e. of 
Philadelphia.] 

[MOORFIELDS, a post-town, and the capital 
of Hardy county, Virginia ; situated on the e. side 
of the s. branch of Patowmao river. It contains a 
court-house, a goal, and between 60 and 70 houses. 
It is J6 miles from Romney, 28 from Winchester, 
and 116 from Richmond.] 

MOOSE, Factory of the River, an establishment 
of the English, in the province of New S.Wales in 
N. America, founded in 1740 near the mouth or 
entrance of the river of its name, in lat. 51 15 , on 
the shore of another navigable river, which, at 12 
miles from the fort which has been built for the de 
fence of the founders, divides itself into two arms, 
the one running from the s. the other from the s. w. 
On the shore of this s. arm are produced all kinds 
of vegetable productions, which are carried to the 
factory, such as barley, beans, and common pease, 
notwithstanding the cold winds blowing over the 
ice in the bay. On the same shore, and above the 
cascade, grows wild a certain corn resembling rice, 
and in the woods of the interior of Moose and Al 
bany bay, as well as upon the shore of the river 
Rupert, are large trees of every kind, such as oaks, 
cedars, firs, &amp;c. also an excellent grass for making 
hay; and throughout the whole territory maybe 
raised the different European grains and fruits. 
The ice breaks at the factory about the beginning 
of March, but higher up, in the middle of the 
month. The river is navigable for canoes as far 
as the cascades ; and 50 leagues up there is^&amp;gt;ne of 
a fall of 50 feet, but after this the river runs deep and 
navigable through a fine healthy country. 

[MOOSE River, a short stream in Grafton coun 
ty. New Hampshire, which runs n. e. from the 
White mountains into Amariscoggin river.] 

[MoosR Island, on the coast of the district of 
Maine, at the mouth of Schoodick river, contains 
about 30 families. On the s. end of this island is 
an excellent harbour suitable for the construction 
of dry docks. Common tides rise here 25 feet.] 

[MOOSEHEAD Lake, or MOOSE Pond, in 
Lincoln county, district of Maine, is an irregular 
shaped body of water, which gives rise to the e. 
branch of Kennebec river, which unites with the 
other above Norridgewock, about 17 miles s. of 
the lake. There are very high mountains to the n. 
and w. of the lake ; and from these the waters run 
by many channels into the St. Lawrence.] 

[MOOSEHILLOCK, the highest of the chain 
of mountains in New Hampshire, the White moun- 

VOL. III. 



M O Q 33? 

tains excepted. It takes its name from its having 
been formerly a remarkable range for moose, and 
lies w. of the White mountains. From its n. w. 
side proceeds Baker s river, a branch of Pemige- 
\vassct, which is the principal branch of Merri- 
mack. On this mountain, snow has been seen from 
the town of Newbury, Vermont, on the 30th of 
June and 31st of August ; and on the mountains 
intervening, snow, it is said, lies the whole year.] 

MOPORA, a settlement of the jurisdiction of 
Muzo, and corregimiento of Tunja, in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. It is much reduced ; of a 
warm temperature, and produces sugar-canes, cot 
ton, yucas, maize, and plantains, on "which the 
natives, who are very poor, subsist. 

MOPORO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Maracaibo, in the same kingdom as 
the former ; situate within the great lake of Mara 
caibo. It is small, and there is this singular cir 
cumstance attached to it, namely, that all the postg 
and rafters on which it is built, and which are of a 
kind of wood called vera, become petrified after 
having been a certain time in the water. 

MOPOSPAN, SANTIAGO nr, a settlement of 
the head settlement of the district and alcaldia 
mayor of Cholula in Nueva Espana. It contains 
39 families of Indians, and is a quarter of a league 
w. of its capital. 

MOQUEHUA, a province and corregimiento of 
the kingdom of Peru, bounded n. by the province of 
Lam pa, n. e. by that of Paucarcolla or Puno, e. by 
that of Chucuico, s. and s. e, by that of Arica, and 
w. by that of Arequipa. It is 42 leagues long, 
and its temperature is for the most part cold, from 
its being situate on the heights arid sides of the 
cordillcra, the tops of which are always covered 
with snow. Towards the lower part, where it is 
bounded by the province of Arica, and in some de 
gree by that of Arequipa, the temperature is mo 
derate, as also in some of the valleys formed by (he 
windings of the cordillera, and in one of which the 
capital stands. In the aforesaid Cordillera are 
many volcanoes, which are almost continually vo 
miting fire, and, in 1600, one called Ornate exploded 
with such violence as to scatter its ashes over nearly 
the whole province, rendering useless many estates 
which were before fertile and productive, and 
carrying its destruction as far as the city of Are 
quipa and some of its settlements, which suffered 
dreadful damages. There are in this province 
some silver mines, which are worked, but to little 
profit. Its vegetable productions are quantities of 
maize, which is carried to the neighbouring pro 
vinces, and wines, which are for the most part con 
verted into brandy, to send to the provinces of the 

X X 



338 



M O Q 



sierra; and in the valley of its name alone they 
usually make about 60,000 arrohas. It also pro 
duces some sugar, wheat, and other seeds, a good 
number of large and small cattle, and other fruits 
peculiar to the serrania. It is watered by several 
streams which flow down from the cordiltera, from 
the greater part of which are formed two rivers ; 
the larger running into the sea by the valley of 
Tambo, of the jurisdiction of Arequipa ; but its 
waters being bad, since near its source it is impreg 
nated by some hot streams of a fetid quality ; the 
other, which is less, being principally formed of 
three streams which pass by the capital and its 
vicinity, and which, after watering the greater and 
better territories, fall into the port of llo, belonging 
to the province of Arica. It was conquered by 
famine by the Emperor Maita Capac. Its corre- 
gidor used to have a reparlimiento of] 10,650 dol 
lars, and its population consists of 10 settlements. 

Torata, Quinistacas, 

Carumas, Ubinas, 

Puquina, Pocsi, 

Coalaque, Mollebaya, 

Ornate, Socay. 

The capital is the town of (he same name, at 
least so called from the time of its foundation by 
the aforesaid Emperor Maita Capac ; but the 
Spaniards call it Santa Catarina de Guadalcazar, 
from its having been rebuilt by the Marquis of this 
title, the viceroy of Peru in 1626. It is situate at 
the foot of the Cordillera, in a pleasant and fertile 
valley, abounding iii vegetable productions, and 
especially in vines, upwards of 60,000 arrobas 
of wine being made yearly. It has a very good 
parish church, three convents, namely, of the re 
ligious orders of San Francisco, San Domingo, 
Betletmitas, and an hospital, and a college for 
merly of the Jesuits. It suffered severely by an 
earthquake in 1715. Its climate is mild and 
healthy, and it contains more than 6000 souls, 
amongst whom are some rich and noble families. In 
lat. 17 13 s. and long. 70 48 w. 

MOQUI ARAYVE, a province and country of 
barbarian Indians in N.America; bounded s. by 
the river Gila as far as La Primeria, e. by Nuevo 
Mexico, n. and w. by the extensive regions as yet 
unknown, save by the confused advices of certain 
Indians, who said that they journeyed w, for six 
moons, and from whose further informations it 
might be conjectured that they reach as far as the 
confines of Tartary by the strait of Uriz. This 
province is inhabited by various barbarous nations 
of infidel Indians, from whom, in 1743, a deputa 
tion to the number of 44 came to Nuevo Mexico 
to entreat the governor, who was then the Lieute- 



M O R 

nant-colonel Don Caspar Domingo, that he would 
send amongst them some missionaries who might 
reduce them to the catholic faith. This he ac 
ceded to, defraying out of his private purse the 
expenccs of cattle, seeds, and instruments, which 
he gave them to cultivate their land, at the same 
time establishing the settlements of 
Hualpi, Quianna, 

Tanos, Aguatubi, 

Moxonavi, And the Rio Grande 

Xongopavi, de Espeleta. 

In 1748 the commissary of the missions of San 
Francisco entered by Nuevo Mexico to continue 
these reductions, as also those of the province of 
Navajoos, to the n. of that of Moqui and n. w. of 
Santa Fe. 

MORAGA, a small settlement of the district 
and jurisdiction of Anserma in the Nuevo Hey node 
Granada ; situate on an eminence on the shore of 
the river Canca ; and in its vicinity are some gold 
mines celebrated for the abundance of this metal. 
Seven leagues from its capital. 

MORAL, a point on the s. coast, and in the 
French possessions of the island of St. Domingo, 
between cape Jaquemel and the river Benet. 

MORALES, a settlement of the province and 
government of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; situate on the e. shore of the Rio 
Grande de la Magdalena. On the e. a small river 
runs near to it, but immediately enters the afore 
said river. Its climate is warm and moist, and 
consequently unhealthy. In lat. 8 15 n. 

[MORA NT Keys, off the island of Jamaica, 
in the W. Indies. Lat. 17 26 n. Long. 75 
57 a&amp;gt;.] 

[Mo RANT Point, the most e. promontory of 
the island of Jamaica. On the s. w. side of the 
point is a harbour of the same name. From point 
Morant it is usual for ships to take their departure 
that are bound through the Windward passage, or 
to any part of the w. end of the island of St. Do 
mingo. Lat. 17 57 n. Long. 76 7 o&amp;gt;.] 

[Mo RANT HARBOUR, Port, is about 10 miles w. 
of point Morant, on the s. coast of the island of 
Jamaica. Before the mouth of it is a small island, 
called Good island, and a fort on each point of the 
entrance.] 

[Mo RANT River is about six miles w. of the 
w. point of point Morant. The land here forms a 
bay, with an anchorage along the shore.] 

MORA VI AYS, a settlement of the province and 
colony of New York in N. America; situate on 
the shore and at the source of the river Delaware. 

MORAYO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Cliichas and Tarija iu Peru, of 



*M O R 

the district of the former ; annexed to the curacy 
ofTalinn. 

MORCHIQUEJO, a settlement of the pro 
vince and government of Cartagena, in the divi 
sion and district of Motnpox ; situate on the shore 
of the Rio Grande de la Magdalena. 

MORCOT, a settlement of the island of Barba- 
does, in the district of the parish of San Jorge. 

MORCOTE, a settlement of the province and 
government of San Juan de los Llanos in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of a moderately 
hot temperature ; situate at the foot of the moun 
tains of Bogota, very fertile, pleasant, and salu 
tary, abounding in vegetable productions, and par 
ticularly in cotton, which the natives spin with 
much nicety, making excellent linen, white and 
striped mantles, delicate napkins, pavilions, and 
other articles of curious manufacture, vying with 
those of Tarma, which are esteemed the best in the 
kingdom. It also produces aguecates^ and a spe 
cies of small plantains, which may be eaten at one 
mouthful, and are called cambures, the like not 
being found elsewhere, and highly esteemed. The 
dates also are very fine, being as good as those 
of Africa and Palestine. It contains 100 house 
keepers, and more than 400 Indians, who are the 
most docile, laborious, and well inclined of any in 
the province. This settlement lies in the road 
leading to Tunja, upon an extensive and beautiful 
lofty plain. 

[MORE, a township in Northumberland 
county, Pennsylvania,] 

[MORELAND, the name of two townships of 
Pennsylvania ; the one in Philadelphia county, 
the other in that of Montgomery.] 

[MORENA, a cape on the coast of Chile, 
S. America, is in lat. 23 20 s. and long. 70 
32 w. It is 15 miles n. by e. of cape George. 
The bay between these capes seems very desirable 
to strangers to go in ; but in a n. w. wind is very 
dangerous, because the wind blows right on the 
shore, and makes a very heavy sea in the road. 
Here is a very convenient harbour, but exceed 
ingly narrow, where a good ship might be ca 
reened.] 

MORENO, a port of the Morro, on the coast of 
the S. sea, of the province and corregimienio of 
Atacama in Peru. 

MORETI, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Darien, and kingdom of Tierra Firme. It 
rises in the mountains of the interior, runs w. and 
enters the Grande de Chucunaqui. 

MORETOWN, a settlement of the province 
and colony of Georgia in N.America; situate 



M O R 



on a small island formed by an arm of the river 
Pompon. 

MORGAN, a settlement of the island of Barbn- 
does, in the district of the parish of St. Philip, 
distinct from two others which are there; one of 
the district of the parish of St. Thomas, the other 
on the w. coast. 

MORGAN, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Cutnana, running w. and entering the San, 
Jacome. 

[MoiiGAN District, in N. Carolina, is bounded 
w. by the state of Tennessee, and s. by the state 
of S. Carolina. It is divided into the counties of 
Burke, Wilkcs, Rutherford, Lincoln, and Bun- 
comb ; and contains 33,292 inhabitants, including 
2693 slaves.] 

[MORGANS, a settlement in Kentucky, 38 
miles e. of Lexington, and 18 n. e. of Boons- 
borough.] 

[MORGANTOWN, a post-town and the chief 
town of the above district, is situated in Burke 
county near Catabaw river. Here are about 30 
houses, a court-house and gaol. It is 30 miles 
from Wilkes, 31 from Lincolntovvn, 74 from 
Salem, and 408 from Philadelphia. Lat. 35 9 
47 *.] 

[MORGANTOWX, a post-town of Virginia, and 
shire-town of Monongalia county, is pleasantly si 
tuated on the e. side of Monongahela river, about 
six miles s. of the mouth of Cheat river; and con 
tains a court-house, a stone-gaol, and about 40 
houses. It is 57 miles from Romney, 17 from 
Union-town in Pennsylvania, 55 from Cumberland 
fort in Maryland, and 219 from Philadelphia.] 

[MORGANZA, a town now laying out in 
Washington county, Pennsylvania; situated in, 
and almost surrounded by the e. and w. branches 
of Charter s river, including the point of their con 
fluence ; 13 miles s. w. of Pittsburg, and on the 
post-road from thence to Washington, the county 
town distant 10 miles. Boats carrying from 200 
to 300 barrels of flour, have been built at Mor 
ganza, laden at the mill tail there, and sent down 
the Chartiers into the Ohio, and so to New Or 
leans. By an act of the legislature of Pennsyl 
vania, the Chartiers, from the Ohio upwards as far 
as Morganza, is declared to be a high-way. This 
town is surrounded by a rich country, where num 
bers of grist and saw mills are already built, and 
the lands in its environs well adapted to agricul 
ture and grazing; and is spoken of as a country 
that is, or will be, the richest in Pennsylvania. 
Morganza, from its situation and other natural ad 
vantages, must become the centre of a great inauu- 
x x 2 



M O R 



factoring country ; especially as considerable bo 
dies of iron ore, of a superior quality, have been 
already discovered in (lie neighbourhood, and have 
been assayed. The high waving hills in this coun 
try are, from the quality of the soil, convertible 
into the most luxuriant grazing lands, and are al 
ready much improved in this way. These hills 
will be peculiarly adapted to raise live stock, and 
more particularly the fine long-woolled breed of 
sheep ; such as that of the Cotswold hills in Eng 
land, whose fleeces sell for 2s. sterling per pound ; 
\vhenothersfetchonly Is. or Is. 3d. The wheat 
of this country is said to weigh, generally, from 
62 to 66 Ib. the bushel of eight gallons. From 
hence considerable exports are already made to 
J\ew Orleans, of flour, bacon, butter, cheese, cider, 
rye, and apple spirits. The black cattle raised 
here are sold to the new settlers, and to cattle mer 
chants, for the Philadelphia and Baltimore mar 
kets ; many have also been driven to Niagara and 
Detroit, where there are frequent demands for live 
stock, which suffer much in those n. countries, 
from hard winters, failures in crops, and other 
causes.] 

MORGNE, or TUERTO, a settlement of the 
parish of the French, in the part they possess in 
the island of St. Domingo ; situate on the n. coast, 
on the shore of the river of its name. 

[MORGUE Fort, orFoRTABEzA DE MORGUE, 
on the s. shore of the entrance to Valdivia bay, on 
the coast of Chile, on the S. Pacific ocean. The 
channel has from nine to six fathoms.] 

[MORIENNE, a bay on the e. coast of the 
island of Cape Breton, near Miray bay, from which 
it is separated only by cape Brule. It is a tolera 
bly deep bay.] 

MOR1N, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Truxillo in Peru, to the w. of the 
monntian of Pelagatos. 

Mo KIN, another settlement, in the island of St. 
Domingo, and part possessed by the French ; si 
tuate on the n. coast, between the settlement of 
Limonade, and that of La Petite Ance. It is in 
the plain of cape Frances, and one of the 12 pa 
rishes of the name of Santa Rosa. 

MORINECA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Darien, and kingdom of Tierra 
Firme ; situate by the s. and on the shore of the 
Rio Grande de Tuira, near the real of Santa 
Maria. 

MORINI, or MAROWINE, a river of the pro 
vince and government of La Guayana, which 
serves as a limit of division between the territories 
of the Dutch and French. It runs n, e. then turns 



M O R 

n. arid empties itself into the Atlantic, in lat. 5* 
55 4" w. 

MORIS, a settlement and reduction of Indians, 
of the missions that were held by the regulars of 
the Jesuits in the province and government of Ci- 
naloa in N. America. 

MO R LAND, WEST, a county of the province 
and colony of Virginia in N. America. 

MORNE, Guos, a very lofty mountain of the 
island of Martinique, covered with points, similar 
to those of the mountains of Montserrat in Cataluna. 
It is near the coast which looks s. e. opposite the 
bay or Ance du Gall ion. 

MORNE, Guos, another mountain, on a point of 
land of the island of San Christoval, one of the 
Lesser Antilles; situate on the n. e. coast, between 
the river Cabrito and the bay of Caret. 

MORNE, GROS, some other mountains, of the 
island of Guadalupe, with a very lofty mountain 
at their extremity, and on the const which looks 
to n. w. between the port of Mouillage and La 
Grand Ance, or Great bay. 

MORNE, GROS, a settlement and parish of the 
French, in the part which they possess in the island 
of St. Domingo ; situate on the n. coast. 

MORO, a settlement of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Santa in Peru. 

[Mono, Castle, is on the point or head-land 
on the e. side of the channel of the Ilavannah, in 
the n. w. part of the island of Cuba, and is the 
first of two strong castles for the defence of the 
channel against the approach of an enemy s ships. 
It is a kind of triangle, fortified with bastions, on 
which are mounted about GO pieces of cannon, 24 
pounders. From the castle there also runs a wall 
or line, mounted with 12 long brass cannon, 36 
pounders ; called, by way of eminence, " The 
Twelve Apostles :" arid at the point, between the 
castle and the sea, there is a tower where a man 
stands and gives signals of what vessels approach. 
See HAVANNAH.] 

[MoRo QUEMADO, FAZENDA DO, a farm about 
60 miles to the n. e. of Rio de Janeiro, visited by 
Mawe in 1809. He passed through it in his way 
to Canta Gallo ; and the following is a description 
of his route, which we extract nearly verbatim, in 
order to give our readers, as far as we are able, an 
accurate idea of the qualities of the soil and nature 
of the territory in these parts. 

1 Some time (observes this traveller) after my 
return from Santa Cruz (to Rio de Janeiro), a cir 
cumstance of a singular nature took place, which 
occasioned me to undertake a journey to a district 
called Canta Gallo, distant about 40 leagues from 



M O R O Q U E M A D O. 



341 



[the capital, and one of the latest discovered in this 
part of Brazil. Two men reported that they had 
there found a mine of silver, and brought to the 
mint a quantity of earthy matter reduced to 
powder, from which was smelted a small ingot 
of that metal. This report being officially laid be 
fore his Excellency Don Rodrigo, I was solicited 
to go to Canta Gallo and investigate the business 
on the spot, the two men being ordered to meet 
rnc there. Before I proceed to relate the result 
of my inquiry, I shall briefly describe whatever 
I observed worthy of note in the course of the 
journey. 

Being provided with a passport, and also a 
sketch of the route, taken from a MS. map in 
the archives, I departed from Hio on the 10th of 
April 1809, accompanied by Dr. Gardner, lecturer 
on chemistry at the college of St. Joaquiru. Hav 
ing to pass to the bottom of the harbour, towards 
the H. we embarked in a small vessel, and being 
favoured with a strong sea-breeze, ran down to 
the entrance of the fine river Maccacu, which we 
reached after a five hours sail. The wind then 
dying, our boatmen took to their oars, and pro 
ceeding up the river we reached a house called 
Villa Nova, where numbers of market-boats for 
Rio were waiting for the land-wind and the turn 
of the tide. After taking some refreshment here, 
\ve rowed onward until the river became so nar 
row that the vessel frequently touched the bank on 
each side, and the men were obliged to push her 
along with poles. At day-break we reached Porto 
dos Caxhes, a place of great resort from the inte 
rior, being the station where the mules discharge 
their loads of produce from the many plantations 
in the neighbourhood. The town consists of seve 
ral poor houses, and of stores where goods are de 
posited for embarkation. The stratum Hereabouts 
is primitive granite, covered with fine strong clay. 
Leaving this place, we proceeded for some dis 
tance and came to a large swamp, which we navi 
gated in a canoe, with very little difficulty, and 
shortly afterwards arrived at the village of Mac 
cacu. It stands on a small eminence in the midst 
of a fine plain, watered by a considerable stream, 
over which there are two good bridges. Though 
almost at the base of the chain of mountains that 
forms a barrier along the coast, the neighbour 
hood affords some fine situations ; the land in ge 
neral consists of a strong clay, but appears much 
worn out. The commander, Colonel Jose, to 
\vhotn 1 introduced myself, gave me a very polite 
reception, as did also the brethren of the convent, 
to whom I paid a visit. 

1 On the following day, being accommodated by 



the colonel with a horse and guide, I proceeded 
along the winding banks of the river, which in 
many places present most beautiful views. Here 
was more cultivated land than I expected to see ; 
but the sugar plantations, and, in general, the low 
pasture grounds, are quite neglected. We passed 
several farms belonging to convents, which, from 
their apparent condition, and the accounts we re 
ceived, do little more than maintain the Negroes 
and incumbents upon them. There was rarely a 
milch cow to be met with : pigs and poultry were 
equally scarce. The population of these fine val 
leys is deplorably thin and poor ; there was a ge 
neral sickliness in the looks of the women and 
children we met with, which may be imputed to 
their miserable diet and inactive life. I ought to 
state that the manners of the people here are mild 
and gentle ; we were every where treated with ci 
vility, and all our inquiries were answered with 
the most friendly marks of respect and attention. 

The air, as we drew nearer the mountains, was 
fresh, and indeed cold. Towards evening we ar 
rived at a farm belonging to a convent of nuns in 
Rio dc Janeiro, where we were kindly accommo 
dated for the night. This place is most agreeably 
situated, and might, under skilful and industrious 
management, be rendered a paradise. It has ex 
cellent clay, fine timber, a good fall of water, 
which forms a beautiful rivulet, and runs into a 
navigable river within 100 yards of the house ; a 
fine extent of arable land, and a still finer of pas 
ture, which peculiarly qualifies it for dairy farm 
ing. It is distant only one day s journey from 
port Caxhes, whence there is a navigable commu 
nication with the metropolis. What a scene for 
an enterprising agriculturist ! At present all is 
neglected: the house, the out-buildings, and other 
conveniences, are in a state of decay, and the 
people who manage the land appear, in common, 
with the animals that feed upon it, to be half fa 
mished. 

* The next morning we proceeded e. and crossing 
the stream, which was at least 60 yards broad and 
full three feet deep, rode along the farther margin, 
which is rather more elevated, and presents a view of 
some fine plains, stretching from thence to the base 
of the mountains. Journeying in that direction 
we reached the fine plantation of Captain Ferrera, 
who received us very politely, and shewed us 
every attention. This place, bounded by the al 
pine ridge behind it, is the extreme point to which 
the river Maccacu is navigable. It is six or seven 
leagues from the village of that name. The estate 
maintains about 100 Negroes, who are chiefly cm- 
ployed in raising sugar, cotton, and coffee ; but] 



M O R O Q U E M A D O. 



[to me the situation appeared much belter calcu 
lated lor growing grain and feeding cattle, as the 
weather is at times cold, the evenings are fre 
quently attended with heavy dews, and owing to 
the proximity of the mountains, here are frequent 
rains, accompanied by thunder and lightning. 
Numbers of fine springs burst fortli from various 
parts of the hills, and form rivulets with falls, 
which, as here is plenty of fine timber, afford 
every means for working machinery. The owner 
lives in opulence, and is so humane and liberal to 
his people, that they seem to revere him as a fa 
ther. We were much pleased with the air of do 
mestic comfort and contented industry, which we 
observed among them on visiting their dwellings 
in the evening. Some of the Negro children were 
at play ; others of more advanced age were assist 
ing the women to pick cotton ; and the men were 
scraping and preparing mandioca. Their cheer 
fulness was not at all interrupted by our approach, 
nor did they betray any uneasy feeling of con 
straint in the presence of their superiors. In lieu 
of candles, which are seldom to be met with but in 
the capital, they burn oil, extracted from the bean 
of the palm, or from a small species of ground-nut 
here called meni. 

; About noon, on the following day, horses being 
provided, and a soldier appointed for our guide, 
we left the fazenda, accompanied by its hospitable 
owner, Captain Ferrera, who conducted us half a 
league on our way. The river, along which we 
passed in an e. direction, bursts through vast 
masses of rock with great force, and in some parts 
forms considerable falls. The captain, ere we 
parted, led me to a water-course, in which were 
found pieces of granite covered with manganese in 
a botryoidal form. After crossing the river twice, 
we arrived at what is called the first register, or 
searching-house, distant about two miles from the 
fazenda. This station is guarded by a corporal 
and a private soldier, who are charged with the 
receipt of various toils, and are empowered to 
search passengers, in order to prevent the smug 
gling of gold dust. After shewing my passport, 
I took leave of Captain Ferrera, who made me 
promise to pay him a longer visit on my return. 

We had been warned of the badness of the 
roads, and were by no means agreeably deceived 
in them, for we were nearly four hours in going 
the next six miles. At the close of day, after a 
laborious and dangerous passage through abrupt 
ravines, and along the sides of steep hills, our 
guide announced that we were in sight of the 
second register, where it was proposed that we 
should pass the night. On arriving we found it a 



most miserable place, inhabited by five or six 
soldiers under the command of a serjeant. This 
good man gave us a hearty welcome, and with 
the assistance of his comrades, cooked us a supper 
of fowls, and regaled us with whatever else their 
scanty store afforded. We were not without mu 
sic to our repast, for the house is built on the edge 
of a roaring torrent, which, bursting through a 
ravine, has washed away every thing except some 
huge masses of rock. A bit of ground, about 10 
yards square, is all the garden these poor people 
have, and even this is much neglected, for the 
guards here arc so often changed, that no one 
thinks of adding to the comforts and conveniences 
of an abode, which others are to enjoy. 

* At day-break, we found that our mules had 
strayed into a wood adjoining, but as the road 
was stopped, we were under no apprehension of 
losing them, for the thickets on each side were 
impervious. This occurrence gave me an oppor 
tunity of seeing more of these remote regions, and 
certainly the imagination of Salvator Rosa himself 
never pictured so rude a solitude. On one side 
rose the great barrier of mountains, which we had 
yet to cross, covered to their summits with trees 
and underwood, without the smallest trace of cul 
tivation ; on the other lay the broken country, be 
tween this ridge and the plain, presenting the same 
wild features of silvan scenery. -/The miserable 
hut, at which we lodged, partook of the sa 
vage character of the neighourhood, and seemed 
formed lor the abode of men cut off from all inter 
course with their fellows. On our return we were 
provided with a breakfast of coffee and eggs; as 
to milk, there was no possibility of procuring any ; 
a cow would have been considered here as an in- 
cumbrance, nor would any one of the six idle sol 
diers have given himself the trouble of milking 
her, though they all had been dying of hunger, 

On resuming our journey, we entered on a road 
still more steep and rugged than that which AVC 
had passed. We were often obliged to dismount 
and lead our mules np almost perpendicular passes, 
and along fearful declivities. In some places, the 
thick foliage of the trees and that of the under 
wood, which grew higher than our heads, shel 
tered us from the sun, and indeed scarcely admit 
ted the light. Not a bird did we see, nor the 
trace of any living thing, except some wild hogs. 
We passed several bare granite rocks of a gneiss- 
like formation. 

* In journeying to the next station, we observed 
nothing worthy of note excepting a small saw mill, 
worked by an overshot wheel, of very clumsy con 
struction. The frame, which contains a single] 

2 



M O R O Q U E M A D O. 



343 



[saw of very thick iron, moves in a perpendicular 
direction ; at every stroke a boy brings the timber 
up, by pulling a cord attached to a crank that 
moves the cylinder on which it rests. How 
readily, thought I, would the meanest Russian 
peasant improve this machine ! 

* We proceeded on our way up an ascent so pre 
cipitous that we were obliged to walk more than 
ride ; after two hours toiling along the side of a 
granite mountain, in which we observed some beds 
of fine clay, we reached the summit, from whence 
we saw the bay of Rio de Janeiro, the sngar-loaf 
mountain, and the city itsel , to all appearance 
not more than four or five leagues distant from us, 
though, in reality, more than 20. At this eleva 
tion, which we may state to be at 4 or 5000 
feet above the level of the sea, the air was sharp 
and keen ; the thermometer stood at 58. Conti 
nuing in a n. e. direction, we passed two poor 
farms, and entered upon a range of grand scenery, 
composed of bare abrupt conical mountains, with 
immense water-falls in every direction. 

At the close of day we arrived at a farm 
house, called Fazenda do Moro Quemado, the 
manager of which received us hospitably, and 
accommodated us for the night. The weather 
was so cold, that a double supply of bed-clothes 
scarcely produced sufficient warmth ; in the 
morning the thermometer was at 48 Fahrenheit. 
After the heavy dew cleared away we took a view 
of the grounds, in company with the manager ; 
they appeared well-suited for a grazing farm, but 
the temperature of the atmosphere is too severe for 
growing the common produce of the country ; 
particularly cotton, coffee, and bananas, which are 
frequently blasted. I was informed that some 
wheat has been grown here, though the people are 
quite unacquainted with the European method of 
farming. Indian corn, for the feed of hogs, is the 
staple article. This plantation is infested by 
ounces, which at times prey upon young cattle; 
the manager, who is a great hunter, keeps dogs, 
though of a poor race, for the express purpose of 
destroying them, which is thus practised: When 
the carcase of a Avorried animal bus been found, 
or when an ounce has been seen prowling about, 
the news is soon proclaimed among the neighbours, 
two or three of whom take fire irms loaded with 
heavy slugs, and go out with the dogs in quest of 
the animal, who generally lurks in some thicket 
near the carcase he has killed, and leaves so 
.strong a scent that the dogs soon find. "W hen dis 
turbed he retreats to his den, if he has one, the 
dogs never attempting to fasten on him, or even to 



face him, but, on the contrary, endeavouring to 
get out of his way, which is not difficult, as the 
ounce is heavy and slow of motion. If he caves, 
the sport is at an end, and the hunters make up the 
entrance ; but he more commonly has recourse to 
a large tree, which he climbs with great facility ; 
here his fate is generally decided, for the hunters 
get near enough to take a steady aim, and seldom 
fail to bring him down, one of them reserving his 
fire to dispatch him, if required, after he has fal 
len. It generally happens that one or two of the 
dogs are killed in coming too near, for even in his 
dying struggles, a single stroke of his paw proves 
mortal. The skin is carried home as a trophy, 
and the neighbours meet and congratulate each 
other on the occasion. 

This farm, in the hands of an experienced and 
skilful agriculturist, might be managed so as to 
produce amazing returns. Its soil is wet, adapted 
to the growth, not only of Indian corn, but of 
wheat, barley, potatoes, &amp;c. and it is so well irri 
gated, by numerous mountain streams, that the 
pastures are always luxuriant. Here are fine falls 
of water, and abundance of excellent timber, so 
that corn-mills might be erected at little more ex- 
pence than what would arise from the purchase of 
mill-stones. Connected with the nun s farm below, 
this establishment might be rendered one of the 
most complete and advantageous in Brazil. 

* Leaving Moro Quemado at noon, and descend 
ing on the other side of the ridge of mountains, 
we passed through an unequal tract, formed of 
hills and ravines. Onward the land appeared 
finer, and the timber of a superior growth, but 
there were few cultivated spots, and not many 
houses. The first extensive fazenda we reached 
was that of Manuel Jose Pereira, a native of the 
Azores, who managed his agricultural concerns 
much better than the other farmers whom we 
visited. We were shewn a large field of Indian 
corn ready for cutting ; the quantity that had been 
sown was about 1 1 fanegas, or bushels, and the 
produce was estimated at 1500 bushels, about 150 
for one. This was an ordinary crop ; in good 
years the harvest yields 200 for one. The corn, 
as before stated, is chiefly consumed in the fatten 
ing of pigs ; the quantity requisite for this pur 
pose is six or seven bushels each, and the time 10 
or 12 weeks. The curing of bacon is performed 
by cutting all the lean from the flitches, and 
sprinkling them with a very little salt. This food 
has the peculiar effect of giving great solidity to 
the fat, which of itself is not liable to putrefac 
tion. Sec Mawe s Travels. ] 



344 



M O R 



MOROCA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Guayana. It rises in the serrania of 
Imataca, and enters the sea on the e. coast. 

MOROCOLLA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Lucanas in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of Iluacana. 

- MOROI, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimifnto of Chichas and Tarija in Peru. 

[MOROKINNEE, or MOROTINNEP, in the 
island of Mowee, one of the Sandwich islands. It 
is in the N. Pacific ocean, pud lies in lat. 20 
29 n. 

MOROMORO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Cayanta or Charcas in the 
kingdom of Peru. 

MORON, a river of the province and corregi 
miento of Cuenca in the kingdom of Quito. It 
takes its origin in some mountains to the e. of that 
city, and runs s. e. to enter the Marauon in the 
province of Mainas. 

[MouoN, a parish of the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres ; situate on a small river 
emptying itself into the La Plata about 20 miles 
s. w. of Buenos Ayres. Lat 34 40 10 7 . Long. 
59 54 45".] 

MORONA, a large river of the kingdom of 
Quito to the s. It rises in the province of Alausi 
to the e. and, after collecting the waters of the 
Zuna, Jubal, Puentehonda, Bolcan, and Avenico, 
and taking itself the name of Upango, runs s. 
then receives the Apatenoma, Guachiyuca, and 
Amaga on its s. w. side, and on its n. c. the Arra- 
bima, Atassari, Yanassa, Hechizero, Chipanga, 
Aptaga, and Puschaga, and then, with the name 
of Morona, becomes navigable and laves the lands 
of the mountains of the country of Los Xibaros, 
where many barbarians of this nation dwell : it 
passes very near the city of Macas, the capital of 
this province, and enters with a large body into the 
Maranon or Amazon, 41 miles s. by e. of San 
Borja, between the rivers Pastaza to the e. and 
Santiago to the w. in lat. 4 38 30 s. 

[MOROSQUILLO Bay is to the s. of Cartha- 
gena, on the coast of the Spanish main, and in the 
bight of the coast coining out of Darien gulf, on 
the e. shore. It is large, but very open.] 

MOROTOCOS, a barbarous nation of In 
dians, of the province ami government of Para 
guay, discovered by the Father Juan Baptista 
Zea, of the abolished order of Jesuits, in 1711. 
They are very different in their customs from the 
other Indians, are taller and of a redder complex 
ion. They make their darts and lances of a wood 
extremely hard, and they manage these with the 



M O R 

greatest dexterity, as also their bows and arrows. 
Amongst these Indians the women had the entire 
authority, and the husbands were not only obe 
dient to them, but managed all the household af 
fairs. The women never kept more than two chil 
dren, one of each sex, and the rest they put to 
death as soon as born, avoiding thereby the trouble 
of rearing them. 

Although this nation, in common with the others, 
had its caciques or captains, they preserved no 
form of government whatever, and their authority 
was only limited (o affairs of war. The country, 
which is in lat. 20 30 s. is dry, barren, and sur 
rounded by mountains, on the which are thick 
woods of palms, in the trunks of which is a kind 
of spongy marrow, from which they squeeze out a 
juice which serves them for drink. Notwithstand 
ing that it freezes much in the winter, they all, 
men and women, go naked ; from whence it has 
been said of them that they had a very hard skin, 
and two fingers thick. The Boxos Indians, who 
were reduced to the faith, took two children from 
the Morotocos, and presented them to the Father 
Suarez, a missionary in the reduction of the Chiqui- 
tos, and making use of these as interpreters, entered 
the country of the Morotocos to preach ; and such 
were the fruits of his labours, that by the end of 
the year 1711, he had converted the whole of 
them, when they established themselves in the 
aforesaid settlement of San Joseph. 

[MOROTOI, or MOROKOI, one of the Sand- 
wich islands in the Pacific ocean, is about 2| 
leagues w. n. w. of Mowee island, and has several 
bays on its s. and w. sides. Its w. point is in lat. 
21 20 n. and long. 157 14 w. and is computed 
to contain 36,000 inhabitants. It is seven leagues 
s. e. of Woahoo island.] 

MORRILLO, PUNTA DEL, a cape or extre 
mity of the island of Inagua ; thus called from a 
small mountain in its vicinity of this name. 

[MORRIS, a county on the n. line of New Jer 
sey, w. of Bergen county. It is about 25 miles 
long, and 20 broad, is divided into five townships, 
and contains about 156,809 acres of improved, and 
30,429 acres of unimproved land. The e. part of 
the county is level, and affords fine meadows, and 
good land for Indian corn. The w. part is more 
mountainous, and produces crops of wheat. Here 
are seven rich iron mines, and two springs famous 
for curing rheumatic and chronic disorders. There 
are also two furnaces, two slitting and rolling mills, 
35 forges and fire works, 37 saw mills, and 43 
grist mills. There are in the county 16,216 inha 
bitants, of whom 636 are slaves. J 



M O R 

MORRIS, a settlement of the island of Barbadoes, 
in the parish and district of St. Joseph ; situated to 
the s. on the e. coast. 

MORRIS, another, in the same island, in the dis 
trict of the parish of Todos Santos. 

[MORRIS Bay, on the a;, coast of the island of 
Antigua, in the W. Indies. It cannot be recom 
mended to ships to pass this way, as there is in one 
place s. from the Five islands only two fathoms 
water. Vessels drawing more than nine feet water 
must not attempt it.] 

[MORRISSINA, a village in W. Chester 
county, New York, contiguous to Hell-gate, in 
the sound. In 1790 it contained 133 inhabitants, 
of whom 30 were slaves. In 1791 it was annexed 
to the township of \V. Chester.] 

[MORRISTOWN, a post-town and capital of 
the above county, is a handsome town, and con 
tains a Presbyterian and Baptist church, a court 
house, an academy, and about 50 compact 
houses; 18 miles to. by n. of Newark, and about 
56 n. e. of Philadelphia. The head-quarter of 
the American army, during the revolution war, 
was frequently in and about this town.] 

[MORR1SVILLE, a village in Pennsylvania ; 
situated in Berk s county, on the zo. bank of De 
laware river, one mile from Trenton, nine from 
Bristol, and 24 from Philadelphia. A post-office 
is kept here.] 

MORRITOS, some mountains of the coast of 
the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, in the province 
and government of the Rio del llacha ; they may 
be discovered at a great distance, and are close to 
cape Chichibacoa on the zo. 

MORRO, a. settlement of the government and 
jurisdiction of Merida, in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It is of a cold but healthy temperature, 
produces much wheat on its hilly sides, maize, and 
other vegetable productions of a cold climate; a 
tolerable number of neat cattle, goats, and sheep ; 
and contains 40 housekeepers and 80 Indians. 

MORRO, another settlement, of the district of 
La Punta of Santa Elena, in the province and 
government of Guayaquil and kingdom of Quito. 

MORRO, another, of the province and corregi- 
miento of Chachapoyas in Peru. 

MORRO, a river of the kingdom of Chile, 
which rises in the mountains of the cordillera, and 
enters the sea in the bay of Concepcion. 

MORRO, another, of the province and corregi- 
miento of Chachapoyas in Peru. It rises in the 
sierra, and incorporates itself with another river 
to enter the Mocobamba. 

MORRO, a mountain, with the surname of Her- 
nioso, on the coast of the province and govern- 

VOL. III. 



M O R 



345 



ment of Cartagena, on a point of land which runs 
into the sea between the point of Zamba and the 
island Verde. 

MORRO, another mountain, with the same 
additional title as the former, on the coast of Ca 
lifornia in N. America. 

MonRo, another, with the surname of Que- 
mado, on the coast of the province and corregi- 
miento of Nasca in Peru. 

MORRO, another, on the coast of the province 
and corregimiento of Arica in Peru. 

MORRO, another, with the surname of Her- 
moso as well as the former, on the coast of the 
province and government of Costa Rica and king 
dom of Guatemala, by the S. sea, between the 
port of Las Velas and cape Guiones. 

MORRO CHICO, a mountain of the coast of the 
province and government of Honduras and king 
dom of Guatemala, between the river Seco and 
that of Callera. 

[MORRO VIEJO. See ST. G ALLAN.! 

MORROA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Cartagena in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; situate on the shore of the stream Pi- 
chelin, near the settlement of San Christoval. 

MORRON, a settlement of the province and 
government of Cartagena in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada; situate on the n. of the town of San 
Bcnito Abad. 

MORRON, another settlement, in the province 
arid government of Venezuela ; situate on (he sea 
shore and to the zo. of the port Cabello. Tins set 
tlement has also a port, which, although small, 
is sheltered from the winds. 

MORROPE, a large settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Sana and bishopric of Trux- 
illo in Peru. It is-of the best climate of any set 
tlement on that coast ; near it runs the river Po- 
zuelos, which fertilizes the territory and renders 
it extremely delightful. The natives employ 
themselves in digging lime out of a quarry in the 
desert of Sechura and Lito, the which is used for 
making soap ; this privilege having been granted 
by the government, and extended to the settlement 
of Pacora, which is annexed to this settlement. 

MORROPON, a river of the province and cor- 
reglmiento of Pi lira in Peru, to the e. It runs s. w. 
and enters the Piura between the rivers Frias and 
Sauri, by its w. shore, in lat. 5 24 s. 

MoRRopox, a settlement of this province and 
kingdom, so called from the former river. 

MORROS, some faraUones or isles of the N. 
sea", lying opposite the coast of Santa Marta, and 
about, the distance of a cannon-shot from it. 

MORROSQUILLO, a gulf an the coast of IL 
y Y 



346 



M O R 



province and government of Cartagena and Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada, between the river Sinu and 
the islands of San Bernardo. 

MORT, a port or bay on the .9. coast of the 
island of Newfoundland, within the great bay of 
Plaisance. 

MORT, another bay, on the s. coast of the 
straits of Magellan, between that of San Martin 
and the creek of Sweet Water. 

MORTAGUA, a river of the province and go 
vernment ofHonduras and kingdom of Guatemala. 
Jt runs n. and enters the sea between the cape of 
Las Pnntas and the bay of Omoa. 

MOHTALLA, an island of the bay of Nassau 
in Florida. See NASSAU. 

[MORTIER S Rocks, on the s. coast of New- 



Lat. 47 2 n. 



Long. 54 C 



foundland island. 
52 w.l 

MORT1GURA, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Para in Brazil ; situate on the island 
Samauna. 

[MORTO Island, on the coast of Pern, so call 
ed by the Spaniards, from its striking resemblance 
to a dead corpse extended at full length. It is 
also called St. Clara. It is about 13 miles n. w. 
from the mouth of the river Tumbez ; and is two 
miles in length, and 72 miles from Guayaquil.] 

[MORTON Bay, on the n. w. coast of the 
island of Nevis in the W. Indies, is near the nar 
rows or channel between that island and St. Chris 
topher s, to the n. te. of which there is from three 
to eio-ht fathoms, according to the distance from 

O 7 O 

shore.] 

MORUAS, a barbarous nation of Indians but 
little known, who inhabit the woods near the river 
Yetau to the w. of Paraguay. They go naked, 
without fixed abode, and maintain themselves by 
the chase. 

[MORUES Bay, on the s. shore of the river St. 
Lawrence, s. of Gaspee bay, and w. of Bonaven- 
tura and Miscan islands.] 

MORUGA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Cumana. It rises in the sierra of Imataca, 
and enters the sea near the river Poumaron, in the 
district possessed by the Dutch. 

[MORUGO, a small river to the w. and n. w. 
of the gulf of Essequibo, on the coast of Surinam 
in S. America.] 

MORUI, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, situate in the peninsula of Paraguana, 
nearly in the centre of the same. 

MORUNGABA, a settlement of the province 
and captainship of San Vicente in Brazil ; situate 
between those of Sarnarnbay and Rio Verde. 



M O S 

MOSCARI, SANTIAGO DE, a settlement of the 
province and corregimiento of Chayanta or Char- 
cas in the same kingdom as the former. 

MOSCAS, MOZCAS, or MUISCAS, an ancient 
nation of Indians, and very numerous, of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, who dwell to e. of the 
mountains and llanuras of Bogota. They were 
the most civilized of all the nations of this king 
dom ; were clothed with a sort of cotton shirt, 
and over that a square mantle of the same fabric, 
and upon their heads, with the skins of animals 
they had killed, adorned with beautiful plumes, 
and in the front of the same an half moon of gold 
or silver, with the points upwards; also on their 
arms they wore bracelets of stone or bone, in their 
nostrils rings of gold, which they called chaqualas ; 
and the height of their gala or luxury was to paint 
their faces and body with vz/a, a kind of paint, 
and with the juice of jaqua, a fruit which pro 
duces a black tint. The women made use of the 
square mantle, which they called chircarte, and 
which was fastened round their waist by a clasp, 
which in their language was called chumbe or 
maure, and upon their shoulders another mantle 
which was smaller, named liquira, and which was 
fastened to their breast by a large gold buckle. 
The men wore their hair long upon their shoulders 
and parted in the Nazarene form, and the women 
carried it loose, availing themselves of the use of 
certain herbs, which, by the help of the fire, might 
render it of a deeper black ; and the greatest af 
front that could be offered them was to cut it. 

These Indians, as well men as women, are of an 
ingenuous countenance, of a good disposition. 
Their arms were slings, swords of macara, a wood 
as hard and as shining as steel ; also a certain kind 
of darts of light wood. They believed that there 
was a general Creator of all, but they nevertheless 
adored the sun and moon, calling the former Zupe 
and the latter Chia ; neither did they doubt of the 
immortality of the soul, but they imagined that it 
passed to other countries, and thus they buried 
their dead with certain portions of victuals, gold, 
emeralds, &amp;c. They were in continual warfare 
with the Muzos and Colimas nations, arid were 
feared and respected by all. 

The Moscan tongue, formerly called Chibcha, 
was the general language of the whole kingdom; 
and this was governed by a king or s//;a, who was 
elective. This language is now almost entirely 
lost. Nearly all the settlements of the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada are of Mozcan Indians, re 
duced to the Catholic faith. They are of a gene 
rous nature, bold, faithful, and robust, but much 
inclined to drunkenness. Some authors believed 



M O S 

that the name of Mozcas had been given them by 
the Spaniards to signify their numbers ; but it is 
certain that this was their own name, as may be 
seen in the history of tiie Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada, which has been written with infinite ability 
by the most illustrious Seaur Don Lucas Fernan 
dez de Piedrahita, bishop of Santa Marta and of 
Panama, and where may also be seen further par 
ticulars concerning these Indians. 

MOSCAS, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Tarma in Peru ; annexed to the cu 
racy of Parianchacra. 

[MOSCHKOS. See KIKAPUS.] 

[MOSE, or VLLLA DEL MOSE, a town on the 
bank of the river Tabasco, in the bottom of Cam- 
pechy gulf, to which small barges may go up. 
Great quantities of cocoa are shipped here for 
Spain ; which brings a great many sloops and 
small vessels to the coast.] 

[MOSES Point, a head or cape of land, on the 
e. side of the entrance into Bonavista bay, on the 
e. coast of Newfoundland island. It is to the s. of 
the rocks called Sweers, and five miles s. w. of cape 
Bonavista.] 

MOSINA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Cumaria ; situate on the w. coast of 
the capital.- 

MOSLEVIN, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tucuman in Peru, at present 
ruined by the infidel Indians ; to the n. n. e. of San 
Joseph de Vilelas. 

[MOSLEY S, a place on Roanoke river, nine 
miles below St. Tammany s, and three above 
Eaton s. The produce of the upper country is 
brought to these places, and sent from thence by 
waggons to Petersburg in Virginia.] 

MOSNACHO, a settlement of the government 
and jurisdiction of Maracaibo. It is very reduced 
and poor ; annexed to the curacy of Chachopo. 
It produces some seeds and fruits peculiar to its 
climate, which is teYnperate. 

MOSQUITO, a bay on the-w. coast, and 
in the part possessed by the French, of the island 
of St. Domingo, between the port of Paz and 
Agua. 

MOSQUITOS, a country of N. America, be 
tween Truxillo and Honduras, of the kingdom of 
Guatemala, in lat. 13 and 15 n. and between 
long. 85 and 88 w. bounded n. and e. by the N. sea, 
s. by the province of IS icaragua, and w. by that of 
Honduras. The Spaniards consider it as part of 
the latter province, but they have no establishment 
or settlement whatever in it ; since the enmity 
which the natives possess towards the Spaniards, 
inclines them easily to enter into alliance with any 



other nation, arid particularly the English, who 
most frequently are upon their coasts, in order to 
make extortions upon them. 

These Indians are excellent fishermen, and are 
much given to the fishery of the marine cow, and 
they moreover frequently make a voyage in Eng 
lish vessels to Jamaica. The Duke of Albemarle, 
being governor of this province, admitted the Mos- 
quitos Indians under the protection of England, 
and their prince received a special commission. 
After his death his successor proceeded to Jamaica 
to restore the treaty, but his vassals were not willing 
to acknowledge it. The English have at various 
times projected the establishment of a colony here. 
The pirate William Dampiere, speaking of these 
Indians, says that they have so acute a sight that 
they can see vessels at a much greater distance than 
can Europeans. Their dexterity also is such, that 
with a little bar of iron like the ramroad of a gun 
they can stop every hit that is made at them ; so 
that they are quite secure except that in case the 
said bar should break. 

MOSQUITOS, some islands near the coast and go 
vernment of Honduras, inhabited by the Mos- 
quitos Indians. They are many and small, and 
close to those of Los Manglares. 

MOSQUITOS, another island, which is one of the 
Little Virgin isles ; situate near the n. coast of La 
Virgen Gorda, on which it is dependent. 

MOSQUITOS, another island, near the e. coast of 
Florida, just without the Bahama channel. 

MOSQUITOS, a bay on the n. coast of the island 
of Cuba, between the port of the Havana and the 
bay of Mariel. 

MOSQUITOS, a point of the coast in the province 
and government of Darien, and kingdom of Tierra 
Firme, between the island of Pinos and the rancho 
of Harpones. 

MOSQUITOS, a bay, called Rincon de Mosquitos, 
on the coast of the province and government of 
Nicaragua, and kingdom of Guatemala, close to 
the cape of Gracias a Dios, and opposite the shoal 
of Tiburones. 

MOSQUITOS, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada. It rises from two lakes at the foot of the 
sierra of Carrizal, by the s. side, and enters the 
Orinoco. 

MOSTARDAS, a settlement of the province 
and captainship of Rcy in Brazil ; situate opposite 
the great lake of Los Patos. 

MOSTAZAL, a river of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Coquimbo in the kingdom of Chile ; 
which runs w. and enters the Limari. 

MOSTAZA8, a settlement of the province and 

Y 2 



348 



government of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada; founded, in 1740, in the serrania, after 
the Real Compania de Guipuzcoa. 

MOT A, a settlement of the jurisdiction and al 
caldia mayor of Pilon in the Nucvo Reyno dc 
Leon. 

MOTA, another settlement, on the s. coast of the 
island of Cuba, with a good port. 

MOTATAN, a large river of the province and 
government of Venezuela in the Nucvo Reyno de 
Granada. It rises from the mountains of Mcrida, 
runs towards the settlement of Bocono, and receiv 
ing in its course the waters of the Nequitao, fer 
tilizes the fields of Truxillo, which place it laves 
on the e. side, and then with a stream increased by 
several other rivers from the mountains of Merida, 
empties itself into the lake of Maracaibo by the e. 
side, in lat. 9 45 n. 

MOT AU IT A, a settlement of the province and 
corregimienlo ofTunja in the Nucvo Reyno de 
Granada. It is of a very cold temperature, and 
produces wheat, maize, papas, and barley, con 
tains 50 housekeepers and as many Indians, and is 
a little less than a league s distance from its ca 
pital. 

MOTE, SAN JOSEPH DE, a settlement of the 
province and government of Quixos and Macas in 
the kingdom of Quito. It is much reduced, of a 
cold temperature, and produces only maize, papas, 
and potatoes, which are there called camotes. It 
is situate at the foot of a very lofty mountain called 
Surnaco. 

MOTE, a river of the province of Guayana, in the 
Dutch possessions. 

MOTE, a small island of the lake of the Iroquces 
Indians in N. America, near the n. coast. 

MOTEPORE, a settlement and real of silver 
mines of the province and government of Sonora in 
N. America. 

[MOTHER Creek, in Kent county, Delaware. 
See FREDERICA.] 

MOTILONES, a barbarous and ferocious na 
tion of Indians, of the province and government of 
Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is 
equally formidable from its numbers as from its in 
trepidity. These Indians wander over a vast tract 
of country, which is bounded n. by the province of 
Maracaibo, e. by the city of Merida, 5. by those of 
Cucuta and Salazar, of Las Palmas, and w, by 
those of Ocana and Tarnalameque, of the province 
of Santa Marta. 

These barbarians continually infest the public 
roads leading to the above-named settlements by 
their incursions, stopping all the traders, and more 
especially on the mountains which lie between 



MOT 

Pamplona and Mcrida, and also in the navigation 
of (he celebrated river Sullia. 

In 17,37 Maclien Barrena proposed to the vice 
roy of Santa Fe to make an expedition against 
these Indians, so as to facilitate the commerce and 
security of those provinces, and although he went 
upon the expedition with three bodies of troops 
from three different places, namely, San Fauslino, 
Salazar de las Palmas, and Mcrida, yet he failed 
on account of a fourth body not coming from 
Ocafia, which was kept back for want of ammu 
nition, since the governor of Santa Marta refused 
to allow them any ; and thus the Motilones, al 
though surrounded by the three other bodies, ef 
fected their escape. 

MOTINES, a jurisdiction and alcaldla mayor 
of the kingdom of Nneva Espaila, in the province 
and bishopric of Mechoacan. It produces a great 
quantity of large and small cattle, copalc, wax, 
cocos, and other seeds. It consists of five principal 
settlements or head settlements of districts, on the 
S. sea, and has upon the coast a signal-house to 
give intelligence of vessels, and particularly of the 
arrival of the bark from California. On its coast 
is a port before you come to that of Acapulco, 
called Santelmo. The aforesaid settlements of its 
district are, 

Zixamitlan, Guacoman, 

Xolotlan, Maquili. 

Chiamila, 

The capital is the settlement of the same name, 
and which the Indians call Pomaro. It is of an 
hot temperature, inhabited by 10 families of In 
dians, and about 15 of Spaniards, Mustees, and 
Mulattoes. It lies 10 leagues from the coast ; al 
though its proximity lo the same is conducive to 
the fishery ofrpbalos, in which nearly all the na 
tives are engaged, selling their stock in the neigh 
bouring provinces and jurisdictions of the bishop 
ric. The territory of this alcaldia mayor is very 
rough and uneven, and the climate is hot. The 
natives used abominable sacrifices ; but these were 
exterminated by the labour and exertions of Fr. 
Pedro de las Garrovillas of the order of San Fran 
cisco, native of the town of this name in Estrema- 
dura, and who was the person who entered to 
preach the doctrine to these infidels, with such 
zeal and effect, that in one day lie burnt upwards 
of 100 of their idols. This jurisdiction is about 
240 miles to thess. one quarter to the .?. of Mexico, 
and between the settlements of Zacatula and Puri- 
ficacion. 

MOTOBAR; a small river of the province and 
government of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It runs to n. n. w. and enters the lake 



M O U 

t)f Maracnibo, between the settlement of Las Bar- 
bacoas and the city of Gibraltar. 

MOTOZINTA, a settlement of the province 
and alcaldia mayor of Gueguetcnango in the king 
dom of Guatemala ; annexed to the curacy of the 
settlement of Santa Ana Cuilco. 

[MOTTE Isle, a small island in lake Cham- 
plain, about eight miles in length and two in 
breadth, distant two miles w. of N. Hero island. 
Jt constitutes a township of its own name in Frank 
lin county, Vermont, and contains 47 inhabi 
tants.] 

M(JTUPE, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Piura in Peru. It has this name 
from a province in which it was in the time of the 
Indians, between the provinces of Piura and 
Truxillo, and in the valleys of which Pizarro re 
freshed his troops when going to the conquest of 
Peru. At present its territory is incorporated with 
the two provinces aforesaid. 

MOTUPE, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimicnlo of Piura in Peru. 

[MOUCHA, LA, a bay on the coast of Chile, 
on the w. coast of S.America.] 

MOUILLAGE, a settlement of the island 
Martinique, one of the Antilles ; situate on the w. 
coast, with a good port. It is a curacy of the re 
ligious order of St. Domingo, between the bay of 
Touche and the river of the fort of S. Pierre. 

MOUILLAGK, a small river of the island of Gua- 
dalupe, on the n. w. coast, between the point of 
Gros Morne and the river of Lanccsan des Hayes. 

MOULE, a large bay or port of the island 
Guadalupe, on the coast which looks to the n. e. 
between the rock of La Corona and the port of Las 
Chain pas. 

MOULINET, a great fall of the river Cata- 
rakui, between lake St. Franois and fort Augusta 
in N. America. 

[MOULTONBOROUGH , a post-town in Straf- 
ford county, New Hampshire ; situated at the n. w. 
corner of lake Winnipiseogee, 15 miles e. of Ply 
mouth, and 50 n. w. by n. of Portsmouth, This 
township was incorporated in 1777, and contains 
565 inhabitants.] 

[MOULTRIE Fort. See SULLIVAN S Island.] 

[MOUNT Island, on the above coast. Lat. 50 5 
n. Long. 6135 .#.] 

[MOUNT BETHEL, UPPER and LOWER, two 
townships in the county of Northampton, Pennsyl 
vania.] 

[MOUNT DESRRT, an island on the coast of 
Hancock county, district of Maine, about 13 miles 
long and 10 broad. It is a valuable tract of land, 
intersected in the middle by the waters flowing into 



M O U 



349 



the s. side from the sea. There are two consider 
able islands on (he .&amp;lt;?. e. side of Mount Desert island, 
called Cranberry islands, which assist in forming a 
harbour in the gulf which sets up on the s. side of 
the island. In 1790, it contained 744 inhabitants. 
The n. part of the island was formed into a town 
ship, called Eden, in 1796. The s. easternmost 
part of the island lies in about lat. 44 18 w. On 
the mainland, opposite the n. part of the island, 
are the towns of Trenton and Sullivan. It is 178 
miles . e. of Boston.] 

MOUNT DiiSEiix Rock, a rock in the N.Atlan 
tic ocean, near the coast of Maire, about 27 miles 
s. of Mount Desert island, in lat. 43 48 n. and 
lon. 68 3 30" K&amp;gt;. 

[MOUNT HOLLY, a village in Burlington 
county, New Jersey ; situated on the n. bank of 
Anocus creek, about seven or eight miles s. e. of 
Burlington.] 

[MOUNT HOPE Bay, in the n. e. part of Nar- 
raganset bay.] 

[MOUNT HOPE, a small river of Connecticut, a 
head branch of the Shetucket, rising in Union.] 

[MOUNT JOLI, on the w. coast of the gulf of St. 
Lawrence, in Labrador.] 

MOUNT Jov, a dependence of the county of 
Newcastle, in the province and colony of Pennsyl 
vania, from whence the first calcareous stone was 
brought from America to Europe. This country 
is notorious for its excellent sand. 

[MOUNT JOY, the name of two townships in 
Pennsylvania, the one in Lancaster, the other in 
York county.] 

[MOUNT JOY, a Moravian settlement in Pennsyl 
vania, 16 miles from Litiz.] 

[MOUNT MISERY, a barren mountain of the 
island of St. Christopher, evidently a decayed 
volcano. Its perpendicular height is 3711 feet, 
and it has an immense crater on the top, the bot 
tom of which is nearly level, and supposed to con 
tain 50 acres, of which seven are covered with, 
water ; the rest are clothed with high grass and 
trees, among which the mountain cabbage is very 
conspicuous. From the crannies or fissures of this 
crater still flow streams of hot water, which are 
strongly impregnated with sulphur, alum, and vi 
triolic acid.] 

[MOUNT PLEASANT, a township in W. Chester 
county, New York ; situated on the e. side of 
Hudson river; bounded s. by Greensburg, and 
n. and e. by Philipsburg. It contains 1924 inha 
bitants, of whom 275 are qualified electors, and 84 
slaves. Also the name of a township in York 
county, Pennsylvania.] 

[MOUNT PLEASANT, a village of Maryland; 



350 



M O U 



situated partly in each of the counties of Queen 
Ann and Caroline, about 11 miles e. of the town of 
Church-hill.] 

[MOUNT TOM, a noted mountain on the w. bnnk 
of Connecticut river, near Northampton. Also 
the name of a mountain between Litchfield and 
Washington in Connecticut.] 

[MOUNT VERNON, the seat of George Washing 
ton, late president of the United States. It is plea 
santly situated on the Virginia bank of Patowmac 
river, in Fairfax county, Virginia, where the river 
is nearly two miles wide ; eight miles below Alex 
andria ; four above the beautiful seat of the late 
Colonel Fairfax, called Bellevoir ; 52 from point 
Look-out, at the mouth of the river. The area of 
the mount is 200 feet above the surface of the river ; 
and after furnishing a lawn of five acres in front, 
and about the same in rear of the buildings, falls off 
rather abruptly in those two quarters. On the n. 
end it subsides gradually into extensive pasture 
grounds ; while on the s. it slopes more steeply, in 
a short, distance, and terminates with the coach 
house, stables, vineyard, and nurseries. On either 
\ving is a thick grove of different flowering forest 
trees. Parallel with them, on the land side, are 
two spacious gardens, into which one is led by two 
serpentine gravel walks, planted with weeping wil 
lows and shady shrubs. The mansion house itself 
(though much embellished by, yet not perfectly 
satisfactory to the chaste taste of the present pos 
sessor) appears venerable and convenient. The 
superb banqueting room was finished just after he 
returned home from the army. A lofty portico 96 
feet in length, supported by eight pillars, has a 
pleasing effect when viewed from the water ; the 
whole assemblage of the green-house, school-house, 
offices, and servants halls, when seen from the 
land side, bears a resemblance to a rural village; 
especially as the lands on that side are laid out 
somewhat in the form of English gardens, in mea 
dows and grass grounds, ornamented with little 
copses, circular clumps, and single trees. A small 
park on the margin of the river, where the English 
fallow deer and the American wild deer are seen 
through the thickets, alternately with the vessels 
as they are sailing along, add a romantic and pic 
turesque appearance to the whole scenery. On 
the opposite side of a small creek to the n. an exten 
sive plain, exhibiting corn-fields and cattle graz 
ing, affords in summer a luxuriant landscape ; 
while the blended verdure of wood-lands and cul 
tivated declivities, on the Maryland shore, varie 
gates the prospect in a charming manner. Such 
are the philosophic shades to which the com 
mander in chief of the American army retired in 



M O U 

17S3, at the close of a victorious war ; which he 
again left in 1789, to dignify with his unequalled 
talents the highest office in the gift of his fel 
low-citizens ; and to which he again retreated 
(1797) loaded with honours, and the benedictions 
of his country, to spend the remainder of his days 
as a private citizen, in peace and tranquillity.] 

[MOUNT VERNON, a plantation in Lincoln 
county, district of Maine, in the neighbourhood of 
Sidney and Wiuslow.] 

[MOUNT WASHINGTON, in the upper part of 
the island of New York.] 

[MOUNT WASHINGTON, one of the highest 
peaks of Uie White mountains, in New Hamp 
shire.] 

[MOUNT WASHINGTON, the s. westernmost 
township of Massachusetts, in Berkshire county, 
about 104 miles o&amp;gt;. by s. of Boston. It was incor 
porated in 1779, and contains 67 inhabitants.] 

MO UN TA INS. The number of mountains in 
Spanish America are infinite, which in different 
cordilleras traverse the whole country through 
various parts. The principal of these are, 
Abides, Guanta, 

Abipi, Guanacas, 

Abitanis, Huanacauri, 

Acacuiia, Huautajaya, 

Acochala, Huatzapa, 

Altar, Lampangui, 

Anapuras, Ligua, 

Andes, Llanganate, 

Antisana, Llaon, 

Antojo, Mohanda, 

Asuay, Notuco, 

Avitahua, Ornate, 

Buritaca, Opon, 

Caruairasu, Osorno, 

Caxamima, Paragoana, 

Cayambe, Peteroa, 

Cequin, Pichinche, 

Chima, Pictiru, 

Chimborasu, Pintac, 

Chocayas, Porco, 

Chuapa, Potosi, 

Chnmbilla, Purase, 

Collanes, Quechucavi, 

Corazon, Quelendana, 

Cotacache, Quindio, 

Cotopacsi, Sahuancuca, 

Cucunuco, Sanguay, 

Cumbal, San Pedro, 

Elenisa, Santa Juana, 

Fosca, San Antonio, 

Gachaneque, Saporovis, 

Guanas, Sierra Nevada, 



M O X 

Sincholagua, Ucuntaya, 

Sinu, Uritusiriga, 

Sunchuli, Yacarima, 

Tampaya, Villagran, 

Tiscan, Irnbabura, 

Tioloma, Itoco. 

Tunguragna, 

For the other mountains of America, See NORTH 
AMERICA. 

MOURE, a fort, of the English in the province 
and colony of Georgia ; situate on the shore of the 
river Savannah, opposite the city and fort of 
Augusta. 

MOURISCA, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Paraiba in Brazil ; situate on the 
shore of the river Paraiba. 

MOUSA, a lake of the province and govern 
ment of Moxos in Peru, on the shore of the river 
San Xavier, where this unites with the Travesia. 

[MOUSE Harbour, at the e. side of the island 
of St. John s, and at the 5. w. angle of the gulf of 
St. Lawrence, is between E. point and Three 
Rivers, and goes in with a small creek that is mo 
derately spacious within.] 

[MOUSOM, a small river of York county, dis 
trict of Maine, which falls into the ocean between 
Wells and Arundel.] 

MOUSTIQUE, a small river of the island of 
Guadalupe, which rises in the mountains of the e. 
coast, runs e. and enters the sea in the bay and port 
of Cul de Sac Grand. 

MOUTON, LE, a shoal of rocks of the N. sea, 
near the island S. Christoval, one of the Antilles, 
and off its n. e. coast, opposite that of Morne. 

MOUTON, LE, a port of Nova Scotia or Canada 
in N. America. It is little and only fit for small 
vessels, and this only in case of distress. On the 
e . coast, near the port of the Heve, in lat. 44. 
Long. 64 30 w. 

[MOWEE, one of the Sandwich isles, next in 
size to, and n. w. of Owhyhec. It has a large bay of 
a semicircular form, opposite to which are the 
islands Tahoorowa and Morokinnee. It is about 
162 miles in circumference, and is thought to con 
tain nearly 70,000 inhabitants.] 

MOXANDA, a very lofty mountain, always 
covered with snow, in the province and corregi 
miento of Otavalo and kingdom of Quito. Its 
summit is divided into two tops, the one of which 
looks to the e. the other to the w. and from each 
of them runs a cordillera. In this mountain the 
rivers Batan and Emacyacu have their source. 
In lat, 12 n. 

MOXI, a river of the province and captainship 
I 



M O X 



351 



of Puerto Seguro in Brazil, which runs n.n.w. 
and enters the Supacay-guazu. 

MOX1CONES, a bay of the coast of the king- 
doin of Chile, in the district of the province and 
corregimiento of Atacama in Peru. 

MOX1MO, a river of the province of Cinaloa 
in the kingdom of Quito. It runs to s.s.c. and 
enters the river Belleno, in lat. 1 32 s. 

MOXO, a settlement of the province and corre- 
gimienlo of Paucarcolla in Peru. 

Moxo, another settlement, of the province and 
corregimiento of Chichas and Tarija in the same 
kingdom, of the district of the jurisdiction of the 
former ; annexed to the curacy of Talina. 

MOXOCAYA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tomina in Peru. 

MOXON, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Xauja in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of its capital. 

MOXONAUI, a settlement of the province of 
Moqui, in the kingdom of Nuevo Mexico in N. 
America. 

MOXOS, an extensive province and country of 
the kingdom of Peru ; bounded s. by the province 
of Santa Cruz de la Sierra, n. e. by the river Itenes 
or Huapore, s. &amp;lt;?. by the intervention of many 
woods, by the Chiquitos Indians, 5. w. by the cor- 
diUera, at the back of which is the province of 
Cochabarnba, w. by the missions of Apolabamba, 
the river Beni running between, and n. by the ri 
vers Iruiame and Exaltatio. It is about 420 miles 
long from e. to w. and about 300 wide from n. to 
s. ; although to travel them it would add consider 
ably to the above distances, owing to the difficul 
ties of the roads. It is watered by four large ri 
vers, besides innumerable rivers of less note : the 
first is the Marmore, which rises in the sierras of 
Altissimas ; the second the Itenes, which is also 
called Huapore; the third the Beni, towards the 
w. part ; and the fourth Branco, or S. Miguel. 

The temperature of this province is "hot and 
moist, owing to the number of woods and rivers, 
and these form innumerable lakes and swamps, 
especially in the rainy season, which begins in 
October and lasts till May, when the inundations 
are so great, that in many parts nothing but the 
tops of trees are to be seen, and all communication, 
between one settlement and another must be made 
by rafts, when yon may swim about for two or 
three days without finding a dry place to tread on. 
At this season the cattle become sick and languid 
from want of pasture, and many of them die, 
whilst the great moisture combined with the parch 
ing heat which through want of a generous air is 



352 



M O X O S. 



experienced, excites such a degree of putrefaction 
in the stagnant waters, that there is never a year 
that passes but which generally brings with it some 
jfatal epidemic fever or disorder, which at times 
destroys whole settlements at once, as was the case 
with those of San Luis Gonzaga, San Pablo, and 
San Miguel, which no longer exist; and, indeed, 
were it not for the natural fecundity of the women 
and the exertions of the missionaries in drawing 
together these barbarian Indianstodwell in societies, 
there would scarcely be any population whatever. 

The territory is as unkind in the production of 
bread and wine, as it is favourable to those plants 
which require great heat and moisture, such as 
maize, sugar canes, yucas or mnndioca^ rice, ca- 
motes, plantains, green ajies, rnani, &amp;c. In some 
of the settlements they gather very good crops of 
cacao, and every where of cotton ; the grain of the 
former is so large, tender and rich, that the choco 
late made of it is of the most delicate flavour and 
strong nourishment ; but it has the defect of be 
coming rancid if kept long, which is the case 
with every kind that is very oily. In the woods 
are found many trees, the wood and fruits of which 
are much esteemed, such as guayucunes, cinna 
mon, marias, from whence is extracted the oil of 
this name, the quinaquina, the seed of which is 
very fragrant when burnt, cedars, palms, tujibos, 
almonds different from those of Europe, copaibos, 
bainillas, dragon plants, and others. In the trunks 
of the trees various kinds of bees lay their wax : 
some of these insects are white, others yellow, 
and others, which live under ground and are less 
esteemed, of a grey colour. Here are many wild 
animals, tigers, antas, deer, rabbits, wild boars, 
and ant-eaters, thus called because they have a 
very long snout with which they devour thousands 
of the above little insects. These animals have no 
other defence than their claws, which are like dag 
gers, and when they fight with the tiger, the con- 
ilict generally proves mortal to both ; for the bear 
grapples with the tiger, and darts its claws into his 
heart and bowels, whilst the latter tears to pieces 
with his jaws the head and face of its adversary. 
Here are also very large snakes, called bobas, rattle 
snakes, vipers, small and large spiders, scorpions, 
mosquitoes, large and fierce ants, gegenes, bats of 
an extraordinary size, and various other venomous 
insects, many rare birds of fine song and beautiful 
plumage, and others well known in Europe. In 
the rivers and lakes are abundance of fish, alliga 
tors, thornbacks, palomclas^ and toninas or dol 
phins, the which the Indians kill with arrows. 
This province is divided into three districts, 



which are, Moxos, Baures, and Pampas. The 
former consists of six settlements on either side of 
the liver Marmorc, with the names of 
Loreto, S. Pedro, 

Trinidad, La Exaltacion, 

S. Xavier, Santa Ana. 

The second, of six other settlements on the w. shore 
of the same river, called 

Magdalena, S. Martin, 

Concepcion, S. Simon, 

S. Joaquin, S. Nicolas. 

And the third of three, which are, 

S. Ignacio, Los Santos Reyes. 

S. Francisco de Borja, 

In all of which there are 22,000 Indians of the fol 
lowing nations, 

Moxos, Sapis, 

Tapacuras, Cayubabas, 

Bolepas, Canacures, 

Coriciaras, Ocoronos, 

Baures, Chumanos, 

Itonamas, Mnyacatnas, 

Heriboconos, Tibois, 

Meques, Nairas, 

Boyomas, Norris, 

Huarayos, Pacarahas, 

Rotoroiios, Pacanabos, 

Mures, Sinabus, 

Erirumas, Cuizaras, 

Canicianas, Cabinas. 

Pec hue os, 

These Indians rather resembled wild beasts than 
human creatures, lived without any appearance of 
religion or worship, and adored nothing but the 
devil and tigers. Some of them called themselves 
priests and sorcerers, also physicians, without 
more knowledge of disorders or remedies than to 
suck the sore part. They made others believe a 
thousand stories of visions that they had had with 
the devil, in order to induce them to multiply their 
offerings : their altars were nothing but some mise 
rable huts, adorned with tutumas, spears, feathers, 
bows, arrows, and darts, and the chief act of ado*- 
ration consisted in making themselves drunk with 
chicha, a drink of maize and yuca, for many days 
together, when some fatal and melancholy results 
would close the solemnities. Whenever they were 
angry they took up their arms and inflicted instant 
death ; and as they had no ideas of civil life, there 
was nothing thought of amongst them concerning a 
common good ; but each man was master of his own 
family, and here he lorded it as his whim directed. 
Thus in their political affairs they had no head 
whatever, and though in time of war they would 



M O X O S. 



353 



go info the field under a commander, who was 
selected as being the most savage arid furious 
amongst them, yet, as soon as the fight was begun, 
would they every one of them, individually, take 
the command upon themselves. Their advance 
was as rapid as their retreat, and if by the violence 
of the former they gained the victory, they made 
so cruel and barbarous a use of it, that they not 
only eat their prisoners, but took pains to put them 
to the severest tortures in killing them. 

Even the matrimonial tie was broke upon the 
slightest pretence ; polygamy was carried to a 
great extent, but no part of their conduct was 
more disorderly than that of the education of the 
children. The father, in respect to these, was 
merely a slave, and when the infirmities of age re. 
quired the attentions of the son, and had a claim 
upon his venerationand respect, thelatter would with 
the greatest insolence put his hoary sire to death, 
alleging that he would now be no longer useful : 
in the same way would he kill his younger bro 
thers and sisters, saying, that he thus liberated 
them from the disgrace and the misery of or 
phans. 

In short, it is scarcely possible to imagine any 
abomination of drunkenness, lasciviousness, super 
stition, and cruelty of the most barbarous nature, 
which was not practised by these savages previous 
to the time that the light of the gospel began to 
shed its influence amongst them. There were cer 
tain distinctions of manners in the aforesaid nations, 
which will be found explained under their proper 
articles. 

About the middle of the 16th century the mis 
sionaries of the Jesuits began to attempt by bribes, 
persuasions, and promises, to reduce to the Catho 
lic faith this savage multitude, and after great la 
bours and fatigues, and not without the loss of 
several lives, did they at last succeed in domesti 
cating them and diffusing amongst them a rational 
and christian-like spirit, forming large and regular 
settlements, and selecting for these purposes those 
parts of the country which were least exposed to 
inundations. They also built magnificent temples, 
which were richly ornamented, and where on fes 
tival days they would cause to be performed fine 
concerts of music, vocal and instrumental, with or 
gans, harps, violins, flutes, trumpets, &amp;c. 

The spiritual government is the same as that of 
the Chiquitos Indians. They hear mass every 
day early in the morning, and are afterwards in 
structed in their religion : again they all meet at 
night-fall to say the rosary and hear sermons. The 
political government consists of a governor, no 
minated by the curate on the first day of the year, 

VOL. III. 



with two alcaldes^ agvazils^ and cftpitufars, whose 
care it is to guard against public disorders. They 
visit the chacras or huts of the Indians, to see 
that they are industrious and take care of their fa 
milies ; and these are supplied with abundance of 
flesh meat from the herds of neat cattle which are 
kept in the neighbourhood. The delinquent, after 
he has been made to know the measure of his 
crime, is punished by a flogging, or other way 
that may be thought necessary, and the obstinate 
or incorrigible Indian is banished from the settle 
ment. Every Indian, after his marriage, is ob 
liged to form a chacra, or small estate, where, 
amongst other things, he must cultivate cotton suf 
ficient for the clothing of his family. The curate s 
ihacra is large, and is kept in order by the com 
munity. Its productions are devoted to his use, 
and to that of the mechanics and other servants 
living immediately under him. Here they manu 
facture sugar, refine the wax collected in the 
woods, make chocolate, very fine cotton stuffs for 
table-clolhs, handkerchiefs, towels, and napkins ; 
and many of these articles are carried for sale, by 
order of the curate, to the neighbouring provinces, 
and with their product other necessaries are pur 
chased, especially salt, of which there is none 
here. 

In this province the Indians go better clothed 
than in any other : many are seen with waistcoats 
and breeches of leather and even of silk, especially 
such as are of higher rank, being masters of liberal 
or mechanic arts, which are very celebrated. In 
some of the settlements there are not only musi 
cians but compositors ; and some are so dexterous 
that they imitate whatever they see, though they 
are rare who know how to write ; notwithstanding 
a breviary has been seen which was done by them 
so nicely that it is impossible to discover it from 
print. 

The common arms of these Indians are the bow 
and arrow, and at Ihe entrance of the Spaniards in 
1762 and 1766, to dislodge the Portuguese from 
the station they had taken upon the other side of 
the river Itenes, near the settlement of Santa Rosa, 
thry accustomed themselves to the use of fire-arms, 
and were extremely useful to the Spaniards against 
the Portuguese, of whom numbers were taken pri- 
soners, and doomed to work in the mines of Cuyaba 
and Matogroso, they b. ing now known by the 
name of Cerlanistas. This province was conquered 
and united to the empire of Peru by the Inca 
Yupanqui. eleventh emperor. 

Moxos, a settlement of the province and cor- 
reginriento of Chichas and Tarija in Peru ; si 
tuate on the lofly part of a, mountain much ex- 
z z 



354 



M O Y 



posed to the winds. It has at its entrance a river 
which passes through the settlement by an aque 
duct erected at great cost. Twenty-eight leagues 
from the city of Santiago de Cotagaita. 

Moxos, another, with the dedicatory title of 
S. Juan de Sahagun, in the missions that were 
held by the religious order of San Francisco in 
the province of Apolabamba. 

MOXO-TORO, a settlement of the province 
and correginiiento of Yaraparaes, and archbishop 
ric of Charcas, in Peru. 

MOYA, a settlement of the province and corre- 
gimicnio of Angaraes in Peru ; annexed to the cu 
racy of Couaica. 

MOYA, another, a small settlement or ward of 
the head settlement of the district and alcaldia 
mayor of Lagos in the kingdom and bishopric of 
Nueva Galicia ; situate to the e. of its capital. 

MOYA, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Jaen de Bracamoros in the kingdom 
of Quito, which enters the Mn ration. 

MOYAGUA, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district and alcaldia mayor of Juchipila in 
Nueva Espafia. Six leagues to the 5. of the said 
head settlement. 

MOYALEC, LEUVU, or COLORADO, also 
called Dcsaguadero de Mendoza, a river of the 
province and government of Tucuman in Peru. 
It rises in the territory of the Aucaes Indians, runs 
in a large stream to 5. s. e. for many leagues, and 
then turns its course to s. 

[MOYAMENSING, a township in Philadel 
phia county, Pennsylvania.] 

MO YEN, a large sand-bank on the coast of the 
island of Newfoundland, one of those which 
serve for the cod-fishery. It is to the w. of Green 
bunk. 

MOYOBAMBA, or SANTIAGO DE LOS VAL 
UES, a city, the capital of the district of this name 
in the province and corrcgimiento of Chachapoyas 
and kingdom of Peru. It is of an hot tempera- 
lure, moist, and unhealthy, but abounding in ve 
getable productions, in cattle, cotton, sugar, to 
bacco, of which alone there were gathered 200 
load annually, before it was monopolized by the 
crown, and of such excellent quality is it as to be 
preferred to all of the other provinces; it likewise 
produces many kinds of fruit. It has, besides the 
parish church, a chapel of Nuestra Senora de 
JBelen. [It is 192 miles e. by n. of Truxillo, on 
the shore of the river of its name, and 310 miles 
??. n. e. of Lima. In lat. 7 s. and long. 75 

w :] 

MOYOBAMBA. The aforesaid river, in the same 
province and corregimiento, rises s, of the capital, 



M U C 

close to the settlement of Naranjos, runs e. and 
enters with a large stream into the Guallaga. 

Mo YO BAM n A, a valley of the same province, 
of a triangular figure, shut in by the cordillera of 
the Andes and the rivers Moyobamba and Negro. 

MOYOC-MARCA, a name given by the In 
dians of Peru, in the time of their gentilism, to 
one of the great towers of the fortress of Cuzco. 

MO YOTEPEC, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of San Lujs de la Costa ; con 
taining 16 families of Indians, and a little more 
than a league s distance from Quauzoquitengo. 

MOYUTA, SAX JUAN BAPTISTA DE, a settle 
ment of the alcaldia mayor of Jutiapa, and king 
dom of Guatemala ; annexed to the curacy of 
Conguaco. 

MUBERRY, a small river of the province and 
colony of S. Carolina, which runs e. and enters 
that of Thirty Miles. 

MUCABLJSA, a settlement of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas, in the part possessed 
by the Portuguese. It is situate on the shore of 
the river Madcra, opposite the river Uvirabasu. 

MUCARAS, some isles or rocky shoals, lying 
between the Lucayas islands, and n. of that of 
Cuba. They are many, and are between cape 
Lobos and the island San Andres. 

MUCARI, a bay on the s. coast of the island 
Jamaica. 

MUCCIA. See MOCHE. 

MUCHIMILCO, a settlement of the province 
of Huejotzinco in Nueva Espafia, in the time of 
the Indian gentilism ; situate near the Sierra Ne 
vada. 

MUCHIPAI, a small and poor settlement of the 
jurisdiction of the city of La Palma, and cor- 
regimienlo of Tunja, in the NuevoReyno de Gra 
nada. It produces some vegetable productions, 
such as maize, cotton, yucas^ and plantains, ail of 
a warm climate ; this being its temperature. 

MUCIlUCHISjor MucucMiEs, a settlement of 
the government and jurisdiction of Merida in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Cranada, near the source of the 
river Carha. It is of a fine temperature, rather 
warm than cold, of a very fertile soil, and abound 
ing in excellent cacao, wheat, maize, and other 
vegetable productions ; contains 50 housekeepers 
and 200 Indians. In lat. 8 n. 

MUCI1UAU, a settlement of the province and 
corre gimicnio of Sana in Peru. 

MUCUiNO, a settlement of the government and 
jurisdiction of Merida iu the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada; situate in the valley of Azequias : of a 
cold temperature, producing much wheat, maize, 
turmas, beans, lentils, &amp;c. It has also abundance 



M U I 

of cattle, and contains 40 housekeepers and ICO 
Indians. 

MUG ORES, a settlement of the province of 
Barcelona and government of Cumana, one of 
those which are under the charge of the religious 
observers of San Francisco, the missionaries of Pi- 
ritu. It is situate on the shore of the river Pao, in 
the bend it makes before its entrance into the Ori 
noco. 

MUCURUBA, a settlement of the government 
of Merida in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It 
is of a mild but healthy temperature, producing 
much maize and other vegetable productions pe 
culiar to its climate. It contains 50 Indians, and 
as many other inhabitants ; and is annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Muchuchis. The re 
gulars of the company had in the district of this 
settlement some rich cattle farms. 

MUCURURI, a settlement of the province and 
government of Guayana or Nneva Andalncia ; si 
tuate on the s. shore of the river Carom, near its 
mouth or entrance into the Orinoco. 

[MUD Island, in Delaware river, is six or seven 
miles below the city of Philadelphia ; whereon is 
a citadel, and a fort not yet completed. On a sand 
bar, a large pier has been erected, as the founda 
tion for a battery, to make a cross fire.] 

[MuD Lake, in the state of New York, is small, 
and lies between Seneca and Crooked lakes. It 
gives rise to a n. branch of Tioga river.] 

MUDURA, a small river of the province and 
government of Guayana, one of those which enter 
by the s. side into the Usupania. 

MUELLAMUES, a settlement of the province 
and government of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada. 

MUERTES, Rio DE LAS, a river in the pro 
vince and captainship of the Rio Janeiro in Brazil. 
It rises to the a?, of the town of Jubaraba, runs 
s. s. w. and enters the Parana. 

MUERTOS, CAXOS DE LOS, a small island of 
the N. sea, close to the 5. coast of the island Puerto 
Rico. 

MUGERES, a small island of the N. sea, near 
the coast of Yucatan ; situate about 18 miles s. e, 
of cape Cotoche ; discovered by Francisco Her 
nandez Giron in 1517, who gave it this name, 
from having found in it several Indian idols well 
clothed, and which appeared to resemble mugeres, 
or women. This island has always bern the com 
mon refuge of the Zambos and Mosquitos pirates 
for careening their vessels. It is in lat. 21 18 n. 
and long. 86 40 w. 

MUISNE, a river of the province and govern- 



M U L 



355 



ment of Esmeraldas in the kingdom of Quito. It 
runs n. and, just before it enters the sea, turns its 
course s. On its shores are a great number of very 
lofty palms; and its entrance into the sea is be 
tween the river San Francisco to the n. and the 
Potete to the s. In lat. 37 30 n. 

MUITACON, a settlement of the province and 
government of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia ; si 
tuate on the shore of the river Orinoco, and to the 
n. of the city of Real Corona. 

MUITO, a small river of the province and 
government of Paraguay, which enters the Pi- 
ratini. 

MUJA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Antioquia in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. 

MUJU, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Para in Brazil. It runs n. and enters the 
Maranon by the s. side in the bay of Para, near 
the fort Capi. In lat. 1 33 s. 

MULAHALO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimitnto of Latacunga in the kingdom of 
Quito, in the district of which is the mountain or 
volcano of Cotopaxi, notorious for the mischief it 
has done in that province. From it rises the river 
San Felipe, which traverses the province, as also 
another river called Guapante, which with the 
Ambato forms the large stream of the Patate. In 
the vicinity of this settlement many veins of silver 
ore have been discovered, though none have been 
worked. On the w. at no great distance, is a very 
large estate, called El Callo. 

MULAS, a point on the n. coast of the island of 
Cuba, between port Sama and the river of Los 
Plata nos. 

MULATAS, some islands of the N. sea, and 
of the province and government of Darien in the 
kingdom of Tierra Firme ; situate close to the 
point of San Bias and to the e. They arc many, 
small, and one of them larger than the rest, are 
very dangerous in the sailing from Portovdo to 
Cartagena, and on them several vessels have been 
wrecked. 

[MULATRE Point, in the island of Dominica 
in the W. Indies. Lat. 15 J6 n. Long. 61 
21 ?/] 

MLLATTO, a cast of people of America, pro 
duced by a black mother and while father, or by a 
black father and white mother, but the latter very 
rarely, although the former very commonly, so 
that America abounds uith Mulatloes : ihey are 
thus the offspring of a libidinous intercourse between 
Europeans and the female slaves, which the au 
thority of the one and the sensuality of the other 
zz 2 



356 



M U L 



tend to make very general. The colour of the 
children thus produced participate of both \vhite 
and black, or are rather of a dingy brown colour. 
Their hair is less crisp than that, of the Negro and 
of a clear chesnut tint. The Mulatto is regularly 
well made, of fine stature, vigorous, strong, indus 
trious, intrepid, ferocious, but given to pleasure, 
deceitful, and capable of committing the greatest 
crimes without compunction. 

It is a certain fact, that throughout the vast do 
minions of the king of Spain in America there are 
no better soldiers than the Mulattoes, nor more in 
famous men. When the mother is a slave the 
offspring is also, by the principle of the law that 
partus sequitur ventrem ; but inasmuch as that 
they are in general the offspring of the master 
of the mother they are made free, and from their 
earliest infancy are brought up in all kinds of vice. 
As the Mulatto, as well as the Negro, is at the 
time of its birth nearly white, not taking its real 
colour till nearly 10 days after ; the difference is 
distinguished by the private parts, for these in the 
Negro child, together with the extremities of its 
toes arid fingers, are already of a dark colour, 
which is not the case with the Mulatto. The 
French, in order to keep down the numbers of this 
cast in their colonies, established a law that the 
father of a Mulatto should pay a fine of 2000 Ibs. 
of sugar, and further, that if he were master of the 
slave, that he should forfeit her as well as the child, 
the money arising from the fine to be paid into the 
funds of the hospital of La Charite. 

There have been many Europeans, Spaniards, 
French, English, and other nations of America, 
who have married Negro women ; and the sons of 
these alone are admitted by law to the offices of 
the state, and although there is a general prohibi 
tion against all Mulattoes whatever, yet has this 
been in several cases dispensed with. Notwith 
standing the bad qualities of the Mulatto, some of 
them have been found, who from their extraordi 
nary virtues and qualifications have deserved great 
marks of approbation and distinction from the 
viceroys, bishops, and other persons of eminence. 
Such were Miguel Angel de Goenaga, captain of 
militia in the city of Portovelo, whose merits had 
gained him a universal title to respect at home and 
in the English, French, and Dutch colonies ; also 
in Puerto Rico another person, named Miguel 
Enrriques, who, although in the humble employ 
ment of a shoemaker, had done such services to 
the king, that he was honoured with a royal 
medal, mid allowed to put to his name the title of 
Don. These examples we conceive to be suHicient 



M U N 

to shew how little influence the colour of a man 
has over the endowments of his soul. 

[MULATTO Point, on the w. coast of S.Ame 
rica, is the ,&amp;lt;r. cape of the port of Ancon, 16 or 18 
miles n. of Cadavayllo river.] 

MULDEN, a city of the province and colony 
of New England in N. America. 

MULEGE, a river of the province of Califor 
nia in N. America. It rises in the centre of the 
province, and enters the sea in the bay of Con- 
cepcion. 

MULEQUES, ISLAS DE LOS, three small 
islands, situate in the river La Plata, near the n. 
coast, close to the islands of Los Inglescsand those 
of Anton Lopez. 

[MULGRAVE Port. See ADMIRALTY Bay. 
Lat. 67 45 n. Long. 165 9 ze.] 

[MULHEGAN River, in Vermont, rises in 
Lewis, and empties into Connecticut river at 
Brunswick.] 

[MULLICUS River, in New Jersey, is small, 
and has many mills and iron-works upon it, and 
empties into Little Egg harbour bay, four miles c. 
of the town of Leeds. It is navigable 20 miles 
for vessels of 60 tons.] 

MULLONES, an ancient settlement of the 
nation of Indians of this name now extinguished, 
or at least of whom nothing remains but this set 
tlement, in the province of Pasto, and kingdom of 
Quito. It is close to the mountain of Curnbal, 
which it has to the s. and to the n. the settle 
ment of Mullama. Its territory is lived by 
the river Telembi by the w. and it is in lat. 57 
22 n. 

MULMUL, a paramo or mountain covered 
with snow, of the province and corregimiento of 
Riobamba in the kingdom of Quito, arid one of 
those which were used by the academicians of the 
sciences at Paris, to fix their instruments for their 
mathematical observations. On its skirt are some 
cow-herds huts or Indian cottages, where they 
watch the cattle which graze in those parts. 

MULOT, a shoal of rock always covered by 
the water near the coast of Nova Scotia or Acadia, 
three quarters of a league to the s. of the point of 
Fourche. 

MUMU, a name which the Indians of the pro 
vince of Veragua in the kingdom of Tierra Firme 
gave to the village or small settlement. 

MUNAMESA, a small river of the province 
and government of Mainas in the kingdom of 
Quito, rising between the Cbambire and the Tigre. 
It runs s. s. e. and enters the Maranon. 

MUNANI, a settlement of the province and 



M U R 

eorreginiienfo of Asangaro in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of its capital. 

[MUNCY, a creek which empties into the Sus- 
quehannah from the n. e. about 20 miles n. of the 
town of Northumberland.] 

MU NICHES, a settlement of the missions 
which were held by the Jesuits in the province and 
government of Mainas, of the kingdom of Quito ; 
annexed to the curacy and settlement of Nueslra 
Senora de Loreto de Paranapuras ; situate on the 
shore of the river of this name. 

MUNIG1TURA, a settlement of the province 
and captainship of Para in Brazil ; situate on the 
sea-coast to the e. of the city of Caele. 

[MUNSiES, DELAWARES, and SAPOONES, 
three Indian tribes, who inhabit at Diagho and 
other villages up the n. branch of Susquehannah 
river. About 20 years ago the two first could 
furnish 150 warriors each, and the Sapoones 30 
warriors.] 

MUQU1YAUIO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Jauxa in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of lluaripampa. 

MURA, CANO DE, an arm of the river Barirna, 
which communicates with the Guarini, in the 
province and government of Cumana. It runs e. 
MURA, RANDAL DE, a very dangerous whirl 
pool of the river Caura. 

MURAPARAX1A, an island of the river Ma- 
dera in the province and country of Las Amazonas, 
very near its shore of the w. side. 

MURATAS, a barbarous nation of Indians who 
dwell in the woods of the river Pastaza to the s. w. 
and lying to the n. n. e. of the river Morona, near 
the source of the Guassaga. The abolished order 
of the Jesuits, the missionaries of Mainas, disco 
vered these Indians in 1757, and formed of them 
a settlement of 250 persons, to which they gave 
the name of Nuestra Senora de los Dolores de 
Mil rat as. These Indians are of a docile and quiet 
disposition, notwithstanding that they are at con 
tinual war with the barbarous and ferocious na 
tion of the Xibaros Indians, their neighbours. 

MURCO, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimienlo of Collahuas in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacv of Llauta. 

[MURDERERS Creek, in the state of New 
York.] 

MURES, a barbarous nation of Indians of Peru, 
bounded by that of Los Moxos. They are ferocious 
and treacherous, and it is said that some of them 
have been reduced to the Catholic faith by the 
Jesuits. 

[MURFRESBOROUGII, a post-town of N. 



M U S 



357 



Carolina, and capital of Gates county. It is 
situated on Mcherrin river, near the Virginia line, 
contains a few houses, a court-house, gaol, and 
tobacco warehouse. It carries on a small trade 
with Edenton, and the other sea-port towns. It 
is three miles from Princeton, seven from Winton, 
99 n. by w. of Edenton, and 234 s. s. w. of Phila 
delphia.] 

[MURGA-MORGA River, on the coast of 
Chile, in S. America, is s. of the s. point of Quin- 
tero bay, and not far from the entrance into Chile 
river. It is not navigable, but is very good to 
water in.] 

MURIB1RA, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Para in Brazil ; situate on the shore 
of the arm of the river of Las Amazonas, which 
forms the island of Marajo and the bay Del Sol. 

MURICHAL, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Guayana. It rises in the table-land 
of Guanipa on the e. runs n. and enters the Gua- 
rapiche. 

MUR1TATI, a settlement of the province of 
Tepeguana and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya in 
N. America. 

MURRI, SAN JOSEPH DK, a settlement of the 
province and government of Darien in the king 
dom of Tierra Firme ; situate on the shore of the 
river of its name. 

MURRI. This river rises in the mountains of 
Choco, runs w. and enters the Atrato. 

MURUACI, a small river of the province and 
colony of Surinam or part of Gnayana possessed 
by the Dutch. It joins various others and enters 
the Cuyuri by the s. side. 

MURUCUR1, a settlement of the province 
of Guayana and government of Cumana, one of 
the missions held there by the Catalanian Capuchin 
fathers. It is situated on the shore of the river 
Caroni, near the mouth where this runs into the 
Orinoco. 

MURUCUTACHI, a dry part of the serrania 
in the province and government of Sonora in N. 
America. 

MURUMURU, an ancient province of Peru, 
in the time of the Indians, in the district of Col- 
lasuyu ; conquered and united to the empire by 
the Inca Capac Yupanqui. 

MUSCADOBO1T, a bay on the s. coast of 
Nova Scotia or Acadia, between that of Che- 
boucto and cape Charles. 

MUSCLE, a small island ; situate near the coast 
of the province of Sagadahock, between the river 
George and the bay of Penobscot. 

[MUSCLE Bank, at the entrance into Trinity 



M U S 



bay or harbour, in the direction of 5. w. on the &amp;lt;?. 
coast of Newfoundland island.] 

[MuscLi; Bay, in the straits of Magellan, in S. 
America, is half way between Elizabeth s bay and 
York road ; in which there is good anchorage 
with a w. wind.] 

[MUSCLE Bay, or MESSILONKS, on the coast of 
Chile or Peru, in S. America, live leagues s. by w. 
of Atacama.] 

[MuscLr. Shoals, in Tennessee river, about 250. 
miles from its mouth, by the course of the river, 
but only 145 in a direct line, about 20 miles in 
length, and derive their name from the number of 
shell-fish found there. At this place the river 
spreads to the breadth of three miles, and forms a 
number of islands ; and the passage is difficult, 
except when there is a swell in the river. From 
this place up to the whirl, or suck, where the river 
breaks through the Great ridge, or Cumberland 
mountain, is 250 miles, including the turnings, the 
navigation all the way excellent.] 

[MUSCONECUNK, a small river of New 
Jersey, which empties into the Delaware six miles 
below Easton.] 

MUSCONGUS, a small river of the same pro 
vince as that of the former island. It runs s. be 
tween rivers George and Sheepscut, and enters 
the sea. 

MUSINAM, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Copiapo in the kingdom of Chile. 

[MUSKINGUM, that is, Elk s Eye, a navi 
gable river of the N. \V. Territory. It is 250 
yards wide ajt its confluence with the Ohio, 172 
miles below Pittsburgh, including the windings of 
the Ohio, though in a direct line it is but 103 
miles. At its mouth stands fort Harmar and Ma 
rietta. Its banks are so high as to prevent its over 
flowing, and it is navigable by large batteaux and 
baro-csto the Three Legs, 120 miles from its month, 
and by small boats to the lake at its head, 45 miles 
farther, including windings. From thence, by a 
portage of about one mile, a communication is 
opened to lake Erie, through Cayahoga, a stream 
of great utility, navigable the whole length, with 
out any obstruction from falls. From lake Erie 
the avenue is well known to Hudson s river in the 
state of New York. The land on this river and 
its branches is of a superior quality, and the coun 
try abounds in springs and conveniences fitted to 
settlements remote from sea navigation, viz. salt- 
springs, coal, free-stone, and ciay. A valuable 
salt-spring has been very lately discovered, eight 
miles from this river, and 50 from Marietta, 
called the Big Spring. Such a quantity of water 



M U S 

flows as to keep 1000 gallons constantly boil 
ing. Ten gallons of this water will, as experi 
ment has proved, afford a quart of salt of supe 
rior quality to any made on the sea-coast.] 

MUSKINGUN, a town of the Owendoos In 
dians in N. America, where the English have a 
fort and establishment at Virginia, near the river 
of this name. 

[MUSKOGULGE, MUSKOGEE,OT, as they are 
more commonly called, CHEEK Indians, inhabit the 
middle parts of Georgia. The Creek or Muskogulge 
language, which is soft and musical, is spoken 
throughout the confederacy, (although consisting 
of many nations, who have a speech peculiar to 
themselves) as also by their friends and allies the 
Natchez. The Chickasaw and Chactaw language 
the Muskogulges say is a dialect of theirs. The 
Muskognlges eminently deserve the encomium of 
all nations for their wisdom and virtue, in expel 
ling (he greatest, and even the common enemy of 
mankind, viz. spirituous liquors. The first and 
most cogent article in all their treaties wilh the 
white people is, that" there shall not be any kind 
of spirituous liquors sold or brought into their 
towns." Instances have frequently occurred, on 
the discovery of attempts to run kegs of spirits into 
their country, of the Indians striking them with 
their tomahawks, and giving (he liquor to the 
thirsty sand, not tasting a drop of it themselves. 
It is difficult to account for their excellent policy 
in civil government ; it cannot derive its efficacy 
from coercive laws, for they have no such artificial 
system. Some of their most favourite songs and 
dances they have from their enemies, the Chac- 
taws ; for it seems that nation is very eminent for 
poetry and music. 

The Muskogulges allow of polygamy in the ut 
most latitude ; every man takes as many wives as 
he pleases, but (he first is queen, and the others 
her handmaids and associates. The Creek or 
Muskogulge confederacy have 55 towns, besides 
many villages. The powerful empire of (he Mus 
kogulges established itself upon the ruin of that 
of the ancient Natchez. The Oakmul^e fields was 
the first settlement (hey sat down upon after their 
emigration from the s?. beyond the Mississippi, 
their original native country. They gradually 
subdued their surrounding enemies, strengthening 
themselves by taking into confederacy the van^ 
qnished tribes. Their whole number, some years 
since, was 17,280, of which 5860 were fighting 
men. They consist of the Appalachies, Aliba- 
mas, Abecas, CawiUaws, Coosas, Conshacks, 
Coosactees, Chatsihoomas, Natchez, Ocomes, 



M U T 

Oakmulgcs, Okolioys, Pakanas, Taensas, Tale- 
poosas, Wcetnmkas, and some others. Their union 
lias rendered them victorious over the Chactaws, 
and formidable to all the nations around them. 
They are a well-made, expert, hardy, sagacious, 
politic people, extremely jealous of their rights, 
and averse to parting with their lands. They have 
abundance of tame cattle and swine, turkeys, 
ducks, and other poultry ; they cultivate tobacco, 
rice, Indian corn, potatoes, beans, peas, cabbage, 
melons, and have plenty of peaches, plums, 
grapes, strawberries, and other fruits. 

They are faithful friends, but inveterate ene 
mies ; hospitable to strangers, and honest and fair 
in their dealings. No nation has a more contemp 
tible opinion of the white mens faith in general than 
these people, yet they place great confidence in the 
United States, and wish to agree with them upon 
a permanent boundary, over which the s. states 
shall not trespass. 

The country which they claim is bounded w. by 
about the 34th degree of latitude; and extends 
from the Tombeckbee or Mobile river to the At 
lantic ocean, though they have ceded a part of 
this tract on the sea-coast, by different treaties, to 
the state of Georgia. Their principal towns lie 
about lat. 32 and long. 86 20 . They are set 
tled in a hilly but not mountainous country. The 
soil is fruitful in a high degree, and well watered, 
abounding in creeks and rivulets, from whence 
they are called the Creek Indians.] 

[MUSQUAKIES Indians inhabit the s. waters 
of lake Michigan, having 200 warriors.] 

[MUSQUATONS, an Indian tribe inhabiting 
near lake Michigan.] 

[MUSQUITO Cove, in N. America, lies in lat. 
65 2 . Long. 53 3 45" w.l 

[MUSQUITO River and Bay lie at a small 
distance n. of cape Canaveral, on the coast of E. 
Florida. The banks of Musquito river towards 
the continent abound in trees and plants common 
to Florida, with pleasant orange groves ; whilst 
the narrow strips of land towards the sea are mostly 
sand hills.] 

[MUSQUITONS, an Indian nation in the 
neighbourhood of the Piankeshaws and Outtago- 
mies ; which see.] 

MUTANAMBO, a settlement of the province 
and government of Cumana ; situate near the set 
tlement of^San Joseph de Leonisa to the e. the 
river Curuma running bet worn. 

MUTARNATl, a river of the province and 
government of Darien, and kingdom of Tierra 
Firmc. It rises in the mountains of the interior 



M U Z 



359 



of this province, runs w. and enters the grand 
river Chucunaqui. 

MUTCA, a settlement of the province and cor- 
reginticnto of Aimaraez in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Chuquinga. 

MUTON, a port of the s. coast of Nova 
Scotia or Acadia in N. America, between the port 
of Rosignol and the bay of Santa Catalina. 

MUTQUIN, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tucuman in Peru ; of the district of 
its capital, to the n. n. e. of the city of S. Francisco 
de Catamarca. 

MUTUANIS, a barbarous nation of Indians of 
the province and country of Las Amazorias, bound 
ed by that of Los Moxos. We havelittle sound in- 
telligence concerning them, but there are plenty of 
fabulous accounts, stating that they are giants, and 
are possessed of extremely rich gold mines, which 
lie two months^ journey from the mouth of the 
river Omopaleas. 

MUTUPI, a large valley of the kingdom of 
Peru ; between Pascamayu and Tumbez. Its na 
tives were conquered and reduced to the empire by 
the Inca Huaina Capac. 

MUX1A, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Antioquia in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada. It enters the Cauca just before the city of 
Caramanta on the opposite shore. 

MUYSCAS. See MOSCMS. 

MUYUMUYU, an ancient province in the 
time of the Indians, and of little extent, in the 
kingdom of Peru ; comprehended in the present 
day in the province of Charcas to the s. of Cuzco : 
conquered by the Inca Roca, sixth emperor of the 
Incas. 

MUYUPAMPA, an ancient province of the 
Indians, comprehended at the present day under 
the name of Moyobamba, in the province of Cha- 
ehapoyas ; conquered and united to the empire by 
the Inca Tupac Yupanqui. 

MUZA, a settlement of the province and corrc- 
gimiento of Abancay in Peru ; annexed to the cu 
racy of Paceho. 

MUZOS, a barbarous nation of Indians of the 
Nueyo Reyno de Granada, who &amp;lt;^ave name to a 
province much celebrated for its rich emerald 
mines, which have produced and still produce the 
finest of these stones in the world. Jt is 24 
leagues n. . of Santa Fc, and is 25 leagues long, 
and II wide; is entirely of a mountainous coun 
try, and hot and moist : very barren in the pro 
ductions, animal and vegetable, of a cold climate, 
but abounding in all those peculiar to its own. 
From all its sierras may be seen the n. and s. po- 



360 



M U Z O S. 



lar stars, and at (he end of August and in the mid 
dle of March the sun throws no shade throughout 
the whole day in any part. Its inhabitants are 
very numerous, extremely barbarous, and of pe 
culiar customs. They say that at the beginning 
of (he world, (here was on the other side of (he 
river Magdalena the shadow of a man, whom they 
called in their language Are, who was always re 
cumbent, and w ho cut out in wood the images of 
some men and women, which being thrown into 
(he river became animated bodies ; (hat they mar 
ried one with another, and that he (aught them how 
to cultivate the land ; after which he disappeared, 
leaving them as the first peoplers of all the Indies. 

They had no gods, neither did they adore the 
sun arid moon like other nations, affirming that 
these bodies were created since themselves ; but 
(hey nevertheless called the sun father, and the 
moon mother. When the husband died a natural 
death, (he brother became heir, taking the wife of 
the defunct, save when she might be (he cause of 
the dea(h. One of their most singular customs 
WMS the following, relating to their marriages. 
When the girl had reached her J6th year, an 
agreement of marriage was concerted between the 
parents without consulting her in any degree, and 
all being settled between them, the bridegroom 
paid a visit to the bride, where he made his court 
assiduously for three days, offering presents and 
ornaments, for which she would as cordially re 
turn cudgelling and blows ; but this amusement 
being over, she would become more pacific, and 
set about dressing the dinner, to which were in 
vited the friends and relations who lived nearest. 
To this it is added, that for a whole moon the new- 
wedded pair would sleep together without con- 
summating the marriage rites, the bride thinking 
that in that case she would be looked upon as a 
bud woman. The husband, in the mean time, 
would devote himself to the manual labour of agri 
culture, assisted with his new mother-in-law, for the 
benefit of his bride, and he would offer her fresh 
presents of petticoats embroidered with a kind of 
beads called by them suches^ and which, when the 
person walked, made a jingling noise. 

If the woman committed adultery, the hus 
band in his wrath would destroy himself, or else 
would be satisfied with breaking all the pots and 
pans of earthen ware and of wood, and would re 
tire to the mountain, where he remained for the 
space of about a month, till the wife might have 
new furnished the house, and when she would go 
forth to look after him ; and when she found him, 
she would drag him by the hair of his head, and 



would give him a good kicking, after which cere 
monies they returned home mutually satisfied and 
content. When the husband died, the parents 
would put the wife upon her knees, where she was 
obliged to cry for three days successively without 
eating or drinking any thing more than a little 
chicha ; when this was accomplished, they took 
the body, burnt it over a fire, and then laid it on 
a scaffold, which served as a tomb, and around it 
hung the bows and arrows and other weapons and 
ornaments of the deceased, and, after a year was 
passed, buried it. But it was not then followed by 
the bride, who all this while had fled, no one 
speaking to her, nor giving her ought to eat; so 
that she would starve, did she not contrive to cul 
tivate the land for her support ; but when the body- 
was interred, her parents would seek her out, bring 
her home, and prepare for her a second nuptials. 

The Indians of this province were subject to the 
Nauras and (o the Moscas, but such was their va 
lour that they drove each of these nations from their 
territory. The first Spaniard \vho found his way 
hither was Captain Luis Lanchero in 1539, (and 
not Bernardo de Fucntes, in 1547, as the ex-je- 
suit Coleti asserts : our information being taken 
from the most illustrious Pied rah ita) ; but such was 
the resistance that Lanchero met with, that his 
men were routed with great slaughter, himself 
being severely wounded. A better fortune did not 
await Melchor Valdes, who by the order of Gon- 
zalo Ximinezde Quesada undertook the reduction 
of these Indians in 1544, he being obliged to re 
treat in a similar way to his predecessor. In 1551, 
Pedro de Ursua entered with be((er fortune, and 
founded the city of Tudela, in memory of his 
country, but it was abanonded shortly after by ils 
inhabitants, who were shocked at the barbarities of 
the Muzos; and thus the final conquest of this 
people was left to the aforesaid Captain Luis Lan 
chero, who manifested feats of valour on the occa 
sion in 1559. This country abounds in rice, 
maize, cotton, tobacco, and some cacno, arid it is 
provided with flesh-meat from the immediate pro 
vince of Ubate. It is watered by (he abundant 
river Zarbe, besides others of less note. 

The capital is (he ci(y of the same name, with 
the dedicatory title of Santisima Trinidad, belong 
ing to the coire&amp;imie.nto of Tunja, and founded by 
Captain Luis Lanchero. It was the seat of the 
government, which was afterwards removed to 
Tunja ; is of a mild temperature, contains a tole 
rable church and three convents of (lie religious 
orders of Sari Francisco, St. Domingo, and San 
Agustin, which 5 with the rest of the population, are 



NAB 



NAG 



361 



very poor. This is composed of 200 families, 
and all of them being devoted to the working of 
the mines of its emeralds, so highly esteemed in 
Europe, and which have rendered this city no 
torious since their first discovery by Captain Juan 
de Penagos, they neglected its agriculture, to which 
the extreme fertility of the soil offers every advan 
tage, until at last that finding themselves checked 
in their darling pursuit by some fallacious ap 
pearances of certain mines, they had recourse to 
the cultivation of the land for their sustenance. 
The soil produces rice, cacao, sugar-cane, maize, 
yucaS) plantains, and many vegetable productions, 
and excellent fruits ; and in its woods are found 
ebony, walnut, and cedar trees, and sweet-scented 
gums, although in cattle it is scarce. In 1764 the 
viceroy of Peru, Don Manuel A mat sent to Don 
Joseph Antonio de Villegas y Avendano to recon 
noitre these emerald mines, and having re-disco 
vered the lost vein, resumed the working them at 
the expence of the crown. This mine is nine miles 



n. w. from the city, and 60 miles n. n. w. of Santa 
Fe, and 43 nearly w. of Tunja. In lat. 5 31 n. 
and long. 74 28 w. 

MUZUP1ES, or MONZUPIES, a barbarous na 
tion of Indians of the province of Guanuco in Peru ; 
who dwell to the n. n. e. bounded by the provinces 
of Los Panataguas and Cocinonomas, with whom 
they are at continual war. It is but little known. 

[MYERSTOWN, a village of Dauphin coun 
ty, Pennsylvania; situated on the n. side ofTuI- 
pehockon creek, a few miles below the canal. It 
contains about 25 houses, and is 28 miles e. by n. 
of Harrisburg, and 57 from Philadelphia.] 

[MYNOMAN1ES, or MINOMANIES, an Indian 
tribe, who with the tribes of the Cliipcwas and 
Saukeys live near bay Puan, and could together 
furnish about 20 years ago 550 warriors. The 
Myriomanies have about 300 fighting men.] 

[MYRTLE Island, one of the Chandeleurs or 
Myrtle islands, in Nassau bay, on the coast of 
Florida^ on the w. side of the peninsula.] 






AAMAN S Creek, a small stream which runs 
s. e. into Delaware river, at Marcus hook. ] 

[NAB S Bay, near the zo, limit of Hudson s bay, 
known by the name of the Welcome sea. Cape 
Eskimaux is its s. point or entrance.] 

NAB A, a settlement of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Caxatambo in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Churin. 

NABAN, a settlement of the same province and 
kingdom as the former ; annexed to the curacy of 
Andaiaos. 

NABON, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimienlo of Cuenca in the kingdom of Quito; 
situate in the road which leads to the province of 
Jaen. 

NABUAPO, a river of the province and country 
of the Iquitos Indians in Peru. It has its origin 
to the n. of the settlement of San Xavier, runs s. 
and enters the Maranon a little above the river 
Tigre by the n. side, in lat. 3 17 s. 

NABUSO, a paramo or mountain always co 
vered with snow, of the province and corregimiento 
ofRiobambain the kingdom of Quito, on which 
the academicians of the sciences at Paris fixed 
their mathematical instruments. 

YOL. in. 



NACARI, a small river of the province of Ostl- 
muri in Nueva Espana. It rises near the town of 
San Miguel, and after running a little way, enters 
the Hyaqui. 

NACARNERI, a settlement of the province 
and government of Sonora in N. America ; situate 
near the river of this name. 

NACATCHES, a settlement of Indians of the 
province and government of Texas in N. America ; 
situate on the shore of the river Rouge, and to the 
n. of the fort Natchitoches. 

NACATLAN, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Zapotitlan, and alcaldia 
mayor of Zacatlan, in Nueva Espana, half a 
league from its capital. 

NACAUNE, a settlement of Indians of the 
province and government of Louisiana in N.Ame 
rica ; situate on the shore of the river Trinidad, in 
the way which leads to Nuevo Mexico. 

NACAUTEPEC, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Cuicatlan in Nuevn Espana. It is of a moist tem 
perature, and contains 3J families of Indians; 11 
leagues to the e, of its capital. 

NACHAPALAN. a settlement of the province 
3 A 



NAD 



and alcaldia, mayor of Panuco in Nueva Espana: 
It was large and populous in the time of the In 
dians. Here it was that the soldiers of llcrnan 
Cortes took the 40 men of the nation of Francisco 
Garay, who wished to effect the conquest of these 
Indians. 

NACHEGO, a large lake of the province 
and government of Mainas in the kingdom of 
Quito, to the s. of the river Mara non. Into this 
lake run the two rivers Sungoto and Manguy, 
and it empties itself by a narrow channel into 
the river Cahuapanas by the w. side, in lat. 5 
23 s. 

NACIMIENTO, a settlement and fortress of 
the kingdom of Chile ; situate on the further side 
of the river Biobio as a frontier against the Arau- 
canos Indians, but who burnt and destroyed it in 
1601. 

NACO, a settlement of the province and govern 
ment of Honduras, founded by Christoval Olid, 
captain of Hernan Cortes in 1524 ; situate in a 
valley of the same name. When this general went 
from Mexico to chastise the aforesaid founder, he 
Iiaving rebelled against his master, the Cacique 
Canek observed to Cortes, that he would lead him 
to a settlement of people with white beards, mean 
ing the Spaniards, and those of this settlement of 
Naco. Cortes arrived under his conductor, but 
found Olid already dead under the hands of Fran 
cisco de las Casas. 

NACODOCHES, a settlement and reduction of 
Indians, of the missions that were held there by the 
religious order of San Francisco, in the province of 
Texas in N. America. 

NACORI, a settlement of the province of Osti- 
muri in N. America. 

NACOSARI, a settlement of the province and 
government of Sonora in N. Ajmerica ; situate on 
the s. of the garrison of Coro de Guachi. 

NACOSARI, another settlement and real of silver 
mines, of the province of Ostimuri, nine leagues 
n. e. of the river Chico. 

NADACO, a settlement of Indians of the pro 
vince and government of Texas in N.America; 
situate between the sources of the rivers Adayes 
and La Trinidad. 

NADA1MA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Nicaragua in the time of the gen- 
tilism of the Indians ; situate near where the capital 
stands. 

NAD1O, a settlement of the head settlement of 
the district of Zitaquaro, and akaldia mayor of 
Maravatio, in the kingdom and bishopric of Me 
choacan. It is of an extremely hot temperature, 
and abounding in sugar-canes ; contains 80 fa- 



N A II 

milies of Indians, and is four leagues to the s. of ifs 
head settlement. 

NAFOLI, a settlement of Indians of the pro 
vince and colony of S. Carolina ; situate on the 
shore ofthc river Aibama. 

NAGARANDO, a name given by the Indians 
of the province of Nicaragua to the spot where the 
Spaniards founded the city of Leon, the capital of 
the same province. 

NAGUALAPA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Almoloyan, and akaldia 
mayor of Colima, in Nueva Esparia. It is of an 
hot temperature-, contains 22 Indian families, who 
trade in wood and maize. In its vicinity are many 
cocales estates, the productions of which are sold 
in the other jurisdictions. Five leagues w. of its 
head settlement. 

NAGUAPO, SAN SIMON DE, a settlement of 
the province and government of Mainas in the 
kingdom of Quito ; situate on the shore of the 
river Trocamana. 

NAGUATZEN, S. Luis DE, a settlement of 
the head settlement of the district of Siguinam, and 
akaldia mayor of Valladolid, in the province and 
bishopric of Mechoacan. It contains five families 
of Spaniards and 159 of Indians, who are curriers 
and make beautiful saddles. It is half a league 
from its head settlement. 

NAGUERACHI, a settlement of the missions 
which were held by the Jesuits in the province of 
Taraumara, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya. 
Forty-five leagues n. of the town and real of the 
mines of Chiguagua. 

[NAHANT Point forms the n. e. point of Bos 
ton harbour, in Massachusetts ; nine miles c. n. e. 
of Boston. Lat. 42 27 . Long. 70 57 w. See 
LYNN Beach.] 

NAHUAS, a nation of Indians of Nueva 
Espana, one of those which spoke the Mexican 
language-. They believed in the immortality of 
the soul, and said that this had different places to 
visit according to the death the body underwent : 
thus, that those who were killed by a flash of light 
ning, went to a place called toocan, where resided 
the deities presiding over water, called talogues; 
that those who died in war, went to the house of 
the sun ; and that those who died of infirmities, 
wandered over the earth for a certain time, so that 
their relations took care to provide them well with 
clothes, victuals, and other necessaries in their sepul 
chres ; and after this they said that they descended 
into the infernal regions, these being divided into 
nine parts, and having a very wide river running 
through it. Moreover, that from thence they 
never escaped, being constantly guarded by a red- 



NAN 

coloured dog : a fable which bears much resem 
blance to the celebrated river Styx and the dog 
Cerberus of the ancients. 

NAHUATLACAS, a nation of Indians of 
Nueva Espana, in former times : one of the 
primites nations, and from whom it is thought the 
Mexicans are descended. 

NAIIUELHUAP1, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Chiloe in the kingdom of 
Chile, to the e. and 90 miles from the sea ; a re 
duction of the Pulchcs and Poyas Indians, amongst 
whom the missions of the Jesuits met with very 
great success. It is situate on the n. shore of the 
lake of its name, in lat. 41 22 30" s. and long. 70 
40 . 

[NAHUNKEAG, a small island in Kenncbcck 
river, 38 miles from the sea, signifies, in the Indian 
language, the land where eels are taken.] 

NAICLJCU, a small river of the province and 
government of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia. It 
rises near that of the Tocome, runs parallel with it 
from s. to n. e. and then turning e. enters the Oaroni 
on the w. side, about 33 miles before this river en 
ters the Orinoco on the s. side. 

NAIGUADA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Venezuela, of the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; situate on the e. side of the city of 
Caracas. 

[NAIN, a Moravian settlement, which was 
established in 1763, on Lehigh river, in Pennsyl 
vania.] 

[NAIN, a settlement of the Moravians on the 
coast of Labrador, near the entrance of Davis 
straits, being s. s. w. of cape Farewell. It was 
begun under the protection of the British govern 
ment, but is now deserted.] 

[NAMASKET, a.small river which empties into 
INarraganset bay.] 

NAMBALLE, a settlement of the province and 
government of Jaen de Bracamoros in the kingdom 
of Quito. 

NAMBE, a settlement of Nuevo Mexico in N. 
America ; situate on the bank of a small river 
which enters the Grande del Norte, between the 
settlements of Pasuque and Tesuque. 

NAMIQUIPAj a settlement of the missions 
which are under the charge of the religious order 
of San Francisco, in the province of Taraumara, 
and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya. Twenty-five 
leagues n. w. of the town and real of mines of San 
Felipe de Chiguagua. 

IS ANAHUATIPAC, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Teutitlan, and alcaldia 
miii/er of Ctiicatlan, in Nueva Espuiia. It con- 



NAN 



S63 



tains 49 families of Indians, and is one league from 
its head settlement. 

NANASCA. Sec NASCA. 

NANAY, a large and navigable river of the 
province and government of Mainas in the king 
dom of Quito. It rises from the lake Pachina, and 
from another small lake near to the same, and runs 
more than 85 leagues to the e. s. e. augmenting 
its stream by the rivers Necanumu, Blanco, and 
various others of less note. In the woods of its 
vicinity, towards the n. and s. dwell some barba 
rian Indians of the nation of the Iquitos, and on 
the n. n.e. are some Paranos Indians. This river 
takes its name from the many firs on its shores, 
called by the Indians nanay . It enters the Ma- 
rafion by the n. part, to the w.. of the settlement of 
Napeanos, in lat. 327 s. 

NANCAGUA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Colchaqua in the kingdom of 
Chile. It has two vice-parishes, and in one of 
them is the celebrated gold mine of Apaltas. It is 
situate on the shore of the river Tinguiririca. 

NANCQKE, a small river of the province and 
colony of Maryland in N. America. 

NANCOOK, a settlement of the island of Bar- 
badoes; situate on the w. coast. 

[NANDAKOES are Indians of N. America, 
who live on the Sabine river, 60 or 70 miles to the 
10. of Yattassees, near where the French formerly 
had a station and factory. Their language is 
Gaddo: about 40 men only of them remain. A 
few years ago they suffered very much by the 
small-pox. They consider themselves the same as 
Caddos, with whom they intermarry, and are oc 
casionally visiting one another in the greatest har 
mony : have the same manners, customs, and at* 
tachtnents.l 

NANDUIQUAZU,a river of the province and 
government of Paraguay in Peru, which rises near 
the ruins of the settlement of La Cruz de Bo- 
lafios, runs e. and incorporates itself with the fol 
lowing. 

NANDUI-MINI, a river of the same province 
and kingdom as is the former, with which it 
unites, entering together into the Pardo or Cor 
lorado. 

NANEGAL, a settlement of the province and 
government of Pastos in the kingdom of Quito, 
and of the district and jurisdiction of its an? 
die nee. 

NANEGAL, another settlement, of- the pro 
vince and government of Esmcraldas in the same 
kingdom. 

NAN IS, a settlement of the province and cozv- 
3 A 2, 



NAN 



NAN 



regimiento of Caxatambo in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Mangas. 

[NANJEMY River, a short creek which emp 
ties into the Patowmac in Charles county, Mary 
land, s. w. of Port Tobacco river.] 

NANOUCHI, a settlement of Indians of the 
Cherokees nation, in the province and colony of 
Carolina ; situate at the source of the river Apala- 
chicola, where the English have a fort and esta 
blishment for their commerce. 

[NANSEMOND, a county of Virginia, on the 
s. side of James s river, and to. of Norfolk county, 
on the N. Carolina line. It is about 44 miles in 
length, and 24 in breadth, and contains 9010 in 
habitants, including 3817 slaves.] 

[NANSEMOND, a short river of Virginia, which 
rises in Great Dismal swamp, and pursuing a n. 
then a n. e. direction, empties into James s river, a 
few miles w. of Elizabeth river. It is navigable 
to Sleepy hole, for vessels of 250 tons ; to Suffolk, 
for those of 100 tons ; and to Milner s, for those 
of 25 tons.] 

[NANTASKET Road may be considered as 
the entrance into the channels of Boston harbour ; 
lies s. of the light-house near Kainsford or Hos 
pital island. A vessel may anchor here in from 
seven to five fathoms in safety. Two huts are 
erected herewith accommodations for shipwrecked 
seamen.] 

[NANTIKOKE, a navigable river of the e. 
shore of Maryland, empties into the Chesapeak 

[NANTIKOKES, an Indian nation who for 
merly lived in Maryland, upon the above river. 
They first retired to the Susquehannah, and then 
farther n. They were skilled in the art of poison 
ing ; by which shocking art nearly their whole 
tribe was extirpated, as well as some of their neigh 
bours. These, with the Mohickons and Conoys, 
20 years ago inhabited Utsanango, Chagnet, and 
Owegy, on the c. branch of the Susquehannah. 
The two first could at that period furnish 100 
\varriors each, and the Conoys 30 warriors.] 

[NANTMILL, EAST and WEST, two town 
ships in Chester county, Pennsylvania.] 

NANTOUNAGAN. See TONNAGANE. 

[NANTUCKET Island, belonging to the state 
of Massachusetts, is situated between lat. 41 13 
and 41 22 30" n. and between long. 69 56 and 
70 13 30" a?, and is about 43 miles s. of cape 
Cod, and lies e. of the island of Martha s Vine 
yard. It is 14 miles in length, and nine in 
breadth, including Sandy point ; but its general 
breadth is 3| miles. This is thought to be the 



island called Nauticon by ancient voyagers. There 
is but one bay of any note, and that is formed by 
a long sandy point, extending from the e. end of 
the island to the n. and w. (on which stands a 
light-house, which was erected by the state in 
1784), and on the n. side of the island as far as 
Eel point. This makes a fine road for ships, ex 
cept witli the wind at n. w. idien there is a heavy 
swell. The harbour has a bar of sand, on which 
are only 7-f- feet of water at ebb tide, but within it 
has 12 and 14 feet. The island constitutes a county 
of its own name, and contains 4620 inhabitants, 
and sends one representative to the general court. 
There is a duck manufactory here, and 10 sper 
maceti works. The inhabitants are, for the most 
part, a robust and enterprising set of people, 
mostly seamen and mechanics. The seamen are 
the most expert whale-men in the world. The 
whale fishery originated among the white inhabi 
tants in the year 1690, in boats from the shore. 
In 1715, they had six sloops, 58 tons burden, and 
the fishery produced 1100/. sterling. From 1772 
to 1775, the fishery employed 150 sail from 90 to 
J80 tons, upon the coast of Guinea, Brazil, and 
the W. Indies; the produce of which amounted 
to 167,000/. sterling. The late war almost ruined 
this business. They have since, however, revived 
it again, and pursue the whales even into the great 
Pacific ocean. There is not here a single tree of 
natural growth ; they have a place called the 
Woods, but it has been destitute of trees for these 
60 years past. The island had formerly plenty of 
wood. The people, especially the females, arc 
fondly attached to the island, and few wish to mi 
grate to a more desirable situation. The people 
are mostly Friends or Quakers. There is one so 
ciety of Congregationalists. Some part of the c. 
end of the island, known by the name of Squarn, 
and some few other places, are held as private 
farms. At present there are near 300 proprietors 
of the island. The proportional number of cattle, 
sheep, &amp;c. put out to pasture, and the quantify of 
ground to raise crops, are minutely regulated ; and 
proper officers are appointed, who in their books 
debit and credit the proprietors accordingly. In 
the month of June, each proprietor gives in to the 
clerks the number of his sheep, cattle, and horses, 
that he may be charged with them in the books ; 
and if the number be more than he is entitled to by 
his rights, he hires ground of his neighbours who 
have less. But, if the proprietors all together 
have more than their number, the overplus are ei 
ther killed or transported from the island. 

In the year 1659, when Thomas Macy removed 



NAP 

with his family from Salisbury in Essex county to 
the w. end of the island, with several other fami 
lies, there were nearly 3000 Indians on the island, 
who were kind to strangers, and benevolent to each 
other, and lived happily until contaminated by 
the bad example of the whites, who introduced 
rum ; and their number soon began to decrease. 
The whites had no material quarrel or difficulty 
with them. The natives sold their lands, and the 
whites went on purchasing, till, in fine, they have 
obtained the whole, except some small rights, 
which are still retained by the natives. A mortal 
sickness carried off 222 of them in 1764; and 
they are now reduced to four males, and 16 fe 
males.] 

[NANTUCKET, (formerly Sherburne), a post- 
town, capital, and port of entry in the above island. 
The exports in the year ending September 30, 
1794, amounted to 20,517 dollars. It is 56 miles 
e. s. e. of Newport, 75 s. e. of Boston, and 255 
e. n. e. of Philadelphia.] 

[NANTUCK.ET Shoal, a bank which stretches 
out above 15 leagues in length, and six in 
breadth, to the s. e. from the island of its name.] 

NANTUE, a port of the coast of the province 
and colony of Maryland, within the bay of Che- 
sapeak. 

NANTUXET Bay, New Jersey, is on the e. 
side of Delaware bay, opposite Bombay hook.] 

NANZUITA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Santa Isabel de Sinacatan, 
in the province and alcaldia mayor of Guazapan, 
and kingdom of Guatemala; annexed to the cu 
racy of its head settlement. 

NAOS, a port on the coast of the province and 
kingdom of Tierra Firme, very convenient and 
capacious, frequented by strange vessels which 
carry on an illicit commerce. It is to the e. of 
the mouth of the river Chagre. 

NAOS, a small island of the S. sea, in the bay of 
Panama, of the province and kingdom of Tierra 
Firme ; one of those which form the port of 
Perico. 

NAOUADICIIES, a settlement of Indians of 
the province and government of Texas in N. Ame 
rica ; situate between the rivers Adaes and Trini 
dad, in the road which leads to Mexico. 

NAPAUECHI, a settlement of the missions 
which were held at the cxpence of the Jesuits, in 
the province ofTaraumara and kingdom of Nueva 
Vizcayar. Twenty-two leagues s. zs. of the 
real of mines and town of San Felipe de Chi- 
guagua. 

NAPEANOS, SAN PABLO DE, a settlement of 
the province and government of Mamas in the 



N A Q 

kingdom of Quito; situate at the source of the 
river Nanay. 

[NAPESTLE, a river spoken of by HumboWt, 
who asserts thai it is not known at New Mexico 
by what name it is denominated in Louisiana. It 
is, however, thought to be the Arkansas.] 

NAPO, a large and abundant river of the pro 
vince and government of Quixos y Macas in the 
kingdom of Quito, and one of the most consider 
able in that kingdom. It rises from the mountain 
and volcano of Cotopacsi, and flows down to the 
valley V r icioso, running constantly e. through some 
very large rocks; and therefore not navigable, 
save only from the settlement and port of its name, 
facilitating the communication between this pro-,, 
viuce and the capital. In its course it collects on 
the s. the waters of the Ansupi, Puni, Araoma, 
Umuyacu, Ayrunni, Canoa-yacu, Anangu, Se- 
renu, Yutury-yacu,Tiputini, Curaray, and others 
of less note; and on the n. the Hollin, Pusunu, 
Sinii, Payamino, Coca, liaya, Aguarico, and 
many which are smaller. On its shores are the 
settlements of Napo, Napotoas, Santa Rosa de Oas, 
San Juan Nepomuceno, and El Dulce Nombre de 
Jesus, all reductions made by the regulars of the 
Jesuits ; but the climate is there very warm and 
moist, and causing great sickness. Both on one and 
the other shores dwell various barbarian nations of 
savage Indians, all having distinct idioms difficult 
to be learnt. This river, thus enlarged by those 
aforesaid, enters with so large a body into the Ma- 
raiion or Amazonas by the n. shore, as fo have 
been frequently mistaken for the same. Where it 
is entered by the river Cacao, is the spot where 
Francisco de Orellana separated himself from his 
chief Gonzalo Pizarro and went to sea. This river 
is most abundantly stocked with delicate fish, and 
in 1774, at the bursting of the volcano of Coto- 
paxi, it was so swelled by the melting of the snows 
and ice, that it burst its boundaries and inundated 
an immense tract of country, doing infinite damage 
in the settlements. Its mouth is in hit. 3 26 s. 

NAPO. The settlement aforesaid, one of the 
missions established by the Jesuits ; situate on the 
shore of the above river, and where (he inhabi 
tants catch much fish. It is very fertile, and 
abounding in yucas^ maize, rice, and plantains. 
In 1744 it suffered much in the inundation before- 
mentioned, when the river carried away the greater 
part of the houses. 

NAPOTOAS, a settlement of the same pro 
vince and kingdom as the former, belonging in 
the district of Quijos ; situate also on the shore of 
the river Napo : one of the missions founded there 
by the Jesuits. 



366 



N A R 



N A R 



NAQUASEE, a settlement of Indians of the 
province and colony of N. Carolina, on the 
confines of that province and that of S. Caro 
lina. 

NARAGUASET, an ancient name of a terri 
tory or district of New England, e. of the river 
Connecticut, now the county of New London. 

NARANJA, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district of Tirindaro, and alcaldia mayor 
of Valladolid, in the province and bishopric of 
Mechoacan. It contains 7G families of Indians, 
and is a quarter of a league n. of its head settle 
ment. 

NARANJAL, a settlement of the province and 
government of Guayaquil and kingdom of Quito, 
in the district of the island of La Puna, abounding 
in woods of excellent quality for ship-building, 
and in which its commerce consists. Seven leagues 
from Guayaquil. 

NARANJAL, another settlement, of the head set 
tlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Ori- 
zava in Nucva Espaila, in which are 108 Indian 
families and only two Spanish. In its district is 
the celebrated sugar-mill, called De Tuzpanco, at 
which there assist no less than eight families of 
Negro slaves ; this great population and extensive 
boundary belonging to the inheritance of the Mar 
quis de Sierra Nevada. Four leagues s.w. of its 
capital. 

NARANJAL, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; situate near the coast of Timana, and at 
the source of the Rio Grande de la*Magdalena. 

NARANJAL, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Antioquia, in the same kingdom as 
the former ; situate on the shore of the river Ne- 
chi, near the pass of La Angostura. 

NARANJAL, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Guayaquil, which rises w. of the set 
tlement of Inca, in the corregimiento of Cuenca, 
and enters the sea near the mouth of the river 
Guayaquil, in the gulf of its name. 

NARANJAL, an island of the S. sea, in the gulf 
of Panama, arid province and kingdom of Tierra 
Firme, one of those called Del Rey, or De las Per- 
las, and the larger of these. Five leagues in 
length from n. to s. desert, and inhabited only by 
a few Negro slaves of the families of Panama, em 
ployed in the searcli for pearls, and for their main 
tenance they grow a little maize, this being the 
only vegetable production. It has a good port 
on the e. side, opposite the coast of the continent, 
from whence it is distant five leagues. 

NARANJO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Popayan and Nuevo Reyno de 



Granada; situate on the shore of a small river to 
the n. of the city of Buga. 

NARANJO, a river of the island of St. Do 
mingo. It is small, and rises near the coast of the 
great bay of Samana, and enters the sea be 
tween the river De Estero and the port of S. Law 
rence. 

NARANJOS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chachapoyas in Peru ; situate at 
the source and on the bank of the river Moyo- 
barnba. 

NARANJOS, a river of the island St. Domingo, 
in the French part. It rises near the coast of the 
w. and, running to this rhumb, enters the sea in 
the bay of Pozo. 

NARANJOS, another river, of the island of 
Cuba, which enters the sea on the n. coast, between 
the ports Sama and Timones. 

NARE, a river of the province and government 
of Antioquia in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. 
.It is navigable for small vessels, and abounds in 
good fish : also in its vicinity is gathered good 
cacao. It enters by the w. into 1 the Rio Grande 
de la Magdalena, between the town of Honda and 
the settlement of Carari. 

NAREO, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district of Tlapacoya, and alcaldia mayor of 
Quatro Villas, in Nueva Espana. It contains 28 
families of Indians, who cultivate some cochineal, 
seeds, and fruits, and cut some woods. Three 
leagues n. w. of its head settlement. 

NAR1GUERA, SAN PEDRO DE ALCANTARA 
DE LA, a settlement of the province and govern 
ment of Quixos y Macas in the kingdom of 
Quito ; a reduction of the Sucumbios Indians, and. 
one of the missions which were held there by the 
Jesuits. 

NARIS, an isle of the N. sea, close to the island 
of Christoval, one of the Antilles. 

NAR1TO, a river of the province and alcaldia 
mayor of Acaponeta or Chiametla in Nueva Es 
pana. It runs from the province of Cinaloa and 
Culiacan, and enters the gulf of California or 
Mar Roxo de Cortes. Although the Indians give 
it this name the Spaniards call it Toluca. It is 
very large and abundant. 

NAR1NA, a river of the island and govern 
ment of Trinidad. It rises from a lake in the e. part, 
not far from tli e coast, and enters the sea close to 
the point of Cocos. 

NARRAGANSET, a city of the county of 
Hampshire, in the bay of Massachusetts, of N. 
America. Five miles e. of Sunderland and 10 
w. of Petersham. 

Bay, Rhode island, makes up 



N A S 

from s. to w. between the mainland on the e. 
and w. It embosoms many fruitful and beautiful 
islands, the principal of which are Rhode island, 
Canonicut, Prudence, Patience, Hope, Dyers, and 
Hog islands. The chief harbours are Newport, 
"VVickford, Warren, Bristol, and Greenwich, 
besides Providence and Patnxet ; the latter is near 
the mouth of Patuxct river, which falls into Pro 
vidence river. Taunton .river and many smaller 
streams fall into this capacious bay. It affords fine 
fish, oysters, and lobsters in great plenty.] 

[NARRAGUAGUSBay. A part of the bay 
between Goldsborough and Machias, in Wash 
ington county, district of Maine, goes by this 
name. From thence for the space of 30 or 40 
miles, the navigator finds, \vithin a great number 
of fine islands, a secure and pleasant ship-way. 
Many of these islands are inhabited and make a 
fine appearance. A river of the same name falls 
into the bay.] 

[NARRAGUAGUS, a post-town ; situate on 
the above bay, 15 miles n. e. of Goldsborough, 
39 e. by n. of Penobscot, arid five from Pleasant 
river.] 

[NARROWS, The. The narrow passage from 
sea, between Long and Statcn islands, into the 
bay which spreads before New York city, formed 
by the junction of Hudson and East rivers, is 
thus called. This strait is nine miles s. of the 
city of New York.] 

[NARROWS, The, a strait about three miles 
broad, between the islands of Nevis and St. Chris 
topher s, in the W. Indies.] 

NARUAEZ, SAN MIGUEL I&amp;gt;E, a settlement of 
the province and government of Quixos and Ma- 
cas in the kingdom of Quito, belonging to the dis 
trict of the second. 

NASAS, a large and abundant river of the 
kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya in N. America. It 
rises near the Real de Minas of Guanavi, 15 
leagues w. of the ciiy of Guadiana, the capital of 
the kingdom, and runs from n. w. to s. e. until it 
enters the great lake of San Pedro. On its shore 
are many settlements of Spaniards, Muslecs^ and 
Mulattoes, and others of Indians, reduced by the 
missions that were held there by the Jesuits ; and 
its waters are made, by means of aqueducts, ser 
viceable for the irrigation of many gardens and 
lands, where there are some vineyards which 
yield abundantly. There was formerly in this 
part a strong garrison, but which was abolished 
through the offer of the Count S. Pedro del Alamo, 
to undertake the defence of the country against the 
infidel Indians. 

NASCA, a celebrated town and port of thepro- 



N A S 



367 



vince and district thus called in Peru, which is 
formed from the territories of lea and Pisco, and 
extends for more than 50 leagues along the strands 
of the Pacific sea. This port is called one of the 
Puertos Intermedios, or intermediate ports, as lying 
between the kingdom of Peru and Chile. The 
soil is very fertile, and abounds in vines and olives, 
of which the crops are excellent, and of which its 
commerce consists, and which tend to make this 
port much frequented by vessels which come to 
lade with these cargoes. The valley in which the 
vines grow, consists of a pebbly sand, having 
some streams of water, which never swell to an in 
ordinate height nor diminish, without their origin 
ever having been discovered, although it is found 
that they spront out of some subterranean chan 
nels, which were formed by the Indians in the 
time of their gentil ism. The town is well peopled, 
and in it are many noble and rich families. It has, 
besides the parish church, a convent of the reli 
gious order of San Agustin. It suffered much 
in an earthquake in 1765 : is of a mild and healthy 
temperature; and its territory was conquered and 
united to the empire of Peru by Capac Yupanqui, 
fifth emperor of the Incas. In lat. 15 T 30" s. 
Long. 75 24 w. 

NASCA, a river of this province, which runs 
w. and enters the sea opposite the promontory also 
of this name. 

NASCA, a mountain on the coast of tl;c said 
province, at the entrance of the port above men 
tioned. 

NASCAT1CH, a small lake of New France or 
Canada, in N. America ; formed by a waste- 
water of the lake St. Peter, and others in the coun 
try and territory of the Nekoubanistes Indians. 

[NASH, a county of Halifax district, con 
taining 7393 inhabitants, of whom 2009 are slaves. 
There is a large and valuable body of iron ore in 
this county ; but only one bloomery has yet been 
erected.] 

[NASH Court-house, in N. Carolina, where a 
post-office is kept, 21 miles w. by n. from Tarbo- 
rough, and 22 s. e. from Lewisburg.] 

[NASHAUN, or NAWSMAWN, one of the 
Elizabeth isles, the property of the Hon. James 
Bowdoin, Esq. of Boston ; situated at the mouth 
of Buzzard s bay, and three miles fronvthe extre 
mity of the peninsula of Barnstaple county. 
Considerable numbers of sheep and cattle arc sup 
ported upon this island ; and it has become famous 
for its excellent wool and cheese. Here Capt. Bar 
tholomew Gosnold landed in 1G02, and took up 
his abode for some time.] 

[NASHUA, River, is a considerable stream in 



368 



N A S 



Worcester county, Massachusetts, and has rich 
intervale lands on its banks. It enters Merri- 
mack river at Dunstable. Its course is n. n. e.] 

[NASHVILLE, the chief town of Mero dis 
trict in the state of Tennessee, is pleasantly 
situated in Davidson s county, on the s. bank of 
Cumberland river, where it is 200 yards broad. 
It was named after Brig. Gen. Francis Nash, 
who fell on the 4th of October 1777, in the 
battle of Germantown. It is regularly laid out, 
and contains 75 houses, a court-house, an aca 
demy, and a church for Presbyterians, and one 
for Methodists. It is the seat of the courts held 
semi-annually for the district of Mero, and of the 
courts of pleas and quarter sessions for Davidson 
county. It is 160 miles w. of Knoxville, 66 from 
Big Salt lick garrison, and 166 s. by w. of Lex 
ington in Kentucky. Lat. 36 3 n. Long. 86 
58 w.] 

[NASKEAG Point, in Lincoln county, district 
of Maine, is the e. point of Penobscot bay.] 

[NASPATUCKET River. See WANASPA- 

X T T C K. r T t 

[NASQUIROU River, on the Labrador coast, 
is to the w. of Esquimaux river.]] 

NASQUIROU, a small river ot the country or 
land of Labrador. It runs s. and enters the sea in 
the gulf of St. Lawrence. 

NASSAU, a cape or point of land on the coast of 
the province and government of Guayana or Nueva 
Andalucia, one of those which form the mouth or 
entrance of the river Paumaron, near Esquivo and 
Demerary. According to some maps, it is the 
same as that which others call cape of Orange, but 
which is very erroneous, for it lays 490 miles 
w. n. w. of cape Orange. It is in lat. 7 36 n. 
Long. 48 45 w. 

NASSAU, a city, the capital of the island of Pro 
vidence, one of the Lucayas ; situate on the n. 
part, on the sea-coast, defended by a castle well 
furnished with artillery, with a good port, which 
has in its neighbourhood various small isles, and 
where ships may be well sheltered and lie secure, 
although its entrance is difficult and fit only for 
small vessels, or such as draw not more than from 
10 to 12 feet water. This city was taken by the 
Spaniards in 1782, but it was restored to the Eng 
lish in the peace of the following year. 

[NASSAU Cape, on the n. shore of Tierra 
Firtnc, S.America.] 

[NASSAU, a small town in Dauphin county, 

Pennsylvania. It contains a German church, and 

about 35 houses. It is also called Kemp s town.] 

[NASSAU Island, at the mouth of By ram river, 

in Long Island sound.] 



NAT 

[NASSAU, tbe chief" town of Providence island, 
one of the Bahamas, and the seat of government. 
It is the only port of entry except at Turk s 
island. See BAHAMAS and NEW PROVIDENCE.] 
[NASTLA, a town of Mexico. See ANGELOS.J 
NATA, or SANTIAGO DE LOS CABALLEROS, 
a city, and capital of the alcaldia -mayor and ju 
risdiction of its name in the province and kingdom 
of Tierra Firme ; situate upon the coast of the 
gulf of Parita, in a beautiful and agreeable spot; 
the territory being fertile and abounding in cattle, 
seeds, and fruit, and of an hot temperature. It is 
called Nata from one of the caciques of that ter 
ritory ; which was discovered by Olonso de 
Ojcda, in 1515, and settled, in 1517, by Caspar 
de Espinosa. The infidel Indians destroyed the 
town in 1529, but it was rebuilt with the title of 
city in 1531. 

Here they make some sorts of crockery of an 
earth of a beautiful red colour, forming them of 
different shapes and figures, and of such beauty 
as to be in great estimation in Peru and even in 
Europe; this consequently forms a considerable 
branch of commerce. In 1748, the president Don 
Dionisio de Alcedo inflicted an exemplary chas 
tisement on three very numerous companies of 
smugglers, who had maintained an open commerce 
with the English, these having furnished them 
with artillery, arms, and ammunition, so that they 
built for themselves a fort, and actually opposed 
and defeated a detachment of the regiment of Gra 
nada, putting to death the officer Don Alonzo de 
Murga, the commander. It is 73 miles s. w. from 
Panama, in lat. 8 21 50" n. Long. 80 17 w. 

[NATA Point, or CKAMA, or CHAUMU Cape, is 
at the w. point of the gulf of Panama, from 
whence the coast tends w. to Haguera point seven 
leagues. All ships bound to the w. z&amp;. and to Aca- 
pulco make this point. It is also called the s. point 
of the bay, which lies within on the w. side of this 
great gulf of Panama.] 

[NATACHQUOIN River, a large river of the 
coast of Labrador, in N. America, to the w\ of 
Nasquirou river, under mount Joli, where it 
forms a s. cape. The little Natachquoin is to the 
w. s, w. of this. ] 

NATAGA, a settlement of the government of 
Neiba in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada; situate 
on an^eminencc,ofa mild temperature, and abound 
ing in vegetable productions and gold mines, and 
in this metal the Indians here pay their tribute. 
The natives, who may amount to little more than 
50, have some of them established themselves in 
a neighbouring place, called Los Organos; since 
they assert that the gold is there more abundant 



-N A -T 

and most easily procured. Sixteen leagues from 
its capital and near the city of La Plata. 

NAT AGAIMAS, an ancient nation of Indians 
of the Nuevo Key no de Grnnada, who used to 
dwell in the llanuros of Neiba, and were at con 
tinual warfare with the Pijaes. Some of them 
were reduced to the faith. They are strong, war 
like, and of a fierce aspect, but faithful. Very few 
of them now remain in a settlement of the corre- 
gimiento of Coyaima, which is of an hot tempe 
rature, and produces cacao^ maize, I/HCUS, and 
plantains, and has good breeds of neat cattle. 
The Indians, when they have to pay their tribute, 
sally forth in large companies to Santa Fe, and on 
their way spend four or five days in fishing in Ihc 
great river of Saldaiia, and in this time they col 
lect all the gold which is necessary for their pur 
poses. Indeed such is the case with which they 
collect this metal, that they must infallibly become 
soon rich, were they not so much given to the vice 
of drunkenness. This settlement is close to the 
town of La Purificacion. 

NATAGAME, a settlement of the kingdom of 
Nueva Vizcaya in N. America. 

[NATAL, a cape and town on the s. shore of 
the Rio Grande, on the n. e. coast of Brazil in S. 
America, is to the s. w. of the four-square shoal, 
at the mouth of the entrance of that river, which 
contains some dangerous rocks. On this point is 
the castle of the Three Kings, or Fortaleza des 
Trcs Magos. The town of Natal is three leagues 
from the castle, before which is good anchorage 
for ships in from four to five fathoms, and well se 
cured from winds.] 

NATCH ES, a nation of barbarian Indians of 
Louisiana in N. America ; who occupied the most 
fertile and best peopled canton. At a short dis 
tance from the coast rise two hills, one behind the 
other, and beyond these are valleys of fertile mea 
dows, interspered with beautiful groups of woods, 
forming a very enchanting prospect. The most 
common of the trees are the walnut and the oak. 

Mr. de Iberbillc, a Frenchman, was the first, 
who, navigating the Mississippi from its mouth, 
discovered this nation and country of the Natches 
in 1701, and who, finding it to have so many ad 
vantages, determined to found a colony and town 
which might be the capital of the establishment 
that might be formed by the French. Accord 
ingly, having formed his plan, he determined to 
give to this new settlement the name of Rosalia, 
which Avas that of Madame de Pontchartrain ; but 
it was never founded, although some geographers 
of the French nation wrongly give it a place in 
their charts. 
VOL. in. 



NAT 



369 



The character of these Notches Indians dif 
fers much from that of all the other nations, 
since they arc : very pacific and really hate war, 
and never make it unless obliged, deeming it no 
glory to destroy their fellow-creatures. The form 
of their government is despotic, and such is the 
subordination of the vassals as to border upon 
slavery. They say that their chiefs arc descended 
from the sun, and, indeed, these take the name 
of this luminary ; and both chief and his wife 
have the power of inflicting death on all on the 
slightest pretence. All treat him with the most 
excessive veneration, and, \v!ien he dies, all those 
of his family think it the greatest honour to die 
with him, whilst those not related, and who cannot 
pretend to this happiness, sometimes make them 
selves a cord by which they may hang themselves. 
They have a temple in which a sacred fire is 
continually burning ; and should it perchance 
happen to go out, the priest entrusted with the care 
of it is immediately put to death. There is no 
nation in the world in which the women are so 
luxurious as in this; and the sun or chief can 
oblige them to prostitute themselves to any stranger 
without the least breach of propriety or decency. 
Although polygamy is allowed without limitation 
as to the number of women, they seldom have 
more than one, but the chief alone can repudiate 
and cast her off at his fancy. The women are 
prettily made and dress well, and the noble 
amongst them may not marry save with plebeians, 
but they may throw off the alliance whenever their 
husband displeases them, and take another, should 
she not be a mother. The wife may break her 
husband s head if unfaithful to his marriage bed, 
but the husbund has not the same power over his 
wife, for he generally looks up to her as a slave to 
his mistress, and may not eat in her presence. 

In their wars they have two chiefs. They have 
two masters of the ceremonies for the temple, and 
two officers to regulate the treaties of peace and 
war, one to inspect the works and another to ma 
nage the public festivities. The great sun or chief 
gives these employments, and the persons fulfilling 
them are respected much by the commonalty. 
The harvests are made for the general good : the 
chief appoints the day of the gathering, and calls 
together all the people, and at the end of July lie 
fixes another time for the celebration of a feast 
which lasts three days ; and at which each indi 
vidually assists, bringing with him some game, 
fish, and other provisions, consisting of maize, 
beans, and melons. The sun and his principal 
wife preside, sitting under a lofty covering of 
leaves; the former having in his hand a sceptre 
3 B 



370 



NAT 



adorned with feathers of various colon rs, and all 
the nobility arranged around them both in the 
most respectful order. On the last day the chief 
makes an oration, exhorting all to fulfil their se 
veral duties, and most particularly to testify their 
veneration to the spirits of the temple, and to la 
bour in the education of their children : then, if 
any one has been instrumental to the public good, 
the chief proceeds (o make his eulogiqm. 

In 1700 the temple was set on fire by a flash of 
lightning, and eight women threw their children 
into the flames, thereby thinking to appease the 
deities. This was one of those actions which was 
particularly extolled, and the women were looked 
upon as complete heroines, nor did the chief, in 
tit is instance, forget to recommend strongly that 
all mothers should adopt the same conduct in a 
similar emergency. 

Garcilaso Inca speaks of the nation of the 
Natches as of a powerful and numerous people ; 
but the fact is, that they are now much reduced 
as well by the epidemic disorders that have pre- 
v.iiled amongst them as by their wars. At pre 
sent they have no other population than that 
where the French have built a fort for their esta 
blishment ; and Mr. de Iberbille destined the Fa 
ther Paul de Kudo, a Jesuit, to undertake the con 
version of these Indians; but he finding that he 
obtained little fruit, passed over to preach to the 
Bayagoulas. Some years after this, the same ob 
ject was had in view by Mr. de S. Cosme, a priest, 
but he was killed by the Indians ; and, indeed, 
such has been the urviforrn resistance on their part 
to any plans adopted for their reduction, as to pre 
clude all possibility of attaining that end. 

[NATCHES, a town so called, on the banks of 
the Mississippi, which, according to Mr. Ashe, 
contains 2500 inhabitants, much given to lux 
urious and dissolute propensities, for which they 
have become proverbial.] 

NATClllTOCHES, or NACTCHITOCHF.S, as 
some pronounce it, a barbarous nation of Indians of 
the province and government of Louisiana, in N. 
America, who dwell 50 leagues up the Red river, 
which is also known by their name. This tribe 
of Indians, who have always been the friends of 
the French and enemies to the Spaniards, is very 
numerous and composed of more than 200 cabins. 
The French military, who had fulfilled their time 
of service, established themselves on an island of 
the Red river, where they built a fort which they 
called Natchitoches ; but having sowed some to 
bacco, and found that the sand that was blown 
upon it made it of a bad quality, they removed 
their establishment to Tierra Firme, where they 



NAT 

have so succeeded in the cultivation of this plant 
that it is of peculiar estimation. This nation is 
60 leagues from New Orleans. 

NATiCK, an ancient township of the county of 
Middlesex in the colony and bay of Massachusetts; 
situate on the shore of Charles river. [It is" 18 
miles s. w. of Boston, and 10 ??. w. of Declham. Its 
name in the Indian language signifies u the place 
of hills." The famous Mr. Eliot formed a reli 
gious society here; and in 1G70, there were 50 
Indian communicants. At his motion, the general 
court granted the land in this town, containing 
about 6000 acres, to the Indians. Very few of 
their descendants, however, now remain. It was 
incorporated into an English district in 1761, and 
into a township in 1781 ; and now contains 615 in 
habitants.] 

NAT1GAN, a small river of the province and 
country of Labrador in N. America, which runs 
s. and enters the sea in the gulf of St. Lawrence. 

NAT1GUANAGUA, a river of the province 
and government of Darien in the kingdom of 
Tierra Firme. It rises in the mountains of the n. 
part, and enters the sea opposite the Mulatto 
isles. 

NAT1SCOTEC, a bay in the island ofAnti- 
costi of N. America, on the e. coast. 

NAT1VIDAD, a settlement of the province and 
government of Sonora in N.America; situate on 
the shore of the river Bezariy. 

NATIVIDAD, a small island of the S. sea, dis 
covered by Admiral Sebastian, a Vizcayan, in 1602, 
when he went by order of the viceroy, Count of 
Monterrey, to reconnoitre the coast of Nueva 
Espana by that sea. This island is small, desert, 
and abounding only in a sort of wild fennel. 

NATIVIDAD, an island of the strafts of Ma 
gellan. 

NATIVITAS, SANTA MART A DF, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the district of Tlapacoya 
and a/caldia mayor of Quatro Villas in Nueva 
Espaiia. It contains 64 Indian families, who cul 
tivate some cochineal, seeds and fruit, and cut wood, 
and in which they trade. Two leagues n. u\ of 
itshead settlement. 

NATIVITAS, an hermitage of Nueva Espana-, at 
less than a league s distance from the city of Xu- 
chimilco, and four to the s. of Mexico ; in the 
which are two or three fountains of excellent 
water, and in the largest and deepest a stone cross, 
fixed there by the first of the monks of S. Francisco 
who passed through that kingdom. This foun 
tain swarms with fish, and the country around 
being delightfully woody and pleasant, with many 
orchards and cultivated grounds, is such as to in.-- 



N A U 

tlucelhe inhabitants of Mexico frequently to visit 
this spot, and indeed all persons of distinction, 
going to that city, alight here to examine the 
cross ; which has the following peculiarity attend 
ing it, namely, that being fixed upright in a canoe, 
and this being agitated by the motion causod in the 
\vater by the number of the fish, the cross is also 
seen to move about, whereas its fixture in the 
canoe not being visible from the shore, it should 
seem that it ought to be stable. 

NATOUAGAMIOU, a lake of New France or 
Canada, formed from various other small lakes to 
the ft. of the great lake of S. Juan. 

[NATTENAT, an Indian village on Noolka 
sound, on the n. w. coast of N. America. It has a 
remarkable cataract, or water-fall, a few miles to 
the n. of it.] 

[NATURAL Bridge. See ROCKBRIDGE Coun 
ty, Virginia.] 

NAU, a settlement of the province and country 
of Las Amazonas, in the Portuguese possessions ; 
a reduction of the Indians, and made by the Car 
melite missionaries of that nation. It is on the 
shore of the river Negro, very near the settlement 
of Baracoa. 

NAUAGANTI, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Uarien, and kingdom of Tierra Firme. 
It rises in the mountains on the n. runs nearly to 
this rhumb, and enters the -sea opposite the island 
of Pinos. 

NALJAJOA, or NAVAJOOS, a province and ter 
ritory of Indians of this nation, in N.America; 
bounded n. by that of Moqui, n. w. by the town of 
Santa Fe, the capital of the kingdom of Nuevo 
Mexico. It is peopled by rancherias or farms of 
barbarian and gentile Indians ; but who were 
easily reduced to the Catholic faith, as was proved 
by the attempts made in 1748 by the friar Juan 
Menchero of the order of San Francisco, who 
with an apostolic zeal went to preach amongst 
them. 

NAUAJOA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Cinaloa ; a reduction of Indians of the 
aforesaid nation, and of the missions which were 
held by the Jesuits. 

NAUCALPAN, SAN BARTOLOME DE, a settle 
ment of the alcaldia mayor of Tacuba in Nueva 
Espufrn ; annexed to the curacy of San Antonio 
cle Iluixquilucan. It contains 273 families of In 
dians, and is nine leagues and an half to the w. s. w. 
of its capital. 

[NAUDOWESIE8, an Indian nation inhabit 
ing lands between lakes Michigan and Superior. 
Warriors, 500]. 

[NAUGATUCK River, a n. e. branch of llou- 



N A U 



371 



satonic river in Connecticut. A great number of 
mills and iron-works are upon this stream and its 
branches.] 

NAU11TECAS, a nation of Indians of Nueva 
Esp ma, who inhabited the coast of the N. sea; 
conquered and subjected to the empire of Mexico 
by Mocthecutzuma 11. ; to impede by that direc 
tion the entrance of the Tlaxcaltecas, when the 
conquest of this republic was in agitation. The 
Nauhtecas were bounded by the Mixcaltzincas. 

NAUHTLAN, a settlement of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Panuco in Nueva Espana ; situ 
ate near the sea-coast by the Indians, before the 
arrival of the Spaniards, who afterwards changed 
its name to Almeiia. The emperor Mocthecut 
zuma used to have posted watches or centincls to 
give notice of what was happening at sea. 

NAULINGO, a settlement and head settlement 
of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Xalapa in 
Nueva Espana ; situate on the top of a stony 
mountain of a league and an half high ; of a cold 
and moist temperature from its lofty situation, but 
as fertile as any other settlements of this jurisdic 
tion. Its population is composed of 142 families 
of Spaniards, J9 of Mustecs and Mulattos, and 
90 of Indians, devoted for the most part to the 
cultivation of the soil. Its name, which signifies 
" four eyes," arises from so many springs of water 
which rise in a hill contiguous to the settlement. 
Five leagues n. e. of its capital. 

NAULINGO, another settlement, with the dedi 
catory title of Santiago, in the head settlement of 
the district of Caluco, of the alcaldia mayor of 
Sonsonate, in the kingdom of Guatemala. It is 
annexed to the curacy of its head settlement, and 
its natives are Mexican Indians. 

NAUMBI, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Paraguay, which enters the Uruguay be 
tween those of Itay and Mbutuay. 

NAUNAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, but 
little known, who dwell in the province and coun 
try of Las Amazonas, in the forests and woods 
close to the river Itau, where they live dispersed 
and wandering about like wild beasts. 

NAUOGAME, a settlement of the missions 
which were held by the regulars of the company, 
in the province and government of Sonoia in N. 
America. 

NAUPAN, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the di:.-:trirtand alcaldia mayor of Guauchinango 
in u Neva Espana, of a mild temperature. It has 
a convent of the religious order of S.Agustin, and 
contains 334 families of Indians, including those of 
eight wards annexed to its curacy, who live by 
cultivating seed and cotton, as also by making 
SB 2 



372 



f * 
A V 



, 

loaf-sugar. Three leagues n. of its head settle- 
merit. 

N A UP AN, a very lofty mountain of the cordillera, 
in the cornegiiaiento and district of Alause, of the 
kingdom of Quito. 

NAURAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, of the 
Nnevo Reyno de Granada, who live near the river 
Carari. Tliey arc cannibals and warlike, and 
sometimes wander as far as the shores of the grand 
river Magdalena. These barbarians at the present 
&amp;lt;lay are far from numerous, and their customs are 
but little known. 

NAUSA, a settlement of the district of Yagua- 
che, in the province and government of Guayaquil 
and kingdom of Quito. 

NAUTA, a river of Nueva Espana, in the juris 
diction and alcaldla mayor of Tampico. It enters 
the sea between the mouth of this river and the 
point Deglada. 

NAUUSHAUUN, an island of the N. sea, one 
of those called Isabella, at the mouth or entrance 
of the bay of Plymouth and New England : three 
miles s. zo. of the peninsula of the county of Barns- 
table, which forms the cape of Cod bay. 

NAUZA, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimicnlo of Gimmico in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Santa Maria del Valle. 

NAUZALCO, SAN JUAN DE, a settlement and 
head settlement of the district of the alcnldia mayor 
of Sonsonate in the kingdom of Guatemala. It 
contains 2650 Indians, with those contained in 
three other settlements annexed to its curacy, 
which belonged to the religious order ofS. Do 
mingo, before the clergy had been appointed to it 
by order of the king. 

.[NAVARRE, a province of New Mexico, on 
the n. e. side of the gulf of California, which se 
parates it from the peninsula of California, on the 
s. K.-.] 

NAVATlA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Nicaragua, and kingdom of Guate 
mala, in the tirn&amp;gt; of the Indian gentilism. 

NAVAZA, a small island of the N.sea, to 
windward of the strait formed by the islands of 
Cuba and St. Domingo. It is desert, and the 
English come to it from Jamaica in boats to catcli 
iguanas, an amphibious animal resembling a li 
zard, and which is found here in great abundance, 
breeding in the roots of old trees : their flesh is 
white, but hard to masticate, and the sailors say 
they make good broth. Some of these animals 
are found three feet long. [It is 67 miles e. n. e. of 
the e. end of the island of Jamaica, and 30 miles 
from Tuburon in the island of St. Domingo. Lat. 
18 33 n. Long, 75 3 a&amp;gt;.] 



NAY 

[NAVESINK Harbour, on the sea-coast of Mon- 
mouth county, New Jersey, lies in lat. 40 24 . 
having Jumping point on the n. and is 2| miles s. 
of the n. end of Sandy Hook island ; and its mouth 
is five miles from the town of Shrewsbury. The 
small river of its name falls into it from the w. and 
rises in the same county. Navesink hills extend 
n. w. from the harbour on the Atlantic ocean, to 
Raritonbay; and are the first land discovered by 
mariners when they arrive on the coast. They arc 
600 feet above the level of the sea, and maybe 
seen 20 leagues off.] 

NAVIDAD, a settlement of the province and 
bishopric of Mechoacan in Nueva Espana, with a 
good port on the coast of the S. sea. It belongs to 
the alcaldia mayor of La Purificacion, and is 156 
miles w. of Mexico. In lat. 18 51 n. Long. 
111 10 w. 

NAVIDAD, another port, in the province and 
corjregtmjientq of Itata of the kingdom of Chile. 

NAViO QUEBRADO, a point of land of the 
coast of the province and government of &amp;lt;he Rio 
del Ilacha, and Nuevo Reyno de Granada, between 
the aforesaid river and the settlement of La Ra- 
rnada. 

NAVIOS, ISLA UE, an island near the coast of 
the province and government of Louisiana in N. 
America, close to the falls of St. Diego. 

NAVIOS, a bay of the n. zo. coast of the island of 
Martinique, between port Case Pilote, and the 
point DeNeijres. 

[NAVIkES, or CAS E N A VIRES Bay, in the 
island of Martinieo, in the W. Indies.] 

NAV1SCALCO, a settlement of the province 
and alcal Jia mayor of Zedalcs in the kingdom of 
Guatemala. 

NAVTL O, a port of the coast of Nueva Espana; 
opposite the province of California. 

[NAVY, a township in Orleans county, in Ver 
mont.] 

[NAVY Hall, in Lower Canada, stands on the 
$. side of lake Ontario, at the head and w. side of 
Niagara river, which last separates it from fort 
Niagara, on the e. side, in the state of New York. 
It is 20 miles n. by w. of fort Erie, and SO s. c. by 
s. of York.] 

[NAVY Island lies in t!ie middle of Niagara 
river, whose waters separate it, from fort Slushcr, on 
the e. bank of the river, and tlie same waters divide 
it from Grand island, on the s. and s. e. It is 
about one mile long, and one broad, and is about 
three miles n. by e. of Navy Hall.] 

NAYARITH, a large arid extensive province 
of N.America; bounded e. by the borders of 
Nueva Vizcaya, and part by Nueva Galicia; w.. 



NAY 

by the provinces of Copala and Culiacan ; s, by 
the jurisdictions and alcaldias of the audience of 
Guadalaxara ; and n, by the sierra Mad re, in which 
it is situate, and the settlements of Taraumara. 
The territory is rough arid mountainous, but fer 
tile and abounding in rich mines, which are how 
ever not worked, and are useless, owing to the want 
of population. 

In this province the Jesuits held a large mission 
dispersed through several settlements, having for 
their defence a garrison with two captains, two 
lieutenants, two Serjeants, and 38 soldiers. It was 
discovered in 1718 by the circumstance of an In 
dian having come from it to the Spaniards, dressed 
in all the insignia peculiar to the Chichirnecas 
kings, and asserting that he came from the Naya- 
ritas: he presented himself with a large retinue 
before the Marquis de Valero, then viceroy of 
Mexico, to render voluntary obedience to the king 
of Spain, with all his vassals in those unknown 
countries, and such as were never guessed at by 
any Spaniard, owing to the thick and almost inac- 
cessible serrania which blocked up the road to the 
interior provinces. This chief then entreated that 
his nation might be instructed in the Catholic re 
ligion, and asked a supply of troops to aid them in 
the defence against their enemies. All this was 
immediately granted, but as they were proceeding 
on their journey, this king with all his vassals, all 
of a sudden, took to flight, carrying with them 
a great part of our equipage : they were of 
course pursued, but the Spaniards soon lost sight 
of them in those intricate serramas-^ and found 
themselves at last on a mountain called the Mesa 
del Tonati ; where, in a very capacious cave, they 
discovered the place of their sacrifices, and amongst 
other things a skeleton to which they used to pay 
adoration, and which was the remains of one of 
their kings, the fifth grandfather of him we have 
above mentioned ; this figure was covered with a 
mantle set with precious stones, according to their 
custom, which reached from the shoulders to the 
i eet, and was seated upon what they call a throne, 
with a shoulder-belt, bracelets, necklace, and gir 
dles of silver ; on its head a crown of beautiful and 
vari-colourcd plumage, -with the left hand on the 
arm of the throne and the right holding a scimitar 
studded with silver : at his feet were some precious 
vessels of stone, marble, and alabaster, in the which 
were offered the human flesh and blood at the sa 
crifices. This idol was taken to Mexico, where it 
was publicly burnt in the court of the inquisition 
by the decree of the judge provisor of the Indians, 
D. Ignacio de Castorena, dignitary of the holy 
metropolitan church and afterwards bishop of 



N A Z 



373 



Yucatan. He celeb-rated an auto de fe on the 
occasion in the convent of San Francisco, cora~ 
manding several Indians, who were afterwards 
taken when Mexico was over-run in 1723, to assist 
at the same. 

The settlements which have been founded in 
this province by the aforesaid missions of the Je 
suits, are 

Mesa del Tonati, Los Dolores, 

Santa Teresa, San Francisco de Paula, 

Jesus Maria, San Joaquin, 

Huaynamota, Santa Ana, 

San Pedro, Peyotan, 

San Juan, San Lucas. 

Tecualmes, 

NAYAUCO, a river of S. Domingo ; which 
rises in the sierra of Baruco on the s. coast, runs 
to this rhumb, and enters the sea in the point of 
Beat a. 

NAZARENO, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Rio Janeiro in Brazil ; situate on 
the coast at cape Frio. 

NAZARENO, a very lofty mountain on the coast 
of the province and government of Sonora in N. 
America. 

NAZARET, NUESTRA SBNOUA DE, a settle 
ment of the province and captainship ofPernam- 
buco in Brazil, on the coast, near the cape San 
Agustin. 

^[NAZARETH, a beautiful town in Northamp 
ton county, Pennsylvania, inhabited by Moravians 
or United Brethren. It is situated eight miles n. 
of Bethlehem, and 49 n. by w. of Philadelphia. 
-It is a tract of good land, containing about 5000 
acres, purchased by the Rev. G.Whith eld, in 1740, 
and sold two years after to the brethren. They 
were however obliged to lejive this place the same 
year, where it seems they had made some settle 
ments before. Bishop N itch man arrived from 
Europe this year (1740) with a company of bre 
thren and sisters, and purchased and settled upon 
the spot which is now called Bethlehem. 

The town of Nazareth stands about the centre of 
the manor, on a small creek, which loses itself in 
the earth about a mile and a half e. of the town. 
It was regularly laid out in 1772, and consists of 
two principal streets which cross each other at 
right angles, and form a square in the middle, of 
340 by 200 feet. The largest building is a stone 
house, erected in 1755, named Nazareth hall, 
98 feet by 46 in length, and 54 in height. The 
lower floor is formed into a spacious hail for public 
worship, the upper part of the house is fitted up 
for a boarding school, where youth fVom different 
parts are under the inspection of the minister of the 



.274 



NEB 



place and several tutors, and are instructed in the 
Ebtgttaftj German, French, and Latin languages ; 
in history, geography, bookkeeping, mathematics, 
music, drawing, and other sciences. The front of 
the house faces a large square open to the s. ad 
joining a fine piece of meadow ground, and com 
mands a most delightful prospect. Another ele 
gant building on the e. of Nazareth hall is inha 
bited by the single sisters, who have the same regu 
lations and way of living as those at Bethlehem. 
Besides their principal manufactory for spinning 
and twisting cotton, they have lately begun to draw 
wax tapers. At the s.w. corner of the aforesaid 
square, in the middle of the town, is the single 
brethren s house, and on the e. s. e. coiner a store. 
On the southernmost end of the street is a good ta 
vern. The dwelling houses are, a few excepted, 
built of lime-stone, one or two stories high, inha 
bited by tradesmen and mechancis, mostly of Ger 
man extraction. The inhabitants are supplied with 
water conveyed to them by pipes from a fine 
spring near the town. The situation of the town, 
and the salubrious air of the adjacent country, 
render this a very agreeable place. 

The number of inhabitants in the town and the 
farms belonging to it, (Shoencck included) consti 
tuting one congregation, and meeting for divine 
service on Lord s days and holidays, at Nazareth 
hall, was, in the year 1788, about 450.] 

NAZINTLA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Xocatla, and alcaldia 
mayor of Chilapa, in Nueva Espafia. One league 
to the .?, of its head settlement. 

NEALE, a settlement of the island of Barba- 
does, in the parish of St. George. 

NEBACH, SANTA MARIA DE, a settlement 
and head settlement of the district of the alcaldia 
mayor and province of Quiche in the kingdom of 
Guatemala. It contains 12JO Indians, including 
those of two other settlements annexed to its 
curacy, and which were formerly of the reli 
gious order of S. Domingo. 

NEBOME, a nation of Indians of N. America, 
dwelling in the sierras and mountains, 80 leagues 
from the town of Cinaloa : 360 of whom, men, 
women, and children, entered in 1615 to establish 
themselves in the settlement of Aborozas, of the 
missions which were held by the Jesuits in that 
province, voluntarily applying to be taken into 
the lap of the church, and being excited to this 
by the instructions they had received from certain 
Indians who attended A I varNuiiezCabezadc Vaca, 
Miguel Dorantes, and the Negro, Estebanico, in 
their perigrinations through Florida to Mexico. 
These Indians, after that they were converted to 



the faith, returned to their country to see (.heir re 
lations, and a few years after this their example 
was followed by the whole nation, who embraced 
the faith and were instructed under the Father 
Diego Vanderspie, a German, but who met with 
a violent death at their hands. 

Previous to their adopting catholicity, these In 
dians were far less barbarous than any of those re 
gions. They had houses with clay walls, they 
cultivated the ground, with the fruits of which 
and by the chase they maintained themselves. 
They clothed themselves with the skins of stags 
and other animals, which they adorned with great 
nicety. They wore a sort of petticoat which 
trailed on the ground, and from their waist up 
wards a cotton mantle. The women were equally 
mode&amp;gt;-t in their dress as in their appearance and 
deportment. 

NECENDELAN, a settlement of the province 
and alcaldia mayor of Ixcuintepcque in the king 
dom of Guatemala, conquered by Pedro de Alva- 
xado in 1523. The natives had the custom, ac 
cording to Francisco Lopez de Gomara, of play 
ing on some bells which they carried in their 
hands at the same time that they fought. 

[NECESSITY, Fort, in Virginia, is situated 
in the great meadow, within four miles of the w. 
bounds of Maryland, and on the n. side of the 
head water of Red Stone creek, which empties 
from the e. into the Monongahela, in lat.3943 w. 
about 26 miles from the spot where this fort was 
erected. It is 238 miles e. by . of Alexandria, 
and 258 n, w. of Fredericksburgh by road dis 
tances. This spot will be for ever famous in the 
history of America, as one of the first scenes of 
General Washington s abilities as a commander. 
In 1753, it was only a small unfinished entrench 
ment, when Mr. Washington, then a colonel, in 
the 22d year of his age^ was sent with 300 men 
towards the Ohio. An engagement with the enemy 
ensued, and the French were defeated. M. de 
Villier, the French commander, sent down 900 
men besides Indians, to attack the Virginians. 
Their brave leader, however, made such an able 
defence with his handful of men in this unfinished 
fort, as to constrain the French officer to grant him 
honourable terms of capitulation.] 

NECIIAS, SAN FRANCISCO DF, a settlement of 
the missions which are held by the religious order 
of S. Francisco, in the province and government 
of Texas in N. America ; situate on the shore of 
the river of its name. Six leagues from the garri 
son of S. Antonio de Bejar. 

NECHI, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Antioquia in the Nuevo lleyno de 



NEE 

Granada ; situate in a long strip or point of land 
formed by the rivers of its name and that of San 
Jorge, in the sierras of Guamoco. 

NECOXTLA, SAN FRANCISCO DE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement oC the district of 
Tequilan, and alcaldiamai/orof Orizava, in iSneva 
Espaiia, in the middle of a sierra; of a very cold 
temperature, and containing261 families of Indians, 
whose trade consists in providing the whole juris 
diction with coals, wood, and torches made of the 
pine-tree. Three leagues s. w. of its capital. 

NECOYA, SAN BAUTOLOME DE, a settlement 
of Indians of the province and government of 
Mainas and kingdom of Quito ; a reduction made 
by the missions held there by the Jesuits, on the 
shore of the river Napo. 

NECTA, SAN PEDRO DE, a settlement of the 
head settlement of the district and alcaJdta nun/or 
of Gueguetenango in the kingdom of Guatemala. 
It is of the Indians of the division of Uzumacintla ; 
annexed to the curacy of its head settlement. 

jjVEDDICK Cape, or NEDDOCK, lies between 
York river and Well s bay, on the coast of York 
county, district of Maine.] 

[NicnmcK. RIVER, Cape, in the above county, 
is navigable about a mile from the sea, and at full 
tide only for vessels of any considerable burden, 
it having a bar of sand at its mouth, and at an hour 
before and after low water, this rivulet is generally 
so shallow as to be fordable within a few rods of 
the sea.] 

[NEEDHAM S Point, on the s. w. angle of the 
island of Barbadocs in the W. Indies, i$ to the 
s. e. from Bridgetown, having a fort upon it called 
Charles fort.] 

[NEEDHAM, a township in Norfolk county, 
Massachusetts, II miles from Boston. It is about 
nine miles in length and five in breadth, and is al 
most encompassed by Charles river. The lower 
fall of the river, at the bridge between Newton and 
Needharn, is about 20 feet in its direct descent. 
Here the river divides Middlesex from Norfolk 
county. It was incorporated in 1711, and con 
tains 1130 inhabitants. A slitting and rolling mill 
lias lately been erected here.] 

[N EEH E EH EOU, one of the Sandwich islands, 
about five leagues to the w. of Atooi, and has 
about 10,000 inhabitants. Its place of anchorage 
is in (at. 21 50 n. and long. 160 15 w. Some 
times it is called Neheeow or Oneeheow.] 

[NEEMBUCU,a town of the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay ; situate on the e. bank of 
the Paraguay, and 28 miles from its junction with 
the Parana. In lat. 2CJ 52 54" s. and long. 58 
11. 28" a?. 



N E G 



375 



[NEGADA, or A NEC A DA, one of the Caribbee 
islands in the W. Indies. It is low and desert, en 
compassed with shoals and sand banks. It is 
called Negada, from its being mostly overflown by 
high tides. It is 69 miles n. w. of Anguilla, and 
abounds with crabs. Lat. 1846 / . Long. 64 
22 w.l 

NEGELOL, a river of the district of Maque- 
gua in the kingdom of Chile. It runs w. and 
unites itself with the Pivinco to enter tlie.Uapami- 
lahue, changing its name tor the Renaico. 

NEGRA, a point of the coast of the province 
and captainship of the Rio Janeiro- in Brazil, be 
tween the capital and cape Frio. 

NEOIIA MCERTA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Tucurmin, in the jurisdiction 
of Xuxuy; situate en the shore of the river La- 
quiaca. 

NEGRETE, a town of the island of Laxa in 
the kingdom of Chile; situate between the livers 
Culavi and Duqueco. On the s. it has a fort on 
the shore of the river Biobio to restrain the Arau- 
canos Indians. 

NEGRILLO^ PUNTAS DEL. The w. head of 
the island Jamaica ; consisting of two remarkable 
points, with the names of North and South, three 
leagues apart, and forming in the intermediate 
space a semicircular bay, called Long bay, in tlu? 
which is a small island close upon the shore. Ves 
sels dt) not enter this bay but under absolute ne 
cessity, as it is much exposed to thew&amp;gt;., w., and s. 
winds. In lat. 18 27 n. Long. 78 17 w. 

NEGRILLO, another point, on the coast of the 
province and corregiitiienlo of Paita in Peru. 

NEGRILLO, a shoal of rock near the coast of 
the province and government of Cartagena and 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; between this city arul 
the point of Canoa. 

NEGRILLO, another shoal of rock ia the souud 
of Campeche. 

NEGRILLOS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Carangas in Peru, of the arch 
bishopric of Charcas, annexed to the curacy of 
Iluachacallu ; situate neat the source of the river 
Camorones. 

N CGI; u, LOS, some isles or shoals of rocks of the 
gulf or bay. of Mexico, to the vs.. of the Alacranes 
isles. 

NEGRO^ a large and navigablie river to the n. 
of the Maranon or Amazon. It runs from w. to e. 
laves many and extensive countries inhabited by 
barbarian Indiana* and communicates with the Ori 
noco by a channel discovered by the Father Ma 
nuel Roman, of the Jesuits, native of Olmedo in 
Castilla la V r ieja, missionary ot the province o 



376 



N E G 



Santa Fc in the Orinoco, where lie was for more 
than SO years. Once, navigating the aforesaid 
channel, lie found himself in the river Negro, 
where he met with some Portuguese who had pene 
trated as far as this spot from Para on discoveries. 
This river, Negro, collects in its course the waters 
of the I jic, Iquiari, Yurnbesch, Nuissi, Casiari, 
Oatabuli i, Aravidd, Blanco, and Vaguapiri ; and, 
being much enlarged by these, it becomes at its 
mouth a league and an half wide. Although geo 
graphers vary in describing the course of this 
river, we have followed Don Carlos de la Conda- 
raine, of the royal academy of the sciences at 
Paris, who reconnoitred it on his return to Europe 
from Peru by the river Amazonas. Jt is at its 
greatest width 1203 toises, as measured by this 
geometrician ; this being the place where the Por 
tuguese have built a fort, in lat. 3 9 , maintain 
ing in it a detachment of the garrison of Para for 
the purpose of catching Indians for the working of 
the mines. On the shores of this river are dif 
ferent settlements of the missions established by the 
religious Carmelites of Portugal. 

According to the investigations of the Father 
jpr. Antonio Caulin, in his Modern History of 
Nueva Andalucia, this river rises in the serranias 
of Yaquesa near Popayan, and in which he agrees 
with the aforesaid academician Don Carlos de la 
Condamine. It receives on the n. shore the Pati- 
vita, which runs in the same direction as the Ini- 
richa, so close to it as to be separated only by a 
very narrow isthmus, and having on its shores the 
nations of the Civitenes,Guarinimanascs, and Mai- 
pures. It is then entered by the Aqui and the 
Itivini, bringing along with it those of the Jchani, 
Kquegani, and Mee, on the borders of which dwell 
the Borepaquinavis Indians. Before the Mee falls 
into the Itivini, it throws out by its w. shore a river 
of its name into the Casiquiare, and in the island 
thus formed, a stream called the Itiriquiri falls 
into the Negro, on the shores of which dwell the 
nation of the Avinavis Indians : also, at a short 
distance, is the union of the Casiquiare and the 
JSegro, beyond which lies the mouth of the Cava- 
pono, and then the mouth of the Guivaro, inha 
bited by Cogenas Indians. Three days journey 
down the river is found a torrent, caused by a reef 
of rocks, which is a continuation from the skirts of 
the mountain Nuca, and lower still are the mouths 
of the river Blanco or of Agnas Blancas, called by 
the natives Aguapiri, which enters the river Negro 
55 leagues before this enters the Maraiion. By the 
s. it receives the Mapicoro, then the Matrichi and 
the Danigua, amongst the which dwell the Maiii- 
sipitana nation. 



N E G 

The Portuguese, as we before observed, cornc 
hither to catch Indians to make them slaves in the 
mines. They enter by the mouth of the Casir 
quiare, pass the channel of Alee, arid, leaving their 
vessels, pass by land to the port Manuteso of the 
river Ciniite, an arm of the Atabapo : also qihei&amp;gt; 
going by the rivicr Negro, enter the month of the 
liivirii, and pass from thence to the rivejr Xcnii. 
The Negro enters the Mara/ion or Anm?onas by 
the n. part, in about lat. 3 16 s. 

[For a table of longitudes and latitudes o.f t he 
most important places in these parts, sec the end of 
the general preface.] 

NEG RO, another, a large and abundant river of 
the province and government of Buenos Ay res, in 
the mountains of Brazil. It runs w. and then 
turning s. w. and after collecting the waters of 
various others, so as greatly to increase its stream, 
unites itself with the Uruguay to enter in a very- 
much increased body (he. river La Plata. 

NEGRO, another, of the province and corregi- 
micnto of Tnnja in the Nuevo Heyno de Granada. 
It rises close to the settlement of Las Guadas, runs 
n. and enters the Grande of the Magdalena, to the 
w. of the city of Velez. 

NEGRO, another, in the province of Ubaque, in 
the same kingdom as the former, which rises near 
Santa Fe, in the mountains to the c. and enters the 
Meta about 75 miles from its source. This river 
is called also Caquesa, as it passes near the settle 
ment of this name, and again, because it soon after 
that, receives a stream of black waters; and the small 
difference between the words Caquesa and. Caqueta 
having caused foreigners to confound this river 
Negro (or Black) with the former of which we have 
treated, so that a great confusion has arisen 
amongst geographers, as also a doubt whether 
there was any communication by that river with 
the Orinoco and the Maranon. 

NEGRO, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Veragua in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, 
which rises in the interior of the mountains and 
runs into the sea, between the Cocle and the Es- 
cudo de Veragua. 

NEGRO, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Texas in N. America, which rises in the 
mountains of Caligoa, runs s. for many leagues, 
and bending its course with many windings to 
n. n.w. enters the Colorado very near its mouth. 

NEGRO, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Tucuman in Peru, of the district of the 
city of Xuxuy, which runs e. and enters the Ver- 
mejo. 

NEGRO, another, a small river of the province 
and government of Neiva in the Nuevo Reyno de 



N E G 



Granada. It rises near the settlement of Qtaz, and 
enters the Grande tie la Magdalena a little from its 
source. 

NEGRO, another, also a small river of the pro 
vince and government of Mamcaibo in the same 
kingdom as the former, which rises in the valley 
of Perija, runs e. and enters the great lake of Ma- 
racaibo by the s. part. 

NEGRO, a small river, of the province and cap 
tainship of San Pablo in Brazil, distinct from that 
of which we have spoken, in that kingdom. It 
rises in the mountains of the coast, runs n. w. and 
unites itself with the Itapeba to enter the grand 
river Curitiva or Igiia/u. 

NEGRO, another, a small river of the province 
and corregrmiento of Chachapoyas in Peru, which 
runs n. n.e. and enters the Moyobamba. 

NEGRO, another, a small river of the province 
and goverpment of Paraguay, which runs e. and 
enters the Grande dc Parana. 

NEGRO, another, a small river, called Arroyo 
Negro, of the province and government of Buenos 
Ay res in Peru. It runs w. and enters the Uru 
guay, between those of S. Francisco and Bellaco. 

NI-GRO, another, of the Nuevo Key no de Gra 
nada, distinct from the above, in the district and 
jurisdiction of the city of San Juan Jiron. It is 
small, and enters the Lebrija a little above this 

city. 

NEGRO, another, of the kingdom of Brazil, 
which rises in the country of the Barbados In 
dians, runs n.n. w. and enters the Topayos a little 
before it does the Yagnaricara. 

NEGRO, a settlement, called also Rio Negro, of 
the district and government of San Juan Jiron, in 
the Nuevo Reyno de Granada; of an hot tempe 
rature, abounding in vegetable productions, par 
ticularly cacao, the best crops being here of any 
in the province. l(s population is reduced ; it is 
situate near the river Negro, of which we have be 
fore treated, and which gives it its name. Six 
leagues from its capital. 

NEGRO, a fort of the province and government 
of Tucumanin Peru. 

NEGRO, a cape or point of land on the exterior 
coast, of the straits of Magellan, on an island formed 
by the entrance of the channel of S. Barbara. 

NEGRO, another cape, of the s. coast of Nova 
Scotia or Acadia, opposite Brown bank. 

NEGRO, another cape, of the coast of Brazil, in 
the province and captainship of Rio Grande, be 
tween this and the settlement of Natal, where the 
Portuguese have a fort, called De Los Reyes. 

NEGRO, a very lofty mountain, called Cerro 
Negro, in the province and corregimiento of Itata, 

VOL. III. 



N E G 



377 



and kingdom of Chile, between the rivers Itata 
and Claro. 

NEGROES, different nations of various king 
doms and provinces of Africa, who, although not 
aborigines of America, have a place in this his 
tory, as forming a principal part of the inhabitants 
of these regions, and who, at the present day, if 
they do not exceed, at least equal in numbers the 
natives. For these are the people who labour in 
the mines, who cultivate the land, who are em 
ployed in all the servile offices in America, in the 
dominions of Spain, Portugal, France, England, 
Holland, &amp;c. They are bought by these nations 
on the coasts of Africa, and arc carried to Ame 
rica, where they are trtated and considered as 
slaves with the "greatest rigour and inhumanity, 
and as though they were not rational creatures. 
The celebrated Fr. Bartolome de las Casas, bishop 
of Chiapa, was the person who, with a discreet 
zeal, proposed to free the Indians from servitude, 
and to procure Negroes for the laborious employ 
ments ; as though, forsooth, this part of the hu 
man species should, on account of their difference 
of colour, want the privileges of humanity. The 
shades of complexion amongst themselves vary 
much, according to their different provinces ; and 
they are distinguished by casts, called the Congos, 
Mandingas, Chalacs, Ararares, a;d many others. 

They are, in general, well made, muscular, 
strong, arid capable of bearing much labour. They 
have a flat nose, pouting lips, black and woolly 
hair, and white teeth. These casts have features 
peculiar to themselves ; thus, for instance, the 
Chalaes have certain marks or scarifications on 
their cheeks, made whilst they were yet children ; 
the Ararares file the points of their teeth, &amp;c. 

The English, Dutch, and Portuguese, carry on 
this infamous commerce on the coasts of Guinea, 
and sell the Negroes in America and in the islands, 
where, after certain years of slavery and servitude, 
they may ransom themselves of their master, pay 
ing for their freedom the same sum at which they 
were bought ; but, notwithstanding this alleviation, 
and which was propagated by the Spanish govern 
ment, little redress is procured to their sufferings, 
through the interestedness and cruelty of the mas 
ters. 

It is certain that the propensities of the Negro 
are most vicious, that they are fraudulent, super 
stitious, vindictive, cruel, and thievish, and that 
without the rigour manifested towards them, it 
would be impossible to manage them ; but the love 
of liberty and the injuries of servitude plead loudly 
in their exculpation ; nor, indeed, have there been 
wanting examples of some who for their moral 
3 c 



378 



N E O 



virtues might vie even -with the beings of civilized 
nations. 

The Spaniards, who, amongst all the rest, are 
those who treat them the least cruelly, have a short 
time since the conquest of their provinces supplied 
themselves with Negroes under different contracts, 
entered info first with the Genoese, afterwards with 
Don Domingo del Grillo, the council of Sevilla, 
Don Nicolas Porcio, Don Bernardo Marin y Guz 
man, the company of Portugal, the French Guinea 
company, as far down as the year 1713; when by 
the peace of Utrecht the trade was granted to the 
English company for 30 years, namely to 1743 : 
after this the person employed in this business was 
Don Joseph Ruiz de Noriega, and after him the 
company of merchants of Cadiz. The first Ne 
groes brought to America by the Spaniards, was 
through the grant of Charles V. made in 1525 to 
Lorenzo Garrebood his mayor domo ; by which 
he was empowered to introduce 4000, and al 
though, owing to the inconvenience found to arise 
from the practice, it was ordered to be discon 
tinued for eight years, a certain recompence being 
paid to the aforesaid person as an indemnification, 
yet necessity obliged its reacloption, as the Indians 
were not equal to the fatigues required of them, 
and as, now, their numbers were sensibly dimi 
nishing. 

In nearly all the settlements, the Negroes are di 
vided into two classes, which are slaves and free 
men, and both of these into Criollos and Bozales: 
a part of the former (the slaves) are employed in 
tilling the ground, and all the rest in different hard 
labours, by which to procure their livelihood, giv 
ing to their masters so much daily, and keeping 
the remainder for their own sustenance. The vio 
lence of the heat and their own natural warmth of 
temperature will not permit them to wear any 
clothing whatever ; they, consequently, go quite 
naked, with the exception of a small cloth round 
their middle. The same is also the case with the 
women slaves, some of whom married, live in the 
huts with their husbands, and others being em 
ployed in the cities, where they gain their liveli 
hood by labour, or by selling in the market-places 
and through the streets all kinds of eatables, sweet 
meats, fruit, and different kinds of broths and 
drinks, maize-broth, and ornate, which serves as 
bread. Those women who have infant chil 
dren (and there arc hardly any without them) 
sling them behind their backs, so that they may 
not interfere in their daily labours or use of their 
arms ; they also give the child the breast by of 
fering the dug under the arm or throwing it over 
the shoulder. Thus they, without trouble, rear 



N E I 

their offspring, nor is this practice to be wondered 
at, inasmuch as some of their breasts arc pendulcnt 
below their waist, arising, no doubt, from their 
never using any stay whatever. 

In order to avoid a contraband trade of Negroes, 
or that they might be imported without paying the 
regular duties, it was established that a mark 
should be put upon them, namely the letter R, 
with a crown above, branded on the left breast; 
but this practice, so detestable in a civilized 
and Catholic nation, was abolished by order of 
Charles III. that generous hearted protector of 
humanity. Animated by this example, the Eng 
lish endeavoured to abolish this infamous com 
merce, but the whole of that nation not agreeing 
on the subject, it was at last recommended that 
provisions should be made by government for their 
better treatment and condition, a reward being 
stated for sucli persons as should bring the most 
Negroes alive from the coast of Guinea out of a 
certain number. On this occasion a porcelain 
medal was made in England, representing one of 
these unfortunate creatures, with the motto of, 
" Am I not man as thou art ; am 1 not thy bro 
ther ?" Many English, French, and Spaniards, 
enlightened by the reason of the present age, have 
given liberty to their slaves ; arid we may hope 
for the day when this miserable race shall no 
longer be shut from the privileges to which they 
are by nature entitled. 

[That the English traders are at last checked in 
this inhuman commerce, we believe cannot be 
doubted. They will not risk a conviction of fe 
lony, and sentence of transportation to Botany bay. 
The American government too, having abolished 
the traffic, and the decision in the noted case of 
the Amedie, having shewn British crusiers in what 
manner they may enforce the American prohibi 
tion ; few vessels bearing that flag arc engaged in 
it, compared with the former amount. But, on 
the other hand, a prodigious slave trade is still 
carried on by the Portuguese and Spaniards, and, 
in the sixth report of the African institution, the 
directors have no hesitation in stating, from their 
own information, that between 70,000 and 80,000 
Negroes were carried over to America by the 
above nations in the year 1810.1 

NEGROS, an extremity of the n. w. coast of the 
island of Martinique, between the bay of Navires 
and fort Real. 

NE1QUITOS, a settlement of the province and 

government of Maracaibo in the Nuevo Reyno de 

Granada ; situate s. of the city of Truxillo, and 

near the settlement of Esemxaque. 

NEIVA, a province and government of the 



N E I 

Nuevo Key no de Granada, called De los Pan- 
tagoros in the time of the Indians. It is entirely 
of a level territory, extending 80 leagues from n. 
to s. on either side of the river Grande de la Mag- 
dalena ; this dividing it into High and Low. It is 
irrigated J )y many streams, which descend from 
the cordilleras, surrounding it as it were with a 
wall. One of these cordilleras is by the extensive 
llanos of San Juan, and the other by the equinoc 
tial provinces, at 20 leagues distance, though in 
some parts less, according to the uncertain manner 
in which the mountains run more or less far into 
the llanuras. Its jurisdiction is bounded by that 
of the cities of Tocaima, Mariquita, and La Plata. 
It is very abundant in gold mines, and fertile in 
vegetable productions, such as maize, yucas, pota 
toes, cacao, tobacco, and a variety of fruits and 
sugar canes, of the which are made delicious 
sweetmeats and conserves. In the woods are found 
fine timber, such as cedar, walnut, and guayacanes, 
which has a tendency to become petrified. The 
neat cattle bred in the llanos or plains, is in such 
abundance as to furnish with supplies the whole 
kingdom, and particularly the capital of Santa Fe, 
and notwithstanding the prohibition against carry 
ing any of this food to Popayan, yet is it con 
stantly done. 

The temperature of this province is very hot 
and unhealthy, and the disease of the carate is 
very common here, being a scrophula of various 
colours breaking out over the whole body, causing 
great heat and irritability, infecting the blood to 
such a degree that the malady becomes hereditary. 
It is also inflicted with the plague of mosquitos, 
spiders, gnats, centipeds, flies, hornets, ants, vari 
ous kinds of snakes, and particularly with an in 
sect similar to that known in Spain by the name 
of cochinilla de San Anton, of a red colour and 
black head, and called here coy a, which, al 
though it does not bite, yet should it burst and 
its blood touch any part of the body, save the 
soles of the feet and the palms of the hands, it 
is so active a poison as to produce instant death, 
causing the whole of the blood of the human body 
to coagulate. It is remarkable the instinct, by 
which the neat cattle, the horses and mules, shun 
this venomous insect. As its poison acts as a coa- 
gulator, a method has been discovered by some 
muleteers, of passing the body of the person who 
has been bitten gradually through the flames of 
a small fire made of straw, and this with some 
success. [According to Mr. Bouker s voyage, this 
account of the cot/a is merely fabulous.] 

NEIVA, the capital of the above province, is 
called La Concepcion del Valle de Nciva ; founded 



N E I 



379 



in 1550 by Captain Juan Alonso, in the par* 
where at present stands the settlement of Villa 
Vieja, and where it remained until 1569, when it 
was destroyed by the Pijaos Indians. In 16 12 the 
governor Don Diego de Ilospina began to resettle 
it in the place where it now is, eight leagues from 
the former, on the shore of the Rio Grande de la 
Magdalena. It is of an hot temperature, abounding 
in vegetable productions, gold and cattle, as does 
all the province. It has besides the parish church 
an hospital of the religious order of San Francisco. 
The population consists of 2000 housekeepers, the 
greater part being people of colour, although there 
are not wanting some noble families. It is 107 
miles s. w. from Santa Fe, 63 s. s. w. from To 
caima, in lat. 3 14 n. 

NEIVA, with the addition of Vieja, a settle 
ment of the same province and kingdom ; situate 
on the margin of the river Magdalena, where 
stood the city previous to its removal to its present 
spot. This settlement is much reduced and very 
poor. 

NEIVA, a river of the island S. Dorningo ; 
which rises in the mountains of the centre, and 
near to those of Ciboo, runs w. many leagues, and 
passes to the s. with an abundant stream through 
the valley of its name, and enters the sea in the 
bay which is also so called. 

NEIVA. The aforesaid valley is large and beau 
tiful, and running from n. to s. towards the coast 
of the latter rhumb, its sides being hemmed in by 
the rivers of its name, and of Las Damas, as also 
by the lake Enriquillo or Henriquille. [This val 
ley contains about SO square leagues, abounds 
with game, and is a chosen spot for flamingoes, 
pheasants, and royal or crowned peacocks. These 
last have a more delicate flavour and more bril 
liant plumage than the peacocks of Europe. Nine 
leagues from the w. bank of the Neiva is the town, 
containing about 200 houses, and can turn out 300 
men fit to bear arms. This town is 15 leagues w. 
by w. of Azu, and 16 from the point where the 
line of demarcation cuts Brackish pond. This 
territory produces a sort of plaster, talc, and fos 
sil salt. The natural re-production of the salt is 
so rapid that a pretty large hollow is absolutely 
filled up again in the course of a year. The river 
might be rendered navigable for small craft, and 
the plain is able to nfford eligible situations for 150 
sugar plantations.] 

NEIVA, a bay on the s. coast of the same island 
of S. Domingo, between that of Ocoa and that of 
Petit Trou. fit is also situated at n. n. e. from 
cape Beata. Lat. 18 16 n. Long. 70 56 a).] 
NEIYA, a river of the province and govern- 
3 c 2 



380 



N E O 



ment of iis name in the NucvoReyno de Granada, 
\vliicli rises s. of the capital, passes opposite to it, 
and shortly after enters the Magdalena. 

[NELSON, a county of Kentucky. Chief 
town, Bairdstown.] 

[NELSON S Fort, a settlement on the w. shore of 
Hudson s bay ; situate at the rnouth of a river of 
the same name, 250 miles .?. e. of Churchill fort, 
and 600 n. w. of Rupert s fort, in the possession 
of the Hudson s hay company, it is iu Int. 57 I2 w. 
and long. 92 42 w. The shoals so called are said 
to be in hit. 57 35 n. and long. J)^ 12 w. and to 
have high water at full and change days at 20 
minutes past eight o clock. ] 

[,\i:i, SON S River is (lie w. to. branch of Hayes 
river, on the w. shore of Hudson s bay, which is 
separated into two channels by Hayes island, at 
the mouth of which Nelson s fort is situated.] 

NEMBUCIIU, a settlement of the province and 
government of Paraguay ; situate on the shore of 
this river before it reaches the city of Corrientes. 
" N EM E() UG A M 1 OlJ , asmall lake of the country 
of Hudson s bay, between the great lake Mista- 
sins and that of Nemiscau, and formed by the 
river Rupert. 

JNEM1SCAU, a small lake of the same county 
as the former; also formed by the river Rupert at 
its mid course, to enter the Mistasiu. 

NLMOCON, a settlement of the corregimicnto 
of Zipaquira in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. 
It is of a cold and moist temperature, celebrated 
for the capital merchandise which it had, as well 
as for its very white salt found in some large saline 
earths, and which are formed by certain fountains 
abounding in its territory. From hence all the 
other provinces are supplied with this article, it 
being esteemed superior to any other ; so that it 
produces upwards of 20,000 dollars annually. 
This settlement was conquered by Gonzalo Xime- 
nez de Quesada in 1537. its population is small, 
since, amongst the rest, we find only SO Indians. 
It has, besides the parish church, a chapel, with 
the dedicatory title of Nuestra Senora de Checua, 
which is a vice-parish. Two leagues s. of Gua- 
tavita, and nine n. of Santa Fe, in the road which 
leads to Tunja. 

[NENANV E\V TICK Indians inhabit near Se 
vern river, s. of Severn lake.] 

NENINCO,asettIemeut of Indians of the island 
of Lax a in the kingdom of Chile ; situate on the 
shore of the river Pecoiquen. 

NEOCOYAES, a barbarous nation of Indians 
of the province and country of Las Amazonas, 
who dwell amidst the woods to the n. of the river 
Napo. Of some of these has been formed the set- 



N E P 

tlement of San Miguel de los Neocoyaes, by the 
missionaries of the Jesuits, dependent or annexed 
to the settlement of El Nombre de Jesus, in lat. 
1 33 s. 

[NEOMINAS River, on the coast of Peru, is 
12 or 14 leagues to the n. zv. of Bona vent ura river. 
It is a large river, and empties into the ocean by 
two mouths. The shore is low, but there is no 
landing upon it, as it is inhabited only by savages 
whom it would not be very safe to trust, as their 
peaceable or hostile disposition towards Europeans 
cannot be easily known. The coast, though in the 
vicinity of the most flourishing Spanish colonies, 
remains unfrequented and wild. Palmas island is 
opposite to this river, being low land, and having 
several shoals about it ; and from hence to cape 
Corrientes is 20 leagues to the?/, w. The river and 
island are in iat. about 4 30 n. J . 

NEOU1SACOAUT, a river of Canada in N. 
America. It runs n. e. and enters lake Superior. 

TNEPEAN Island, a small island of the S. Pa 
cific ocean, opposite to port Hunter, on the A , coast 
of Norfolk island.] 

[NEPEAN Sound, an extensive water on the 
n. n\ coast of N. America, having a number of 
islands iu it, in some charts called Princess Royal 
islands. It opens e. from cape St. James, the 
southernmost point of Washington s or Queen 
Charlotte s islands. Fitzhugh s sound lies between 
it and Queen Charlotte s sound to the s.~] 

PsEPENA, a settlement of the province and 
corrcs;imiento of Santa in Peru. 

NEPIGON, a lake of Canada, to the n. of 
lake Superior, with which it communicates by a 
large arm. 

NEPOIIUALCO, a settlement of the province 
of Cernpoala in the time of the geutilism of the 
Indians, and where the Chichirnecos established 
themselves when they left Chicomoztoc or Siete 
Cuevas. They gave a name in their language 
signifying Counter, since there they counted the 
numbers of those who had arrived. They lived 
on friendly terms with the Totonaques, a noble of 
whom, named Xatontan, gave them clothes to 
cover themselves with, also flesh of different ani 
mals, which they used to eat raw. 

[NEPONSET, a river of Massachusetts, ori 
ginates chiefly from Muddy and Punkapog ponds 
in Stoughtou, and Mashapog pond in Sharon, 
and after passing over falls sufficient to carry mills, 
unites with other small streams, and forms a very 
constant supply of water for the many mills situated 
on the river below, until it meets the tide in Mil 
ton, from whence it is navigable for vessels of 150 
tons burden to Boston bay, distant about four miles. 



N E U 

There are six paper mills, besides many others of 
different kinds, on this small river.] 

NEPOS, a settlement of the province and corre- 
gimienlo oi Caxamarca in Peru. 

NEQUE, an island of the N. sea ; one of (he 
Lncavas ; to the e. of Bahama. 

NEQUEHUAYOOONDORj a settlement of 
the province and corregimfcrifoofGv&amp;LDfaL in Peru ; 
annexed to the curacy of Tambillo. 

NERAGANSAT, a river of the province and 
colony of New England in N. America. 

[NEKUKA, a port in the island of Cape Bre 
ton, where the French had a settlement.] 

[NESBIT S Harbour, on the coast of New Bri 
tain, in N. America, where the Moravians formed 
a settlement in 1752; of the first party, some 
were killed and others were driven away. In 1764, 
they made another attempt under the protection of 
the British government, and were well received 
by the Esquimaux, and by the last account the 
mission succeeded/] 

[NESCOPEC River falls into thew. e. branch of 
Susquehannah river, near the mouth of the creek 
of that name, in Northumberland county, Penn 
sylvania, and opposite to the town of Berwick, S3 
miles n. w. of Philadelphia, and in lat. 41 3 . An 
Indian town, called Nescopec, formerly stood near 
the site of Berwick.] 

NESH1MENECK, a river of the colony and 
province of Pennsylvania in N. America. 

NESKY, a point on the coast of the province 
of Sagadahook, one of those which form the great 
bay of Penobscot. 

[NETHERLANDS, NEW, is the tract now in 
cluded in the states of Now York, New Jersey, 
and part of Delaware and Pennsylvania, and was 
thus named by the Dutch. It passed first by con 
quest and afterwards by treaty into the hands of the 
English.] 

NEUERI, a river oftheprovince of Barcelona, 
and government of Cumana, which rises in the 
mountains of Bergantin, runs n. collecting the 
"waters of various others, and empties, much in 
creased, into the sea, between the cities of Barce 
lona and Cumana, but nearest to the former, form 
ing a port which was discovered by Geronirno de 
Ortal. 

[The Neueri lies 16 leagues e. of the Unare. Its 
source is about 20 leagues s. of its mouth. The 
narrowness of its channel, and the waters it re 
ceives from other rivers, give it a rapidity and 
force which defies all the efforts of navigation, un 
til a little above Barcelona.] 

NEL F Port, a new settlement of New France 



E V 



381 



or Canada in N. America, on the shore of (he 
river S. Lawrence, with a good port. W . of 
Quebec. 

NEIJF, another port, of Long Island, in the 
province of New York, to the s. and in the strait 
which this island forms with the continent. 

NEUF, a cape or point of land on the const of 
Newfoundland, between Catalinc bay and cipe 
Lorian. 

NE ULTRA, or NEUTKR, a narrow strait of 
New N. Wales, in the reign of the Arctic pole, 
between lat. 62 and 63 ;/. discovered by Thomas 
Roe, an Englishman. 

[NEUS, a river of N. Carolina, which empties 
into Pamlico sound below the town of Ncwbern. 
It is navigable for sea vessels 12 miles above New- 
bern, tor scows 50 miles, and for small boats 200 
miles.] 

[NEUSTRA SENNORA, BAIA DE, or OUR 
LADY S Bay, on the coast of Chile, on the S. Pa 
cific ocean, in S. America, is 30 leagues from Co- 
piapa, and 20 s. s. w. of cape George. It is in 
different riding in this bay, as the w. w. winds blow 
right in, and the gusts from the mountains are very 
dangerous.] 

NEVADA, a very lofty and extensive sierra 
of the province and government of Santa Marta, 
in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is one of 
the three arms or branches of the cordillera, of the 
highest mountains traversing the whole of Ame 
rica for more than 2000 leagues. The third of 
these branches begins in the province of Santa 
Marta, runs through the kingdom of Tierra Firme, 
narrowing between Panama and Porto velo, and 
forming the isthmus which divides the two seas, 
the N. and S. and then extends itself along into 
N. America and through the provinces of Nucva 
Espaiia. These mountains of the sierra Nevada 
abound in mines of gold and silver, exquisite and 
bulky timber, strange birds and animals, the same 
as will be found enumerated under the article 
ANDES, the same being a part of the sierra ; but it 
must be observed, that the climate ot these moun 
tains varies considerably in the different kingdoms 
and provinces through which they run. 

NEVADA, a mountain perpetually covered with 
snow, in the province and government of Tucu- 
man in Peru, of the jurisdiction of the city of Cor 
doba, to the s. s. to. of this capital. 

NEVADAS, some islands situate near the s. 
coast of the strait of Magellan. They are various, 
and form the said coast from the mouth of the 
channel of San Juan to Monday cape. 

JNEVAS, a barbarous nation of Indians of the 



383 



N E V 



province and country of Las Amazonas ; being 
descendants of the Semigayes and inhabiting the 
woods between the rivers Tigre and Curaray. 

[NEVERSINK Creek, a stream in the Harden- 
berg patent, in Ulster county, New York. On an 
island in this creek Mr. Baker having cut down a 
hollow beech tree, in March 1790, found near two 
barrels full of chimney swallows in the cavity of 
the tree. They were in a torpid state, but some 
of them being placed near a tire, were pleasantly 
reanimated by the warmth, and took wing with 
their usual agility.] 

[NEV1L Bay, on the w. shore of Hudson s bay, 
is nearly due no. a little n. from cape Digges and 
Mansel island at the entrance into the bay.] 

NEVIS, an island of the N. sea ; one of the 
Lesser Antilles ; situate a league s. of the island S. 
Christopher or Christoval. It is two leagues long 
and one wide ; is nothing but one lofty mountain, 
the skirts of which are very fertile for the space of 
half a league and upwards, the soil losing its pro 
perty as it approaches the top. 

At its first establishment it was very flourishing, 
and contained 30,000 inhabitants, but owing to 
what it suffered by the invasion of the French in 
1706, and some epidemic distempers, as well as 
some revolutions, its population has been so much 
diminished as to consist at the present day of no 
more than 3000 whites, and 6 or 7000 Negro slaves. 
It produces much cotton, sugar, and tobacco; 
these being the only articles of its commerce. The 
natives have great credit in America, as being 
active and industrious, and they are particularly 
distinguishable for the cleanliness of their persons 
and houses. It has some very good roads, which 
lead to various small ports, at which are the towns 
of Newcastle, Littleborough or Moreton, and 
Charlestown, the capital. The island is divided 
into three parishes or districts, and employs an 
nually in its traffic 20 vessels. The money arising 
from the exports of cotton and sugar to England in 
1770 amounted to 44,000/. ; and the value of the 
rum, lemons, and molasses was 14,OOOZ. more. The 
French restored this island to its former possessors 
at the peace of Utrecht. 

[It is generally believed that Columbus be 
stowed on it the appellation of Nieves or the 
Snows, from its resemblance to a mountain of 
the same name in Spain, the top of which is 
covered with snow ; but it is not an improbable 
conjecture, that in those days a white smoke 
was seen to issue from the summit, which at a 
distance had a snow-like appearance, and that 
it rather derived its name from thence. It is ge- 



N E V 

nerally thought that the island was produced from 
some volcanic explosion, as there is a hollow or 
crater near the summit still visible, which contains 
a hot spring strongly impregnated with sulphur ; 
and sulphur is frequently found in substance in 
the neighbouring gullies and cavities of the earth. 

The country is well watered, and the land in 
general fertile, a small proportion towards the 
summit of the island exccpted, which answers 
however for the growth of ground provisions, 
such as yams and other esculent vegetables. The 
soil is stony; the best is a ktose black mould, on 
a clay. In some places, the upper stratum is a 
stiff clay, which requires labour, but properly di 
vided and pulverised, repays the labour bestowed 
upon it. The general produce of sugar (its only 
staple production) is one hogshead of sixteen 
cwt. per acre from all the canes that are annually 
cut, which being about 4000 acres, the return 
of the whole is an equal number of hogsheads, 
and this was the average fixed on by the French 
government in 1782, as a rule for regulating the 
taxes. As at St. Christopher s, the planters seldom 
cut raloon canes. 

This island, small as it is, is now divided into 
five parishes, though perhaps only three at the 
time Albedo wrote. It contains, as he observes, 
a town called Charlestown, the seat of government 
and a port of entry, and there are two other ship 
ping places, called Indian-castle, and Newcastle. 
The principal fortification is at Charlestown, and 
is called Charles fort. The commandant is ap 
pointed by the crown, but receives a salary from 
the island. 

The government, which is included in that of 
the Leeward Charaibean islands, in the absence of 
the governor-general, is administered by the presi 
dent of the council. This board is composed of 
the president, and six other members. The house 
of assembly consists of 15 representatives ; three 
for each parish. 

The administration of common law is under the 
guidance of a chief justice, and two assistant 
judges, and there is an office for the registry of 
deeds. 

The number of white inhabitants in 1798 did 
not exceed 600, while the Negroes amounted to 
about 10,000 ; a disproportion which necessarily 
converts all such white men as are not exempted 
by age or decrepitude, into a well-regulated 
militia, among which there is a troop consisting 
of 50 horse, well mounted and accoutred. Eng 
lish forces, on the British establishment, they have 
none.] 



N E V 



NEW 



383 



[The English first established themselves in this 
island in the year 1628, under the protection and 
encouragement of Sir Thomas Warner ; but it 
was under the administration of his immediate suc 
cessor, Mr. Lake, that Nevis rose to opulence and 
importance. He made this island the place of his 
residence, and it flourished beyond example. It is 
said, that about the year 1640, it possessed 4000 
whites : so powerfully are mankind invited by the 
advantages of a mild and equitable system of go 
vernment. The inhabitants of this little island, 
observes Mr. Bryan Edwards, live amidst the 
beauties of an eternal spring, beneath a sky serene 
and unclouded, and in a spot inexpressibly beauti 
ful. 



And the quantities of the principal articles imported into Great Britain were, ia 



In the report of the privy council on the slave 
trade in 1788, the British property vested in this 
island is estimated at 30,000 taxed acres of 
patented estates, and the Negroes are computed at 
8000, at 50/. each Negro. 

By return to house of commons 1806, the hogs 
heads of sugar of 13 c\vt. exported, were as follows, 
. In 1789, 4000 

1799, 3850 

1805, 2400 

The oflicial value of the imports and exports oi 
Nevis were, in 

Imports. Exports. 

1809, 89,062 rf20,500 

1810, .126,443 agl 1,764. 



Coffee. 


Sugar. 


Rum. 


Cotton Wool. 


Brit. Plant. 


For. Plant. 


Brit. Plant. 


For. Plant. 


Cwt. 

1809, 
1810, 18 


Cwt. 
31 


Cwt. 

60,872 
87,393 


Cwt. 


Galls. 
52,478 
67,010 


L!&amp;gt;s. 
17,463 
11,160 



A detailed account of the vessels, &amp;c. that have 
cleared outwards from this island between January 
1807, and January 1808, with their cargoes, is in 
cluded in the island Montserrat. 

According to what has been above stated, the 
population of this island amounted, in 1640, to 
4000 whites besides Negroes ; in 1780, to 3000 
whites and 6 or 7000 Negroes, and in 1798, to 
600 whites and 10,000 Negroes. The first and 
last of these accounts are derived from Bryan 
Edwards, the former from our author A^edo. 
The following statements are official. 

By report of the privy council in 1788, and by a 
subsequent estimate, the population of Nevis 
amounted to 



Years. 


W hites. 


People of 
Colour. 


Slaves. 


In 1787 


1514 


140 


8420 


1805 


1300 


150 


8000 



The import of slaves into Nevis by report of 
privy council 1788, at a medium of four years, 
and by a return to house of commons in 1805, at a 
medium of two years to 1803, was 



Average of 

Four years to 1787 
Two years to 1803 


Imports. 


Re-exports. 


Retained. 


544 

228 


_ 


544 

228 



The middle of this island is in lat. 17 8 n. and 
long. 6238 a&amp;gt;.] 

NEVIS, a small lake of Canada in N.America, 
between that of Natovagamiou and the river St. 
Lawrence. 

[NEW, a river of N. Carolina, which empties, 
after a short course, into the ocean, through New 
River inlet. Its mouth is wide and shoal. It 
abounds with mullet during the winter season.] 

[NEW ALBION, a name given to a country of 
indefinite limits, on the w. coast of N. America, 
lying n. of California. See ALBION.] 

[NEW ANDALUSIA, aprovince of Tierra Firme, 
S. America, lying on the coast of the N. sea, op- 
posite to the Leeward islands ; bounded by the 
river Orinoco on the a;. This country is called 
Paria by some writers. Its chief town is St. 
Thomas. Some gold mines were discovered here 
in 1785.] 

[NEW ANDOVER, a settlement in York county, 
district of Maine, which contains, including Hi 
ram and Potterfield, 214 inhabitants.] 



NEW 



[New ANTICARIA, a town of New Spain, 34 
leagues w.W Acapnlco.] 

[NEW ANTIGUERA, an episcopal city of New 
Spain, in the province of Guaxaca, erected into a 
bishopric by Paul III. 1517. It has a noble cathe 
dral, supported by marble pillars.] 

[New ATHENS, or TIOOA Point, stands on the 
post-road from Cooperstown to W-iU&amp;msbnrg, in 
Luzerne county, Pennsylvania, on the point of 
land formed by the confluence of Tioga river with 
the e. branch of Snsquehannah river, in lat. 41 
54 and long. 76 32 z&amp;. and about three miles s. 
of the New York line, 16 miles s. e. by e. of 
Newtown in New York, 14 s. K?. of Owego, and 
82s. w. of Cooperstown.] 

[NEW BARBADOE*, atownshipin Bergen coun 
ty, New Jersey.] 

[New BEDFORD, a post-town and port of entry 
in Bristol county, Massachusetts, situated on a 
small bay which sets up n. from Buzzard s bay, 45 
miles s. of Boston. The township was incorpo 
rated in 1787, and is 13 miles in length and four in 
breadth ; bounded e. by Rochester, w. by Dart 
mouth, of which it was originally a part, and s. 
by Buzzard s bay. Acchusnutt was the Indian 
name of New Bedford, and the small river of that 
name, discovered by Gosnold in 1602, runs from 
n. to s. through the township, and divides the vil 
lages of Oxford and Fairhaven from Bedford vil 
lage. A company was incorporated in 1796, for 
building a bridge across this river. From the head 
to the mouth of the river is seven or eight miles. 
Fairhaven and Bedford villages are a mile apart, 
and a ferry constantly attended is established be 
tween them. The harbour is very safe, in some 
places 17 or 18 feet of water; and vessels of or 
400 tons lie at the wharfs. Its mouth is formed 
by Clark s neck on the w. side, and Sconticutt 
point on the other. An island between these points 
renders the entrance narrow, in five fathoms water. 
High water at full and change of the moon 37 
minutes after seven o clock. Dartmouth is the 
safest place to lie at with an e. wind ; but a,t New 
Bedford you will lie safe at the wharfs. The river 
has plenty of small fish, and a short way from its 
mouth they catch cod, bass, black fish, sheep s 
head, &amp;c. The damage done by the British to 
this town in 1778 amounted to the value of 97,000/. 
It is now in a flourishing state. In the township 
are a post-ofliec, a printing-office, three meetings 
for Friends, and three for Congregationalists, and 
3313 inhabitants. The exports to the different 
States and to the W. Indies for one year, ending 
September 30, 1794, amounted to 82,085 dollars. 
It is 218 miles n. e. by e, of Philadelphia.] 



NEW 

[NEW BISCAY, a province in the audience of 
Galicia in Old Mexico or New Spain. It is said 
to be 100 leagues from e. to w. and 120 from n. to 
s. It is a well watered and fertile country. Many 
of the inhabitants are rich, not only in corn, cattle, 
&amp;c. but also in silver mines. See BISCAY.] 

[NEW BOSTON, a township in Hillsborough 
county, New Hampshire, about 70 miles TO. of 
Portsmouth. It was incorporated in 1763, and 
contains 1202 inhabitants.] 

[NEW BHAINTHEE, a township in Worcester 
county, Massachusetts, consisting of about 13,000 
acres of land, taken from Brairitree, Brookfield, and 
Hard wick, and was incorporated in 1751. It 
contains 490 inhabitants, mostly farmers, and lies 
17 miles n. w. of Worcester, and 50 n. w. of Bos 
ton.] 

[NEW BRITAIN. See AMERICA, LABRADOR, 
and BRITAIN, NEW.] 

[Nr.w BRITAIN, a township in Buck s county, 
Pennsylvania.] 

[NEW BRUNSWICK, in the state of New York, 
is situated on Paltz kill, about eight miles s. w. of 
New Paltz, and 69 n. of New York city.] 

[NEW BRUNSWICK, in Middlesex county, New 
Jersey. See BRUNSWICK.] 

[NEW BRUNSWICK, a British province in N. 
America, the n. w. part of Nova Scotia ; bounded 
w. by the district of Maine, from which it is sepa 
rated by the river St. Croix, and a line drawn due 
n. from its source to the Canada line, n. by the s. 
boundary of the province of Lower Canada, until it 
touches the sea-shore at the zo. extremity of Chaleur 
bay; then following the various windings of the 
sea-shore to the bay of Verte, in the straits of 
Northumberland : on the a. e. it is divided from 
Nova Scotia by the several windings of the Missi- 
quash river, from its confluence with Beau basin 
(at the head of Chegnecto channel) to its main 
source; and from thence by a due e. line to the 
bay of Verte. The n. shores of the bay of Fundy 
constitute the remainder of the s. boundary. All 
islands included in the above limits belong to this 
province. According to Arrowsmith s map, it is 
about 200 miles long and 170 broad. The chief 
towns are St. John s, at the mouth of the river of 
the same name ; St. Anne s, the present scat of go 
vernment, 62 miles up the river; and Fredericks- 
town, a few miles above St. Anne s. The chief 
rivers are St. John s, Merrimichi, Petitcodiac, 
Memramcook, Ristigouche, and Nipisiguit. The 
coast of this province is indented with numerous 
bays and commodious harbours, the chief are Cha 
leur, Merrimichi, Verti, which last is separated 
from the bay of Fundy by a narrow isthmus of 



NEW BRUNSWICK. 



[about IS miles wide ; bay of Fundy, which extends 
50 leagues into the country ; Chegnecto bay, at 
the head of the bay of Fundy ; Passamaquoddy 
bay, bordering upon the district of Maine. At 
the entrance of this bay is an island granted to 
several gentlemen in Liverpool, in Lancashire, 
who named it Campo Bello. At a very consider- 
ble expcnce they attempted to form a settlement 
here, but failed. On several other islands in this 
bay there are settlements made by people from 
Massachusetts. Here are numerous lakes, as yet 
without names. Grand lake, near St. John s river, 
is 30 miles long and eight or ten broad ; and in 
some places 40 fathoms deep. 

The general assembly of this province have 
granted to the crown the sum of 10,000/. in aid of 
the defence of the province, in the present hostili 
ties with the United States. The ordinary revenues 
of the colony do not exceed fiOOO/. a year. But we 
cannot give a better view of the trade and resources 
of this colony and its interests compared with, 
and opposed to, those of the United States, than 
by the publication of the following authentic docu 
ment, transmitted to this government in 1804, viz. 
The Memorial and Petition of the Merchants 
and oilier Inhabitants of New BrunsicicJ^ to 
Lord Ifobart, 
* Humbly sheweth, 

1 That after the settlement of this province by 
the American loyalists in the year 1783, its inha 
bitants eagerly engaged in endeavouring to supply 
with fish and lumber the British possessions in the 
West Indies, and by their exertions they had, 
within the first 10 years, built 93 square-rigged 
vessels, and 71 sloops and schooners, which were 
principally employed in that trade. There was 
the most flattering prospect that this trade would 
have rapidly increased, when the late war break 
ing out, the governors of the West India islands 
admitted, by proclamation, the vessels of the 
United States of America to supply them with 
every thing they wanted ; by which means the 
rising trade of this province has been materially 
injured, and the enterprising spirit of its inhabi 
tants severely checked. For the citizens of the 
United States, having none of the evils of war to 
encounter, are not subject to the high rates of in 
surance on their vessels and cargoes, nor to the 
great advance in the wages of seamen, to which, 
by the imperious circumstances of the times, Bri 
tish subjects are unavoidably liable. And being 
admitted by proclamation, they are thereby ex 
empt from a transient and parochial duty of two 
and a half to five per cent, exacted in the West 
India islands from British subjects. 

VOL. in. 



* Admission into the British ports in the West 
Indies having been once obtained by the Americans) 
their government has spared neither pains nor ex 
pence to increase their fisheries, so essential to that 
trade. By granting a bounty of nearly 20s. per 
ton on all vessels employed in the cod fishery, they 
have induced numbers to turn their attention to 
that business, and now the principal part of the 
cod fishery in the bay of Fundy is engrossed by 
them. 

* The county of Charlotte being separated from 
the United States only by a navigable river, the 
Americans have, under the foregoing advantages, 
been enabled to carry off annually (to be reshipped 
for the West India market) nearly three millions of 
feet of boards cut in that part of this province, and 
also a large proportion of the fish caught and 
cured by British subjects in the bay of Passama 
quoddy. 

* These discouraging circumstances have pre 
vented the trade in fish and lumber from this pro 
vince to the West Indies from increasing since the 
year 1793, and would have totally annihilated it, 
had not the province possessed advantages in point 
of situation so favourable for that trade, as to enable 
its inhabitants to continue the establishments al 
ready made for that purpose. What those ad 
vantages are, your memorialists now beg leave to 
state to your Lordship. 

* The sea-coast of this province abounds with 
cod and scale fish, and its rivers are annually 
visited by immense shoals of herrings, shad, and 
salmon. The numerous harbours along the coast 
are most conveniently situated for carrying on the 
cod fishery, which may be prosecuted to any ex 
tent imaginable. The herrings which frequent 
the rivers of this province are a species peculiarly 
adapted for the West India market ; being equally 
nutritious with the common herrings, and possessed 
of a greater degree of firmness, they are capable of 
being kept longer in a warm climate. Jn such 
abundance are they annually to be found, that the 
quantity cured can only be limited by the insuffi 
cient number of hands employed in the business. 

* The interior of. this province, as well as the 
parts bordering on the sea-coast, is every where 
intersected by rivers, creeks, and lakes, on the mar 
gin of which, or at no great distance from them, 
the country for the most part is covered with inex 
haustible forests of pine, spruce, birch, beech, 
maple, elm, fir, and other timber, proper for ma.sts 
of any size, lumber, and ship-building. The 
smaller rivers afford excellent situations for saw 
mills, and every stream, by the melting of the 
snow in the spring, is rendered deep enough to j 

3 D 



386 



NEW 



[float down the masts and lumber of every descrip 
tion, which the inhabitants have cut and brought 
to its banks, during the long and severe winters of 
this climate, when their agricultural pursuits are 
necessarily suspended. The lands in the interior 
ot the province are generally excellent, and where 
cleared, have proved very productive. 

* Great advances have not hitherto been made 
in agriculture for want of a sufficient number of 
inhabitants, yet within a few years there has re 
mained, beyond our domestic supply, a consider 
able surplus in horses, salted provisions, and but 
ter, for exportation. And your memorialists look 
forward with confidence to a rapid increase in the 
exports of those articles, for which the soil and 
climate of this country are well adapted. 

Possessing so many local advantages, your me 
morialists /eel themselvt s warranted in stating to 
your Lordship, that, were not the Americans ad 
mitted into the British ports in the West Indies, 
the fisheries of this and the neighbouring colonies, 
if duly encouraged, would, with the regular sup 
ply from the united kingdoms, furnish the British 
&amp;gt;Vest India islands with all the fLh they would 
require ; and that in a few years the supply of 
lumber from this province, which already exceeds 
10,000,000 of feet annually, would with the ex 
ception of staves only be equal to the demand in 
the said islands. And your memorialists far 
ther confidently state, that these provinces would 
furnish shipping sufficient to carry from the United 
States all the flour, corn, and staves, which the 
British West Indies would stand in need of be 
yond what the Canadian provinces could furnish. 

1 During the peace from 1783 to 1793, Ameri 
can vessels were not admitted into the British West 
India islands, (the whole trade of those islands 
being carried on during that period in British 
bottoms), and at no time have the supplies been 
more abundant or more reasonable. Were the 
Americans excluded from those islands, this and 
the neighbouring provinces could now furnish a 
much larger proportion than formerly of the sup 
plies required, and a rapid and progressive in 
crease might annually be expected. But should 
the Americans obtain by treaty a right to partici 
pate in that trade, not only will the farther pro 
gress of improvement in this province be inter 
rupted, but many of its most industrious inhabi 
tants, unable to procure a subsistence here, will be 
urrd to forego the blessings of the British consti 
tution, to which they are rao&amp;gt;t sincerely and zea 
lously attached, and to seek (or an establishment in 
the United States of America. That great advan 
tages would result to the British nation from pro- 



N E W 

viding n sure and permanent supply of those essen 
tial articles for its West India islands, independent 
of foreign assistance, must be obvious. The in 
habitants of those islands, forming commercial 
connections only with their fellow-subjects, would 
continue the more unalterably attached in their 
dutiful affection and loyally to the parent slate; 
and there would be the less reason to dread the 
consequences of any misunderstanding that might 
hereafter arise between Great Britain and the 
United States of America. The introduction into 
the West Indies of contraband articles, particu 
larly teas, and all kinds of East India manufac 
tures, (a traffic which the Americans now carry 
on to an enormous extent), would thereby be 
checked, and the whole benefit of the trade of those 
islands secured to British subjects. If thus aided 
ami supported against the vie\\s of the Americans, 
the trade of these n. provinces would speedily ac 
quire new and increasing vigour, and (\\hich may 
be an important consideration) soon render them 
valuable nurseries of seamen for the British navy, 
that grand security to the commerce and prosperity 
of his Majesty s kingdoms and colonies. 

Your memorialists therefore most humbly 
pray, &amp;c. 

Saint John, New Brunswick 3 \\th J\fa!/ t 

1804. 
Sec CANADA, ST. JOHN S River, &amp;c.] 

[NEW C A LI DOM A, the name given by the 
Scotch to the ill-fated settlement which that nation 
formed on the isthmus of Darien, and on the .?. w. 
side of the gulf of that name. It is situated e. of 
of the narrowest part of the isthmus which is be 
tween Panama and Porto Bello, and lies s. e. of 
the latter city. The settlement was formed in 1698. 
See DAHIE.N.] 

[New CANTON, a small town lately established 
in Buckingham county, Virginia, on the s. side of 
James s river, 41 miles above Richmond. It con 
tains a few houses, and aware-house for inspecting 
tobacco.] 

[NEW CARLISLE. See BONAVENTURE.] 

[NEW-CASTLE, the most n. county of Dela 
ware state. It is about 40 miles in length and 20 
in breadth, and contains 19,686 inhabitants, in 
cluding 256 1 2 slaves. Here are two snuff-mills, a 
slit! ing-mill, four paper-mills, 00 for grinding 
different kinds of grain, and several fulling-mills. 
The chief towns of this county are Wilmington 
and New-Castle. The land is more broken than 
any oilier part of the state. The heights of Chris 
tiana are lofty and commanding.] 

[NEW-CASTLE, a post-town and the seat of 
justice of the above county. It is situated on the 



NEW 

to. side of Delaware river, five miles s. of Wil 
mington, and 26 s. w. of Philadelphia. It con 
tains about 70 houses, a court-house, and goal ; a 
church for Episcopalians and another for Presby 
terians. This is the oldest town on Delaware river, 
having 1 been settled by the Swedes, about the year 
1627, who called it Stockholm, after the metropo 
lis of Sweden. When it fell into the hands of the 
Dutch, it received the name of New Amsterdam ; 
and the English, when they took possession of the 
coun rv, gave it the name of New-Castle. It was 
lately on the decline; but now it begins to flourish. 
Piers are to be built, which will afford a safe re 
treat to vessels during the winter season. These, 
when completed, will add considerably to its ad 
vantages, it was incorporated in 1672, by the 
governor of New York, and was for many years 
under the management of a bailiff and six assistants. 
Lat. 3940 w.] 

[New-CASTLE, a township in West Chester 
County, New York, taken from North Castle in 
1791, and incorporated. In 1796, there were 15 1 
of the inhabitants qualified electors.] 

[N KW-CASTLE, a small town in the county of 
Rockingham, New Hampshire, eight miles dis 
tant from Portsmouth, was incorporated in 1693, 
and contains 534 inhabitants.] 

[NEW-CASTLE, a small post-town in Lincoln 
county, district of Maine, situated between Da- 
mariscotta and Skungut rivers. It is 10 miles e. 
of Wiscasset, 38 ft. e. of Portland, and eight n. by 
e. of Boston. The township contains 896 inhabi 
tants.] 

[NEW-CASTLE, a post-town of Hanover county, 
Virginia ; situated at the mouth of Assequin creek, 
on the s. w. side of Pamunky river, and contains 
about 36 houses. It is 41 miles n^w. of Wiliams- 
burgh, 19 w. e. of Richmond, and 170 from Phi*, 
ladelphia.] 

[NEW CHESTER, a township in Grafton cou- ity, 
New Hampshire; situated on the w. side of Pe 
rn igewasset river. It was incorporated in 1778&amp;gt; 
and contains 312 inhabitants. It is about 11 miles 
below the town of Plymouth.] 

[New CONCORD,, formerly called Gunthwaite, 
a township in Grafton county, New Hampshire, 
on Amonoosuck river, and was incorporated in 
1768, and contains 147 inhabitants.] 

[Niiw COUBUDA, a town of the province of 
Tucarnan in S. America.] 

[Nuvv Co UN WALL, a township in Orange coun 
ty, New York ; bounded n. by Ulster county, 
and e. by Hudson s river and Haverstravv. It 
contains 4225 inhabitants, inclusive of 167 slaves.] 



N E W 



387 



[Nt:\r DUBLIN, a township in Lunenburg 
county, Nova Scotia; situated on Mahone bay ; 
first settled by Irish/ and afterwards by Ger 
mans.] 

[Nuw DURHAM, in Strafford county, New 
Hampshire, lies on the e. coast of Winnepisseoga 
lake, w. of Merry- Meeting bay, nearly 40 miles 
n. w. of Portsmouth. Incorporated in 1762, hav 
ing 554 inhabitants.] 

[NEW EDINBURGH, a new settlement in Nova 
Scotia.] 

NEW ENGLAND, a province and colony which 
belonged to the English in N. America, and. at 
present one of those composing the republic of the 
United States, being one of the most flourishing of 
all the establishments belonging to the English in 
that part of the world : bounded n. c. by Nova 
Scotia, e. and s. by the Atlantic, zo. by New 
York, and n. and n. w. by Canada or New France. 
It is 450 miles long and nearly 200 wide at its 
broadest part; but the cultivated part, and that 
which deserves most to be mentioned, is somewhat 
more than 60 miles in extent from the coast. The 
first discoverer of this country was Sebastian (ja 
bot in 1497, arid in 1587 it was taken possession 
of in the name of Queen Elizabeth, of England, by 
Philip Amadas and Arthur Barlow. In the fol 
lowing year a colony was brought hither by Rich 
ard Grenville, who gave it the name of New Ply 
mouth. 

In 1621 many Puritans flocked hither, who, 
flying from the religious persecutions in England 
under King James I. went over to Hollan 1, but 
not finding there the reception they looked for, 
fixed on this part of America, where the greater 
part of them perished the first winter through the 
rigour of the season, being without, food or cloth 
ing ; the rest, however, surmounted these difficul 
ties, and the colony began to increase and flourish 
about the year 1629. 

Next followed a ferment between the Quakers, 
Anabaptists, and the other religious sects, which 
caused a .kind of civil war. It was then that a 
disorder aro*e from a charge against certain Puri 
tans of witchcraft, when in order to take cogni 
sance of these offences, a tribunal was erected, at 
which, by the mere impeachment, an infinite num 
ber were ordered to be put to death, the governor 
being William Phipps, a man of low extraction, 
and who, in his religious zeal, spared neither age, 
sex, or condition. 

This province had the privilege of electing for 
itself a governor, magistrates, &amp;c. but having 
abused the same, it was taken from it by Charles 



388 



NEW ENGLAND. 



II. king of England, in 1684 ; but some time after 
the revolution, which had led to this precaution, 
it was again granted, though with less licence. 

The climate, compared with that of Virginia, is 
like that of the s. of England, compared with the 
c. part, and notwithstanding that it is in the torrid 
zone, it is very irregular, neither very hot nor very 
cold, and the air is healthy. When the English 
first entered it, it was an immense wood, of which 
only some small parts had been cleared by the In 
dians for sowing maize, but it did not want for 
fertile arid well irrigated valleys. The land im 
mediately on the coast is generally low, and in some 
parts swampy, but about half way it begins to rise 
into hills, and in the n. e. part it is even moun 
tainous. 

Few countries are so fertile in rivers, lakes, and 
springs as this; the former abound in excellent 
fish, and there are seven of them navigable for 
many leagues, and would be for more, were it not 
for the innumerable cascades and cataracts. The 
names of these rivers are, Connecticut, Thames, 
Patuxet, Merrimack, Piscataway, Saco, and Cask; 
and, besides these, in the e. part, Sagadohock, 
Kenebec, Penobscot, and many others, to the ad 
vantages of which may be attributed the great num 
ber of populous cities found here : besides, in the 
spaces between the above rivers the ground is so 
irrigated with streams and fountains, that it is al 
most impossible to stir 12 feet without finding good 
sweet water. 

New England produces cod-fish in great abun 
dance, fish-oil, whales, cedar-wood, tallow, salt 
meat, maize, neat cattle, and swine ; pulse and 
fruit of all kinds, masts and yard-arms for vessels, 
woods of infinite sorts, many fine skins of castors, 
hares, rabbits, and other animals, of which they 
make fine hats and various woven articles. All 
these things provided New England with a plen 
tiful means of carrying on a great trade with all 
the nations of Europe and others in America, and 
there used, previously to its independence, to enter 
every year regularly into its ports more than a 
thousand vessels. New England is divided into 
four provinces, which are, Connecticut, Massa 
chusetts, Rhode Island, and New Hampshire; 
and these contain more than 350,000 souls. 

[New England, or as it is now generally known 
under the title of Northern and Eastern States, lies 
between lat. 41 and about 48 n. and between 
long. 66 53 and 74 8 w. It lies in the form of 
a quarter of a circle. Its re. line beginning at the 
mouth of Byram river, which empties into Long 
Island sound, at the s. w. corner of Connecticut, 



lat. 41, runs a little e. of w. until it strikes the 45^ 
of latitude ; and then curves to the e. almost 
to the gulf of St. Lawrence. This grand division 
of the United States comprehends the states of 
Vermont, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, (in 
cluding the district of Maine,) lihode Island and 
Providence plantations, and Connecticut. 

The climate of New England is so healthful 
that it is estimated that about one in seven of the 
inhabitants live to the age of 70 years ; and about 
one in 15 or 14 to SO and upwards. North-west, 
w. and s. iff. winds are the most prevalent. East and 
n. e. winds, which are unelastic and disagreeable, 
are frequent at certain seasons of the year, particu 
larly in April and May, on the sea-coasts. The 
weather is less variable than in the middle, and 
especially in the s. states, and more so than in Ca 
nada. The extremes of heat and cold, according 
to Fahrenheit s thermometer, are from 20* below 
to 100 above 0. The medium is from 48 to 50". 
The diseases most prevalent in New England are 
alvine fluxes, St. Antony s fire, asthma, atrophy, 
catarrh, cholic, inflammatory, slow, nervous, and 
mixed fevers, pulmonary consumption, quinsy, 
and rheumatism. A late writer has observed, that 
" in other countries, men are divided according to 
their wealth or indigence, into three classes ; the 
opulent, the middling, and the poor ; the idleness, 
luxuries, and debaucheries of the first, and the 
misery and too frequent intemperance of the last, 
destroy the greater proportion of these two. The 
intermediate class is below those indulgencies 
which prove fatal to the rich, and above those 
sufferings to which the unfortunate poor fall vic 
tims : this is therefore the happiest division of the 
three. Of the rich and poor, the American re 
public furnishes a much smaller proportion than 
any other district of the known world. In Con 
necticut, particularly, the distribution of wealth 
and its concomitants, is more equal than elsewhere, 
and therefore, as far as excess, or want of wealth, 
may prove destructive or salutary to life, the in 
habitants of this state may plead exemption from, 
diseases." What this writer, Dr. Foulke, says of 
Connecticut in particular, will, with very few ex 
ceptions, apply to New England at large. 

New England is a high, hilly, and in some 
parts a mountainous country, formed by nature to 
be inhabited by a hardy race of free, independent 
republicans. The mountains are comparatively 
small, running nearly n. and s. in ridges parallel 
to each other. Between these ridges, flow the 
great rivers in majestic meanders, receiving the in 
numerable rivulets and larger streams which pro-] 

2 



ENGL 



AND. 



389 



[cccd from the mountains on each side. To a spec 
tator on the top of a neighbouring mountain, the 
vales between the ridges, while in a stale of nature, 
exhibit a romantic appearance. They seem an 
ocean of woods, swelled and depressed in its sur 
face like that of the great ocean itself. A richer, 
though less romantic, view is presented when the 
valleys have been cleared of their natural growth 
by the industrious husbandmen, and the fruit of 
their labour appears in loaded orchards, extensive 
meadows covered with large herds of sheep and 
neat cattle, and rich fields of flax, corn, and the 
various kinds of grain. These valleys are of vari 
ous breadths, from two to 20 miles ; and by 
the annual inundations of the rivers and smaller 
streams which flow through them, there is fre 
quently an accumulation of rich, fat soil left upon 
the surface when the waters retire. The principal 
rivers have been already mentioned. New Eng 
land, generally speaking, is better adapted for 
grazing than for grain, though a sufficient quantity 
of the latter is raised for home consumption, if we 
except wheat, which is imported in considerable 
quantities from the middle and s. states. Indian 
corn, rye, oats, barley, buck-wheat, flax, and 
hemp, generally succeed very well. Apples are 
common, and in general plenty in New England ; 
and cider constitutes the principal drink of the in 
habitants. Peaches do not thrive so well as for 
merly. The other common fruits are more or less 
cultivated in different parts. The high and rocky 
ground is in many parts covered with clover, and 
generaly aflbrds the best of pasture ; and here are 
raised some of the finest cattle in the world. The 
quantity of butter and cheese made for exportation 
is very great. Considerable attention has lately 
been paid to the raising of sheep. This is the 
most populous division of the United States. 
It contained, according to the census of 1790, 
1,009,522 souls; and the number, according to 
the census of 1810, was as follows, viz. 

Souls. 

In Vermont, -i - * - 217,913 

New Hampshire, : - - - 214,414 

Massachusetts, - 472,040 

Maine, - 228,705 

Rhode Island and Providence planta 
tions, -&amp;gt;- 76,931 
Connecticut, - - ; - - 261,942 

Total, 1,471,945 

The great body of these are landholders and cul 
tivators of the soil. As they possess, in fee simple, 
the farms which they cidtivate, they are naturally 
attached to their country : the cultivation of the 



soil makes them robust and healthy, and enables 
them to defend it. New England may, with pro 
priety, be called a nursery of men, whence are an 
nually transplanted, into other parts of the United 
States, thousands of its natives. Vast numbers of 
them, since the war, have emigrated into the n. 
parts of New York, into Kentucky and the W. 
Territory, and into Georgia, and some are scat 
tered into every state and every town of note in 
the union. 

The i;; habitants of New Enghuid arc, almost 
universally, of English descent ; and it is owing 
to this circumstance, and to the great and general 
attention that has been paid to education, that the 
English language has been preserved among them 
so tree from corruption. Learning is diffused 
more universally, among all ranks of people here, 
than in any other part of the globe ; arising from 
the excellent establishment of schools in almost 
every township, and the extensive circulation of 
newspapers. The first attempt to form a regular 
settlement in this country was at Sagadahock, in 
1C07, but the year after, the whole number who 
survived the winter returned to England. The 
first company that laid the foundation of the New 
England states, planted themselves at Plymouth 
November 1620. The founders of the colony con 
sisted of but 101 souls. In 1640, the importation 
of settlers ceased. The persecution of which Al- 
cedo speaks (the motive which had led to trans 
portation to America) was over, by the change of 
affairs in England. At this time the number of 
passengers who had come over, in 298 vessels 
from the beginning of the colony, amounted to 
21,200 men, women, and children ; perhaps about 
4000 families. In 1760, the number of inhabi 
tants in Massachusetts bay, New Hampshire, Con 
necticut, and Rhode Island, amounted, probably, 
to 500,000. For a copious history of the states 
included in New England, see Index to additional 
history concerning Massachusetts.] 
List of the capes, points, bays, and ports, on the 

coast of New England. 
Point of Pemaquid, Cape Cod, 

Little point, Gooseberry point, 

Cape Elizabeth, Point Watch, 

Cape Porpus, Cape Sachem, 

Cape Nidduck, Lion s Tongue, 

Cape York, Cape Anne, 

Lock s point, Cape Alderton, 

Great Boar point, Cape Monument, 

Mount Pigeon, Point Billingsgate, 

Cape Pullin, Cape Pamet, 

Cape Gurnet, Point Ninigret, 

Point Murray, Point Black, 



390 



NEW 



Harrascket, 

Little hay, 

Oyster Hirer, 

Clerks, 

Fair field, 

Calko, 

Massachusetts, 

Long island, 

Merry-meeting, 

Broad-cove, 

Sandy, 

Falmoulh, 

Nathantick, 

Tarpaulin. 

Ports. 
Winter, 
Konochaset, 
New Haven, 
Piscataqua, 
Sc it u ate, 
Ship, 

Cape Anne, 
Yarmouth, 
Old Town, 
Boston, 
Slokoin. 



South point, 

Cape Poge, 

Cape Nathan, 

Cape Marsh field, 

Sandy point, 

Race point, 

Cape Malabar, 

Point Quakhoragok, 

Pipe point, 

Point Hemunaseth, 

Long Neck point. 
Bays. 

Penobscot, 

Sawko, 

Cod and Plymouth, 

Connecticut, 

Mussequoif, 

Exeter, 

Nahunt, 

Naskintucket, 

Guilfbrd, 

Homes, 

Kennebeck, 

Wells, 

Narraganset, 

Winipisoketpond, 

[NEW FAIRFIELD, the north-westernmost town 
ship in Fairfield counly, Connecticut.] 

[Nfiw FANE, the chief town of Windham 
counly, Vermont, is situated on West river, a 
little to the n. w. of Brattleborough. It has 660 
inhabitants.] 

[New GARDEN, a township in Chester county, 
Pennsylvania.] 

[I\EW GARDEN, a settlement of the Friends in 
Guildford county, N. Carolina.] 

[NKW GENEVA, a settlement in Fay ette county, 
Pennsylvania.] 

[NEW GEHMANTOWN, a post-town of New 
Jersey; situated in Flunterdon county. It is 19 
miles n. w. of Brunswick, 30 n. of Trenton, and 
46 . f. by n. of Philadephia.] 

[i\EW GLOUCESTER, a small post-town in Cum 
berland county, district of Maine, 25 miles n. of 
Portland, and 110 n. by e. of Boston. It was in 
corporated in 1774, and contains 1355 inhabi 
tants.] 

[N EW GOTTINGEN, atown of Georgia ; situated 
in Burke county, on the w. bank of Savannah 
river, about 18 miles e. of Wayuesborough, and 
35 n. e. of Ebenezer.] 

[Ni:w GRANADA, a province in the s. division 
of Tierra Firme, S. America, whose chief town is 
Santa Fe deBagota. See CIBOI.A.] 

[NEW GRANTJIAM, a township in Cheshire 



NEW 

county, New Hampshire, was incorporated in 
1761, and contains 333 inhabitants, and is about 
15 miles s. e. of Dartmouth college.] 

[Ni.w HAMPSHIRE, one of the United States of 
America, is situated between lat. 42 38 and 45 
18 n. and between long. 70 42 and 72 32 w. 
from Greenwich ; bounded ;?. by Lower Canada, 
e. by the district of Maine, s. by Massachusetts, 
and w. by Connecticut river, which separates it 
from Vermont. Its shape is nearly that of a right 
angled triangle; the district of Maine and the 
sea its leg, the line of Massachusetts its perpendi 
cular, and Connecticut river its hypothenuse. It 
contains 9491 square miles, or 6,074,240 acres; of 
which at least 100,000 acres are water. Its length 
is 162 miles ; its greatest breadth 78, and its least 
breadth 15 miles. 

This state is divided into five counties, viz. 
Rockingharn, StrafFord, Cheshire, llillsborough, 
and Grafton. The chief towns are Portsmouth, 
Exeter, Concord, Dover, Amherst, Keen, Charles- 
town, Plymouth, and Haverhill. Most of the town 
ships are six miles square, and the whole number of 
townships and locations is 214 ; containing, in 1796, 
141,885 persons, including 158 slaves. In 1767, 
the number of inhabitants \vas estimated at 52,700, 
and by the census of 1810, the population amounted 
to 214,414 souls. This state has but about 14 
miles of sea-coast, at its s.e. corner. In this dis 
tance there are several coves for fishing vessels, 
but the only harbour for ships is the entrance of 
Piscataqua river, ihe shores of which are rocky. 
The shore is mostly a sandy beach, adjoining to 
which are salt marshes, intersected by creeks, 
which produce good pasture for cattle and sheep. 
The intervale lands on the margin of the great 
rivers are the most valuable, because they are over 
flowed and enriched by the water from the uplands, 
which brings a fat slime or sediment. On Con 
necticut river these lands are from a quarter of a 
mile to a mile and an half on each side, and pro 
duce corn, grain, and grass, especially wheat, in 
greater abundance and perfection than the same 
kind of soil does in the higher lands. The wide 
spreading hills are esteemed as warm and rich; 
rocky moist land is accounted good for pasture; 
drained swamps have a deep mellow soil ; and the 
valleys between the hills are generally very pro 
ductive. Agriculture is the chief occupation of 
the inhabitants ; beef, pork, mutton, poultry, 
wheat, rye, Indian corn, barley, pulse, butter, 
cheese, hops, esculent roots and plants, flax, hernp, 
&amp;c. are articles which will always find a market, 
and are raised in immense quantities in New 
Hampshire, both for home consumption and ex-] 



NEW H A M P S II I 11 E. 



391 



[ portation. Apples and pears are the most com 
mon fruits cultivated in (his state, and no husband 
man thinks his farm complete without an orchard. 
Tree fruit of (he first quality cannot be raised in 
such a n. climate as this, without particular atten 
tion. New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania 
have it in perfect ion. As you depart from that 
tract, either s. or n. it degenerates. The unculti 
vated lands are covered with extensive forests of 
pine, fir, cedar, oak, walnut, &amp;c. For climate, 
diseases, &amp;c. see NMV ENGLAND. 

Several kinds of earths and clays are found in 
this state, chiefly in Exeter, Newmarket, Dur 
ham, and Dover. Marl abounds in several 
places, but is little used. Red and yellow ochres 
are found in Somersworth, Chesterfield, Rindge, 
and Jaffray. Steatites or soap rock is found in 
Orfbrd. The best lapis specularis, a kind of talc, 
commonly called ising-glass, is found in Graft on 
and other parts. Crystals have been discovered 
at Northwood, Rindge, and Conway ; alum, at 
Barringtorij Orford, and .1 affray ; vitriol, at Jaf 
fray, Brentwood, and Rindge, generally found 
combined in the same stone with sulphur. Free 
stone fit for building is found in Orford ; also a 
grey stone fit for mill-stones. Iron ore is Ibund in 
many places ; black lead in Jaffray, and some 
lead and copper ore has been seen ; but iron is the 
only metal which has been wrought to any advan 
tage. 

New Hampshire is intersected by several ranges 
of mountains. The first rid^e, by the name of the 
Blue hills, passes through Rochester, Harrington, 
and Nottingham, and the several summits are dis 
tinguished by different names. Behind these are 
several higher detached mountains. Farther back 
the mountains rise still higher, and among the third 
range, Chocorua, Ossapy, and Kyarsarge, are the 
principal. Beyond these is the lofty ridge which 
divides the branches of Connecticut and Merri- 
mack rivers, denominated the u Height of Land." 
In this ridge is the celebrated Monadnock moun 
tain, 30 miles n. of which is Sunapee, and 48 miles 
further is Mooschillock, called also Mooshelock 
mountain. The ridge is then continued n. divid 
ing the waters of the river Connecticut from those 
ofSaco and Amariscoggin. Here the mountains 
rise much higher, and the most elevated summits 
in this range are the White mountains, which are 
9000 feet above the sea. The lands w. of this last 
mentioned range of mountains, bordering on Con 
necticut river, are interspersed with extensive mea 
dows, rich and well watered. Ossapy mountain lies 
adjoining the town of Moultonborough on the n. e. 
In this to\vn it is observed, that in a n. e. storm the 



wind falls over the mountain, like wafer over a 
dam ; and with such force, as frequently to unroof 
houses. People who live near these mountains, by 
noticing the various movements of attracted va 
pours, can form a pretty accurate judgment of the 
weather ; and they hence style these mountains 
their almanack. If a cloud is attracted by a moun 
tain, and hovers on its top, they predict rain ; and 
if, after rain, the mountain continues capped, they 
expect a repetition of showers. A storm is pre 
ceded for several hours by a roaring of the moun 
tain, which may be heard 10 or 12 miles. But 
the White mountains are undoubtedly the highest 
land in New England, and in clear weather, are 
discovered before any other land, by vessels com 
ing into the c. coast ; but by reason of their white 
appearance, are frequently mistaken for clouds. 
They are visible on the land at the distance of SO 
miles, on the .&amp;lt;?. and s. e. sides ; they appear higher 
when viewed from the n. e. and it is said, they are 
seen from the neighbourhood of Chamblee and 
Quebec. The Indians gave them the name of 
Agiocohpok. The number of summits in this 
cluster of mountains cannot at present be ascer 
tained, the country around them being a thick 
wilderness. The greatest number which can be 
seen at once is at Dartmouth, on the n. w. side, 
where seven summits appear at one view, of which 
four are bald. Of these the three highest are the 
most distant, being on the e. side of the cluster: 
one of these is the mountain which makes so ma 
jestic an appearance all along the shore of the e. 
counties of Massachusetts. It has lately been dis 
tinguished by the name of mount Washington. 
During the period of nine or 10 months, these 
mountains exhibit more or less of that bright ap 
pearance, from which they are denominated white. 
In the spring, when the snow is partly dissolved, 
they appear of a pale blue, streaked with white ; 
and after it is wholly gone, at the distance of 60 
miles, they are altogether of the same pale blue, 
nearly approaching a sky colour ; while at the 
same time, viewed at the distance of eight miles or 
less, they appear of the proper colour of the rock. 
These changes are observed by people who live 
within constant view of them ; and from these 
facts and observations, it may with certainty be 
concluded, that the whiteness of them is wholly 
caused by the snow, and not by any other white 
substance, for in fact there is none. 

The reader will-find an elegant description of 
these mountains in the 3d vol. of Dr. Bi-lknap s 
History of New Hampshire, from which the above 
is extracted. 

The most considerable rivers of this state arc] 



392 



NEW 



[Connecticut, Merrimack, Piscataqua, Saco, An- 
droscoggin, Upper and Lower Amonoosuck, be 
sides many other smaller streams. The chief 
lakes are Winnipiseogce, Umbagog, Sunapee, 
Squam, and Great Ossipee. Before the war, ship 
building was a source of considerable wealth to this 
state; about 200 vessels were then annually built, 
and sold in Europe and in the W. Indies, but that 
trade is much declined. Although this is not to 
be ranked among the great commercial states, yet 
its trade is considerable. Its exports consist of 
lumber, ship timber, whale oil, flax seed, live stock, 
beef, pork, Indian corn, pot and pearl ashes, &amp;c. 
&amp;c. In 1790, there belonged to Piscataqua 33 
vessels above 100 tons, and 50 under that burden. 
The tonnage of foreign and American vessels cleared 
out from the 1st of October 1789, to 1st of October 
1791, was 31,097 tons, of which 26,560 tons were 
American vessels. The fisheries at Piscataqua, in 
cluding the isle of Shoals, employ annually 27 
schooners and 20 boats. In 1791, the produce 
was 25,850 quintals of cod and scale fish. The 
exports from the port of Piscataqua in two years, 
viz. from 1st of October J789, to 1st of October 

1791, amounted to the value of 296,839 dollars, 
51 cenls; in the year ending September 30th, 

1792, 181,407 dollars; in 1793, 198,197 dollars ; 
and in the year 1794, 153,856 dollars. The bank 
of New Hampshire was established in 1792, with 
a capital of 60,000 dollars ; by an act of assembly 
the stock-holders can increase it to 200, 000 dollars 
specie, and 100,000 dollars in any other estate. 
The only college in the state is at Hanover, called 
Dartmouth college, which is amply endowed with 
lands, and is in a flourishing situation. The prin 
cipal academies are those of Exeter, New Ipswich, 
Atkinson, and Amherst. 

A brief, and we must add (as will be seen by 
comparison with this) very unsatisfactory account 
&amp;lt;&amp;gt;f New Hampshire is given by our author under 
article I IAMI SUIUE. It contains, however, a list of 
all the principal towns and settlements in the state, 
which sec. Also for many particular details rela 
tive to its history, sec Index to additional matter 
respecting Massachusetts ; likewise NEW ENG 
LAND and UNITED STATES.] 

[New HAMPSTEAD, a township in Orange 
county, New York, bounded e. by Clarkstown, 
and 5. by the state of New .Jersey. It was taken 
from Ilaverstraw, and incorporated in 1791. By 
the state census 1796, there were 245 of its inhabi 
tants qualified electors.] 

[HEW HAMPTON, a post-town of New Hamp 
shire ; situated in Straflord county, on the w. side of 
Like Winnipiseogee, nine miles s. e. of Plymouth, 



N E W 

and nine . w. of Meredith. The township was in 
corporated in 1777, and contains 652 inhabitants.] 

[NEW HANOVI R, a maritime county of Wil 
mington district, N. Carolina, extending from Cape 
Fear river n. e. along the Atlantic ocean. It con 
tains 6831 inhabitants, including 3738 slaves. 
Chief town, Wilmington.] 

[NEW HANOVEU, a township in Burlington 
county, New Jersey, containing about 20,000 
acres of improved land, and a large quantity that 
is barren and uncultivated. The compact part of 
the township is called New-mills, where are about 
50 houses, 27 miles from Philadelphia, and 13 
from Burlington.] 

[NEW HANOVEU, a township in Morgan county, 
Pennsylvania.] 

[NEW HAHTFOHD, a small post-town in Litch- 
fild county, Connecticut, 13 miles n. e. of Litch- 
field, 19 w. by n. of Hartford.] 

[NEW HAVEN County, Connecticut, extends 
along the sound between Middlesex county on 
the e. and Fairfield county on the w. ; about 30 
miles long from n. to s. and 28 from e. to w. It is 
divided into J4 townships. It contained in 1756, 
17,955 free persons, and 2x 6 slaves ; in 1774, 
25,896 free persons, and 925 slaves ; and in 1790, 
30,397 free persons, and 433 slaves.] 

[NEW HAVEN City, the seat of justice in the 
above county, and the semi-metropolis of the state. 
This city lies round the head of a bay which makes 
up about four miles n. from Long Island sound. 
It covers part of a large plain which is circum 
scribed on three sides by high hills or mountains. 
Two small rivers bound the city c. and a;. It 
was originally laid out in squares of 60 rods ; 
many of these squares have been divided by cross 
streets. Four streets run n. w. and s. e. and are 
crossed by others at right angles. Near the centre 
of the city is the public square, on and around 
which are the public buildings, which are a state- 
house, two college edifices, and a chapel, three 
churches for Congregationalists, and one for Epis 
copalians ; all which are handsome and commodi 
ous buildings. The college edifices, chapel, state- 
house, and one of the churches are of brick. The 
public square is encircled with rows of trees, which 
render it both convenient and delightful. Its 
beauty, however, is greatly diminished by the 
burial-ground, and several of the public build 
ings, which occupy a considerable part of it. 
Many of the streets are ornamented with rows of 
trees on each side, which give the city a rural 
appearance. The prospect from the steeples is 
greatly variegated and extremely beautiful. There 
are between 3 and 400 neat dwelling-houses in. 



NEW 



393 



the ciiy, principally of wood. The streets are 
sandy but clean. Within the limits of the city 
are 4000 souls. About one in 70 die annually. 
Indeed as to pleasantness of situation and salubrity 
of air, New Haven is hardly exceeded by any 
city in America. It carries on a considerable 
trade with New York and the W. India islands. 
The exports for one year, ending September SO, 
1791, amounted to the value of 171,868 dollars. 
Manufactures of card-teeth, linen, buttons, cotton, 
and paper, are carried on here. Yale college, 
which is established in this city, was founded in 
1700, and remained at Killingworth until 1707, 
then at Say brook until 1716, when it was removed 
and fixed at New Haven. It has its name from 
its principal benefactor Governor Yale. There 
are at present six college domiciles, two of which, 
each 100 feet long and 40 wide, are inhabited by 
the students, containing 52 chambers each, sufti- 
cient for lodging 120 students ; a chapel 40 by 50 
feet, with a steeple 130 feet high ; a dining-hall 
GO by 40 feet ; a house for the president, and ano 
ther for the professor of divinity. In the chapel is 
lodged the public library, consisting of about 3000 
volumes, and the philosophical apparatus, as com 
plete as most others in the United States, and con 
tains the machines necessary for exhibiting ex 
periments in the whole course of experimental 
philosophy and astronomy. The museum, to 
which additions are constantly making, contains 
many natural curiosities. From the year 1700 to 
1793, there had been educated and graduated at 
this university about 2303. The number of stu 
dents is genefally 150. The harbour, though in 
ferior to New London, has good anchorage, with 
three fathom and four feet water at common tides, 
and 2 1 fathom at low water. This place and Hart 
ford are the scats of the legislature alternately. It 
is 36 miles s. w. by s. of Hartford, 36 from New 
London, 62 from New York, 105 from Boston, 
and 131 n. e. of Philadelphia. Lat. 41 16 n. 
Long. 72 53 a?.] 

[New HAVBN, a township in Addison county, 
Vermont, on Otter creek or river, containing 723 
inhabitants.] 

[NEW HEBRIDES, a cluster of islands in the 
Pacific ocean, so called by Capt. Cook in 1794 the 
same as the archipelago of the Great Cy lades of Bou 
gainville, or the Terra Austral of Quiros, which see.] 

[Niiw HOLDERNESS, a losvuship in Grafton 
county, New Hampshire ; situated on the e. side 
of Pemigewasset river, about three miles c. by s. 
of Plymouth. It was incorporated in 1761, and 
contains 329 inhabitants.] 

[New HOLLAND, a town of Pennsylvania, 

VOL. 1TJ. 



Lancaster county, in the midst of a fertile coun 
try. It contains B, German church and about 70 
houses. It is 15 miles e. n. c. of Lancaster, and 
41 &amp;lt;o. n. w. of Philadelphia.] 

[NEW HUNTINGTON, a mountainous township 
in Chittenden county, Vermont, on the s. w. side 
of Onion river, containing 136 inhabitants.] 

[NEW INVERNESS, in Georgia, is situated near 
Darien on Alatamaha river. It was built by the 
Scotch highlanders, 160 of whom landed here in 
1735.] 

[N;;w IPSWICH, a township in Hilisborough 
county, New Hampshire, on the zc?. side of Sou- 
hegan river, near the s. line of the state. It was 
incorporated in 1762, and contains 1241 inhabi 
tants. There is an academy, founded in 1789, 
having a fund of about 1000/. and has generally 
about 40 or 50 students. It is about 24 miles s. e. 
of Keene, and 52 w. s. ID. of Portsmouth.] 

NEW JERSEV, a province of N. America, 
formerly belonging to England, and now one, of 
those composing the United States. It was founded 
in 1682, and ceded to Lord George Cateret, and 
some other English gentlemen, who gave it the 
name of New Jersey, from the estates which the 
family of this name possess in an island so called. 

The continual disputes which lasted for many 
years between the settlers and proprietors, brought 
this province to a miserable state. It was divided 
into two parts, with the titles of E. and W. Jer 
sey; and in the reign of Queen Anne they were 
united. It is bounded n. by New York, e. and 
5. e. by the Atlantic, is. and s. zo. by the river 
and bay of Delaware ; between 38 56 and 41 22 
n. lat. and between 73 44 and 75 40 long. fro:n 
the meridian of London, and is 143 miles long 
and 62 wide. 

Before the formation of the United States and 
the establishment of the independence, it was a 
royal government with a council of assembly no 
minated by the king, the province also nominat 
ing deputies to represent the people. For some 
time tlie authority of the governor of New York 
extended also over New Jersey. 

The climate is, for the most part, more temperate 
here than in the former, or even than in New 
England, from its more.?, situation. It produces 
all kinds of vegetable productions, cattle, swine, 
and skins, and exports wheat, barley, flour, oxen, 
fish, some butter, flax seed, beer, barrelled herrings, 
and harness, to the W. Indies, receiving in ex 
change sugar, rum, and other effects ; and to Eng 
land it sends skins, hides, tobacco, fish, pitch, 
oil, and whale-bone, and other productions ; tak 
ing in exchange crockery ware and clothes. As 
3 E 



39* 



NEW JERSEY. 



its towns are inland, its articles of commerce are 
also of an inland qualify. In one spot there were 
150 to 200 families, which, although for the most 
part Dutch, lived subject to the English govern 
ment in great peace and tranquillity. 

There are in this province two iron mines, one 
in the river Passaick, the other in the upper part 
of the Raritan. 

E. Jersey, which is the largest and most popu 
lous part, extends from 5. to n. nearly 100 miles, 
the length of the coast of the river Hudson, from 
the bay of Little Egg to the part of the aforesaid 
river, which is in lat. 41, and is divided into that 
of S. and that of W. Jersey by a tine of division 
which passes from Egg bay to the river Cheswick 
and e. arm of the Raritan. The width of this 
part is very irregular, it being, in some parts, more 
contracted than at others. It is, however, looked 
upon as the best part of the two Jerseys, and is 
divided into the following counties: 
- Monmouth, Essex, 

Middlesex, Bergen. 

W. Jersey is not so much cultivated or so po 
pulous as the former, but the convenience, offered 
by its large lakes for commerce, gives it rather a 
favourable distinction. In this part, six counties 
were judiciously erected by Dr. Cox ; but his suc 
cessors pulled down the system, and now there is 
only one, called Cape May, which is a piece of 
land or e. point at the entrance of the bays of Dela 
ware and of Egg, which separates the two Jer 
seys ; and here there are several scattered houses, 
the principal of them being Cox s-hall. The fall 
of the river Passaick deserves particular description. 
It is a part where the waters become confined in a 
channel of 40 yards across, and where, with an 
immense rapidity, they rush to fall down a preci 
pice of 70 perpendicular feet. The greater part 
of the inhabitants of this province are fishermen, 
employed in catching whales, which abound in the 
bay of Delaware ; and this Gay, with the river of 
the same name, have on their shores all the part of 
New Jersey running from s. to e. and to s. zo. as 
also all the plantations, which, from being united, 
are called cities. The river Mauricius, between 
that of Coanzi and Cape May, is the largest in the 
whole country ; and this last river, although small, 
is very deep and navigable for small vessels. Ten 
or 12 miles up the same is a city of its name, with 
about 80 families. In this division are the cotin- 
tiesof Burlington, Gloucester, Salem, Cumberland, 
Cape May, Ilunterdon, Morris, and Sussex. In 
this province there is no established religion, but 
it has 22 churches, 57 meeting-houses for Scotch 
and English presbyteriuns, 22 for Dutch, 39 
1 



Quakers meetings, 220 meetings of Anabaptist?, 
seven of Lutherans, one of Moravians, one of Se 
paratists ; and its population is composed of 13,000 
souls of all sexes and ages, including Negro 
slaves. 

[In giving what we conceive a fuller and cor 
rector view of this state, we shall not be afraid of 
entering into some trifling repetitions. 

New Jersey contains about 8320 square miles, 
equal to 5,324,800 acres. It is divided into 13 
counties, viz. Cape May, Cumberland, Salem, 
Gloucester, Burlington, Hunterdon, and Sussex ; 
these seven lie from s. to n. on Delaware river ; 
Cape May and Gloucester extend across to the sea ; 
Bergen, Essex, Middlesex, and Monmouth, lie 
from n. to s. on the e. side of the state ; Somer 
set and Morris are inland counties. 

The number of inhabitants in 1796 was 184,139, 
of whom 11,423 were slaves; and by the census 
of 1810, the total population amounted to 245,562 
souls. The most remarkable bay is Arthur kull 
or Newark bay, formed by the union of Passaick 
and Hackinsac rivers. The rivers in this state, 
though not large, are numerous. A traveller in 
passing the common road from New York to Phi 
ladelphia, crosses three considerable rivers, viz. 
the Hackinsac and Passaick, between Bergen and 
Newark, and the Rariton by Brunswick. Pas 
saick is a very crooked river. It is navigable 
about 10 miles, and is 230 yards wide at the terry. 
The cataract, or great falls, in this river, is one 
of the greatest natural curiosities in the state. 
The river is about 40 yards wide, and moves in a 
slow gentle current, until coming within a short 
distance of a deep cleft in a rock which crosses the 
channel, it descends and falls above 70 feet per 
pendicularly, in one entire sheet. One end of the 
cleft, which was evidently made by some violent 
convulsion in nature, is closed : at the other the 
water rushes out with incredible swiftness, form 
ing an acute angle with its former direction, and 
is received into a large bason, whence it takes a 
winding course through the rocks, and spreads 
into a broad smooth stream. The cleft is from four 
to 12 feet broad. The falling of the water occa 
sions a cloud of vapour to arise, which, by float 
ing amidst the sun-beams, presents rainbows to the 
view, which adds beauty to the tremendous scene. 
The new manufacturing town of Patterson is 
erected upon the great falls in this river. Kariton 
riveris formed by two considerable streams, called 
the n. and s. branches; one of which has its source 
in Morris, the other in Ilunterdon county. It pas 
ses by Brunswick and Amboy, and, mingling with 
the waters of the Arthur Kull sound, helps to] 



NEW J E R S EY. 



395 



jYorm the fine harbour of Amboy. Bridges have 
lately been erected over the Passaick, Hackinsac, 
and Rariton rivers, on the post-road between New 
York and Philadelphia. These bridges will 
greatly facilitate the intercourse between these two 
great cities. 

The counties of Sussex, Morris, and the n. 
part of Bergen, are mountainous. As much as 
five-eighths of most of the s. counties, or one- 
fourth of the whole state, is almost entirely a 
sandy barren, unfit in many parts for cultivation. 
All the varieties of soil, from the worst to the best 
kind, may be found here. The good land in the 
s. counties lies principally on the banks of rivers 
and creeks. The barrens produce little else but 
shrub oaks and yellow pines. These sandy lands 
yield an immense quantity of bog iron ore, which 
is worked up to great advantage in the iron works 
in these counties. In the hilly and mountainous 
parts which are not too rocky for cultivation, the 
soil is of a stronger kind, and covered in its na 
tural state with stately oaks, hickories, chesnuts, 
&amp;c. and when cultivated produces wheat, rye, In 
dian corn, buck-wheat, oats, barley, (lax, and 
fruits of all kinds common to the climate. The 
land in this hilly country is good for grazing, arid 
farmers feed great numbers of cattle for New York 
and Philadelphia markets. The orchards in many 
parts of the slate equal any in the United States, 
and their cider is said, and not without reason, 
to be the best in the world. The markets of New 
York and Philadelphia receive a very consider 
able proportion of their supplies from the conti 
guous parts of New Jersey. These supplies con 
sist of vegetables of many kinds, apples, pears, 
peaches, plums, strawberries, cherries, and other 
fruits ; cider in large quantities, butter, cheese, 
beef, pork, mutton, and the lesser meats. The 
trade i&amp;gt; carried on almost solely with and from 
those two great commercial cities, New York on 
one side and Philadelphia on the other ; though it 
wants not good pods of its own. 

Manufactures here have hitherto been inconsi 
derable, not sufficient to supply its own consump 
tion, if we except the articles of iron, nails, and 
leather. A spirit of industry and improvement, 
particularly in manufactures, has, however, of late 
greatly increased. The iron manufacture is, of 
all others, the greatest source of wealth to the 
state. Iron works are erected in Gloucester, Bur 
lington, Sussex, Morris, and other counties. The 
mountains in the county of Morris give rise to a 
number of streams, nec:essary and convenient for 
these works, and at the same time furnish a co 
pious supply of wood and ore of a superior quality. 



In this county alone are no less than seven rich 
iron mines, from which might be taken ore suffi 
cient to supply the United States ; and to work it 
into iron there are two furnaces, two rolling and 
slitting mills, and about thirty forges, containing 
from two to four fires each. These works produce 
annually about 540 tons of bar-iron, 800 tons of 
pigs, besides large quantities of hollow ware, sheet 
iron, and nail-rods. In the whole state it is sup 
posed there is yearly made about 1200 tons of bar- 
iron, 1200 ditto of pigs, SO ditto of nail-rods, ex 
clusive of hollow ware, and various other castings, 
of which vast quantities are made. 

The inhabitants are a collection of Low Dutch, 
Germans, English, Scotch, Irish, and New Eng- 
landers, and their descendants. National attach 
ment and mutual convenience have generally in 
duced these several kinds of people to settle toge 
ther in a body, and in this way their peculiar na 
tional manners, customs, and character, are still 
preserved, especially among the poorer class of 
people, who have little intercourse with any but 
those of their own nation. The people of New 
Jersey are generally industrious, frugal, and hos 
pitable. All the religious denominations live to 
gether in peace and harmony ; and are allowed by 
the constitution of the state to worship Almighty 
God agreeably to the dictates of their own con 
sciences. The college at Princetown, called Nassau 
hall, has been under the care of a succession of presi 
dents, eminent for piety and learning; and has fur 
nished a number of civilians, divines, and physi 
cians of the first rank in America. It has consi 
derable funds, is under excellent regulations, and 
has generally from 80 to 100 students, principally 
from the s. states. There are academies at Free 
hold, Trenton, Mackinsac, Orangedale, Elizabeth- 
town, Burlington, and Newark ; and grammar- 
schools at Springfield, Morristown, Bordentown, 
and Amboy. 

There are a number of towns in this state nearly 
of equal size and importance, and none that has 
more than 300 houses compactly built. Trenton 
is one of the largest, and the capital of the state. 
The other principal towns are Brunswick, Bur 
lington, Amboy, Bordentown, Princetown, Eliza- 
bethtown, Newark, and Morristown. 

This state was the seat of war for several years, 
during the bloody contest between Great Britain 
and America. Her losses both of men and pro 
perty, in proportion to the population and wealth 
of the state, was greater than of any other of the 
Thirteen States. When General Washington was 
retreating through the Jerseys, almost forsaken by 
all others, her militia were at all times obedient to] 
3E2 



396 



NEW 



[his orders ; and, fora considerable length of time, 
composed the strength of his army. There is 
hardly a town in the state that lay in the progress 
of (lie British army that was not rendered signal 
by some enterprise or exploit. 

Governors of New Jersey from the surrender of 
the Government by the Proprietors in 1702. 

* Eduard Viscount Cornbnry, 1702 to 1708, re 

moved and succeeded by 

* John Lord Lovelace, 1708 to 1709, died and 

the government devolved to 

Lieut. Gov. Richard Ingoldsby, 1709 to 1710, 
when came in 

* Brigadier Robert Hunter, 1710 to 1720, who 

resigned in favour of 

* William Bnrnet, 1720 to 1727, removed and 

succeeded by 

* John Montgomery, 1728 to 1731, died and was 

succeeded by 

* William Crosby, 1731 to 1736, died and the 

government devolved to 
John Anderson, president of the council, 1736, 

by whose death about two weeks after, the go- 

vernment devolved to 
John Hamilton, president of the council, 1736 

to 1738. 
Those marked * were governors in chief, and down 

to this time were governors of New York and 

New Jersey, but from 1738 forward, New 

Jersey has had a separate governor. 

* Lewis Morris, 1738 to 1746, died and the go 

vernment devolved to 
John Hamilton, president, 1746, by whose death 

it devolved to 
John Reading, president, 1746 to 1747. 

* Jonathan Belcher, 1747 to 1757, died and the 

government again devolved to 
John Reading, president, 1757 to 1758. 
Thomas Pownall, then governor of Massachusetts, 

being lieutenant-governor, arrived on the 

death of Governor Belcher, but continued in 

the province a few days only. 

* Francis Bernard, 1758 to 1760, removed to Bos 

ton and succeeded by 

* Thomas Boone, 1760 to 1761, removed to S. 

Carolina and succeeded by 

* Josiah Hardy, 1761 to 1763, removed and suc 

ceed ed by 

* William Franklin, 1763 to 1776, removed and 

succeeded by 

* William Livingston, 1776 to 1790, died and 

succeeded by 

* William Patterson, 1791.1 

[NEW JERSI.Y Compaoy s Grant of Lands, lies 



NEW 

on the e. side of Mississippi river, s. of the Illi 
nois, and n. a?, of the Army lands, \\hich form 
the tract shaped by the confluence of Ohio with 
Mississippi.] 

[NEW KKNT, a county of Virginia, bounded 
on the s. side by Pamouky and York rivers. It is 
about 33 miles long and 12 broad, and contains 
6239 inhabitants, including 3700 slaves. New 
Kent court-house is 28 miles from Richmond, and 
25 from Williamsburg.] 

[NEW LEBANON, a post-town in Dutchess 
county, New York, celebrated for ils medicinal 
springs. The compact part of this town is plea 
santly situated partly in an extensive valley and 
partly on the declivity of the surrounding hills. 
The spring is on the 5. side, and near the bottom 
of a gentle hill, but a few rods w. of the Massa 
chusetts w. line ; and is surrounded with several 
good houses, which afford convenient accommo 
dations for the valetudinarians who visit these wa 
ters. Concerning the medicinal virtues of this 
spring, Dr. Watcrhouse, professor of the theory 
and practice of physic at Harvard university, 
and who visited it in the summer of 1791, ob 
serves, " I confess myself to be at a loss to deter 
mine the contents of these waters by chemical 
analysis, or any of the ordinary tests. I suspect 
their impregnation is from some cause weakened. 
Excepting from their warmth, which is about that 
of new milk, 1 never should have suspected them 
to come under the head of medicinal waters. They 
are used for the various purposes of cookery, and 
for common drink by the neighbours ; and 1 never 
could discover any other effects from drinking 
them than what we might expect from rain or river 
water of that temperature. There was no visible 
change produced in this water by the addition of 
an alkali, or by a solution of alum; nor was any 
effervescence raised by the oil of vitriol ; neither 
did it change the colours of gold, silver, or cop 
per ; nor did it redden beef or mutton boiled in it; 
nor did it extract a black tincture from galls ; 
neither did it curdle milk, the whites or eggs, or 
soap. The quality of the waters of the pool at 
Lebanon is, therefore, very different from those of 
Saratoga. These are warm and warmish, those 
very cold, smart, and exhilarating. Frogs are 
found in the pool of Lebanon, and plants grow 
and flourish in and around it; but plants will not 
grow within the vapour of those of Saratoga, and 
as for small animals, they soon expire in it. Hence 
we conclude that that spirit us miner alls which 
some call aerial acid, or fixed air, abounds in the 
one but not in the other. Yet the Lebanon pool 
is famous for having wrought many cures, espe- 



NEW 

cially in rheumatisms, stiff joints, scabby erup 
tions, and even in visceral obstructions and indi 
gestions ; all of which is very probable. If a 
person who has brought on a train of chronic com 
plaints by intemperance in eating and drinking, 
should swallow four or five quarts of rain or river 
water in a day, he would not feel so keen an appe 
tite for animal food, or thirst for spirituous liquors. 
Hence such a course of water-drinking will open 
obstructions, rinse out impurities, render perspira 
tion free, and thus remove that unnatural load 
from the animal machine, which causes and keeps 
up its disorders. Possibly, however, there may 
be something so subtle in these waters as to elude 
the scrutinizing hand of the chemists, since they 
all allow that the analysis of mineral waters is one 
among the most difficult things in the chemical 
art." A society of Shakers inhabit the s. part of 
the town in view of the main stage-road which pas 
ses through this town. Their manufactures of va 
rious kinds are considerable, and very neat and 
excellent. It is about 23 miles e. by s. of Albany, 
112 n. by e. of New York, and six w. of Pitts- 
field.] 

[Ni}\v LONDON, a maritime county of Connec 
ticut, comprehending the 5. e. corner of it, border 
ing e. on Rhode Island, and s. on Long Island 
sound, about 30 miles from e. to w. and 21 from 
n. to s. It was settled soon after the first settle 
ments were formed on Connecticut river ; and is 
divided into 11 townships, of which New London 
and Norwich are the chief. It contained in 1756, 
22,844 inhabitants, of whom 829 were slaves; in 
1790, 33,200, of whom 586 were slaves.] 

[NEW LONDON, a city, port of entry, and post- 
town, in the above county, and one of the most 
considerable commercial towns in the state. It 
stands on the w. side of the river Thames, about 
three miles from its entrance into the sound, and 
is defended by fort TrumbuU and fort Griswold, 
the one on the New London, the other on the 
Gr^ton side of the Thames. A considerable part 
of the town was burnt by Benedict Arnold in 1781. 
It has since been rebuilt. Here are two places of 
public worship, one for Episcopalians, and one for 
Congregationalists, about 300 dwelling houses, and 
4600 inhabitants. The harbour is large, safe, and 
commodious, and has five fathoms water ; high 
water at full and change, 54 minutes after eight. 
On the w. side of the entrance is a light-house, on 
a point of land which projects considerably into 
the sound. The exports for a year ending Sep 
tember 30, 1794, amounted to 557,453 dollars. 
In that year 1000 mules were shipped for the W. 
Indies. It is 12 miles s. of Norwich, 38 s. e. by s. 



N E W 



397 



of Hartford, 36 c. of New Haven, and 162 n. e. 
by e. of Philadelphia. Lat. 41 19 n. Long. 
72 10 zo. The township of New London was 
laid out in lots in J648, but had a few English in 
habitants two years before, it was called by the 
Indians Nameag or Towawog, and from being the 
seat of the Pequot tribe, Avas called Pequot. It 
was the seat of Sassacus, the grand monarch of 
Long island, and part of Connecticut and Narra- 
ganset.] 

[NEW LONDON, a small township in Hills- 
borough county, New Hampshire, incorporated in 
1779, and contains 311 inhabitants. It lies at the 
head of Biackwater river, and about three miles 
from the n. e. side of Sunapee lake.] 

[Ni:w LONDON, a post-town of Virginia, and 
the chief town of Bedford county. It stands upon 
rising ground, and contains about ISO houses, a 
court-house arid gaol. There were here in the 
late war several workshops for repairing fire-arms. 
It is 87 miles ay. by s. of Richmond, and 87 zo. of 
Petersburg!!.] 

[New MADRID, in (hew. part of Louisiana, is a 
settlement on the a&amp;gt;. bank of the Mississippi, com 
menced some years ago, and conducted by Colo 
nel Morgan of New Jersey, under the patronage 
of the Spanish king. The spot on which the city 
was proposed to be built is situated in hit. 36 
30 w. and 45 miles below the mouth of Ohio river. 
The limits of the new city of Madrid were to ex 
tend four miles s. and two w. from the river ; so 
as to cross a beautiful, living, deep lake, of the 
purest spring-water, 100 yards wide, and several 
miles in length, emptying itself, by a constant and 
rapid narrow stream, through the centre of the 
city. The banks of this hike, called St. Annis, 
are high, beautiful, and pleasant ; the water deep, 
clear, and sweet, and well stored with fish ; the 
bottom a clear sand, free from woods, shrubs, or 
other vegetables. On each side of this delightful 
lake, streets were to be laid out, 100 feet wide, 
and a road to be continued round it, of the same 
breadth ; and the streets were directed to be pre 
served for ever, for the health, and pleasure of the 
citizens. A street J20 feet wide, on the bank of 
the Mississippi, was laid out ; and the trees were 
directed to be preserved for the same purpose. 
Twelve acres, in a central part of the city, were to 
be preserved in like manner, to be ornamented, re 
gulated, and improved by the magistracy of the 
city for public walks ; arid 40 half-acre lots for 
other public uses ; and one lot of 12 acres for the 
the king s use. We do not hear that this scheme 
is prosecuting, and conclude it is given up. The 
country in the vicinity of this intended city is r,c^ 



398 



N E W 



presented as excellent, and, in many parts, beyond 
description. The natural growth consists of mul 
berry, locust, sassafras, walnut, hickory, oak, ash, 
dog-wood, &amp;c. \vith one or more grape-vines run 
ning up almost every tree; and the grapes yield, 
from experiments, good red wine in plenty, arid 
with little labour. In some of the low grounds 
grow large cypress trees. The climate is said &amp;lt;o 
be favourable to health, and to the culture of fruits 
of various kinds, particularly for garden vege 
tables. The prairies or meadows are fertile in 
grass, flowering plants, strawberries, and when cul 
tivated produce good crops of wheat, barley, In 
dian corn, flax, hemp, and tobacco, and are easily 
tilled. Iron and lead mines and salt springs, it is 
asserted, are found in such plenty as to afford an 
abundant supply of these necessary articles. The 
banks of the Mississippi, for many leagues in ex 
tent, commencing about 20 miles above the mouth 
of the Ohio, are a continued chain of lime-stone. 
A fine tract of high, rich, level land, s.w., o&amp;gt;.,and 
n.w. of New Madrid, about 25 miles wide, ex 
tends quite to the river St. Francis.] 

[NEW MARLBOHOUGH, a township in Ulster 
county, New York. See MARYBOROUGH.] 

[New MARLBOROUGH, Berkshire county, Mas 
sachusetts. It is 23 miles 5. of Lenox. 1 

[Niiw MARLBOROUGH, a town in King 
George s county, Virginia, on the w. side of 
Patowmac river, 10 miles e. of Falmouth.] 

[NEW MEADOWS River, in the district of Maine, 
a water of Casco bay, navigable for vessels of a 
considerable burden a small distance. See CASCO 
Bay.] 

[NEW MEXICO. See MEXICO, NEW.] 

[NEW MILFOUD, a post-town of Connecticut, 
Litchfield county, on the e. side of Ilousatonick 
river, about 16 miles n. of Danbury, 13 s. w. of 
Litchfield, and 45 w. s, w. of Hartford.] 

[NEW NORTH WALES. See WALES, and 
NEW BRITAIN.] 

[NEW ORLEAKS, the metropolis of Louisiana, 
was regularly laid out by the French in the year 
1720, on the e. side of the river Mississippi, in 
lat. 30 . and long. 90 12 w. ; 18 miles from 
Detour des Anglois, or English Turn, and 117 
from the Bella island, and 78 from the mouths of 
the Mississippi. All the streets are perfectly 
straight, but too narrow, and cross each other at 
right angles. There wre, in 1788, 1100 houses 
in tin s town, generally built with timber frames, 
raised about eight feet from the ground, with large 
galleries round them, and the cellars under the 
floors level with the ground : any subterraneous 
buildings would be constantly full of water. Most 



NEW 

of the houses have gardens. In March 1788, this 
town, by a fire, was reduced in five hours to 200 
houses. It has since been rebuilt, and at present 
contains, according to Mr. Ashe, near 15,(JOO in 
habitants. They are a mixture from all nations, 
but chiefly France and Spain. Those from the 
other American states constitute, accord ing to Mr. 
Ashe, by far the worst part of the population. 

The side of the town next the river is open, and 
is secured from the inundations of (he river by 
a raised bank, generally called the Levee, which 
extends from the English Turn to the upper settle 
ments of the Germans, a distance of more than 50 
miles, with a good road all the way. There is 
reason to believe that in a short time New Orleans 
may become a great and opulent city, if we con 
sider the advantages of its situation, but a few 
leagues from the sea, on a noble river, in a most 
fertile country, under a most delightful arid whole 
some climate, within two weeks sail of Mexico, 
and still nearer the French, Spanish, and British 
W. India islands, with a moral certainty of its be 
coming a general receptacle for the produce ot that 
extensive and valuable country on the Mississippi, 
Ohio, and its other branches; all which are much 
more than sufficient to ensure the future wealth, 
power, and prosperity of this city. The vessels 
which sail up the Mississippi haul close alongside 
the bank next to New Orleans, to which they 
make fast, and take in or discharge their cargoes 
with the same ease as at a wharf. Its commerce, 
since its acquisition with the rest of Louisiana by 
.the United States, has very considerably increased ; 
nor, indeed, are the whole of the surrounding dis 
tricts in a less flourishing state of population than 
the capital itself, since by the census of 1810, the 
inhabitants of that portion of country, comprised 
under the tide of the Territorial Government, 
amounted to 76,556 souls. 

A letter from New Orleans, dated August 21, 
1812, gives the following account of a serious 
storm, with whicli this city has lately been visited. 

" On Wednesday night last, about 10 o clock, 
a gale commenced, occasionally accompanied with 
rain and hail, and which continued with a most 
dreadful violence for upwards of four hours. As 
we have never witnessed any thing to equal it, 
neither do we believe the imagination can picture 
to itself a scene more truly awful and distressing 
than that which its consequences present. The 
market-house, a large and solid building, entirely 
demolished ; its brick columns, of two feet dia 
meter, swept down as though their weighty con 
struction presented no obstacle whatever to the 
overwhelming element. The roof carried off from 



NEW 

the church of the convent, the fence surrounding 
which, as also the trees in the garden, many 
whereof are remarkably large, levelled to the 
ground. The tin covering of the theatres, nailed 
on in such a manner, as would certainly have re 
sisted any ordinary force, twisted and torn off as 
though it were mere paper. A great part of the 
brick wall surrounding the garrison beat down. 
It would be impossible to particularise all the da 
mage that has been done ; we believe, however, 
we may assert, that there is not a building in the 
city or fauxbourgs, but what has been more or 
less injured. 

" But the scene presented to us on visiting the 
shore, who shall attempt to describe ? The level 
almost entirely destroyed ; the beach covered w rth 
fragments of vessels, merchandise, trunks, &amp;c. and 
here and there the eye falling upon a mangled 
corpse. All the shipping below town high and 
dry in the woods. All the river craft, barges, 
market-boats, &amp;c. entirely crushed to atoms. As 
far as we have heard from the country, the ravages 
have been terrible ; the planters dwellings, sugar- 
houses, &amp;c. demolished; and we have reason to 
fear that nearly the whole crop of sugar will be 
lost."] 

[NEW PALTZ, a township in Ulster county, 
New York ; bounded e. by Hudson river, s. by 
Marlborough and Shawangunk. It contains 2309 
inhabitants, including 30^ slaves. The compact 
part of it is situated on the e. side of Wall kill, 
and contains about 250 houses and a Dutch church. 
It is 10 miles from Shawangunk, nine s. of Kings 
ton, 13 s. w. of Rhinebeck, and 67 n. of New 
York.] 

[NEW PROVIDENCE Island. See PROVIDENCE.] 

[NEW RIVER, a river of Tennessee, which rises 
on the n, side of the Alleghany mountains, and 
running a n. e. course enters Virginia, and is called 
KANHAWAY; which see.] 

[NEW ROCIIF.LLE, a township in W. Chester 
county, New York, on Long Island sound. It 
contained 692 inhabitants, of whom 89 were slaves, 
in 1790. In 1796, there were 100 of the inhabi 
tants qualified electors. It is six miles s. w. of 
Rye, and 20 n. e. of New York city.] 

[NEW SALEM, or PEQUOTTINK, a Moravian 
settlement, formed in 1786, on the e. side of Hu 
ron river, which runs n. into lake Erie.] 

[NEW SALEM, a township in Hampshire county, 
Massachusetts ; bounded e. by the w. line of Wor 
cester county. It was incorporated in 1753, and 
contains 1543 inhabitants. It is 56 miles w. by n. 
of "Boston.] 

SALEM, a township in Rockingham 



NEW 



399 



county, New Hampshire, adjoining Pelham and 
Haverhill.] 

[NEW SAVANNAH, a village in Burke county, 
Georgia, on the s. w. bank of the Savannah, 85 
miles s.s.e. of Augusta.] 

[NEW SHOREHAM. See BLOCK Island.] 

[NEW SMYRNA Entrance, or MOSKITO Inlet, 
on the coast of Florida, is about 11 leagues n. n. w, 
one quarter w. from cape Canaverel.] 

[Nt .w SOUTH WALES. See WALES, and NEW 

BlUTAlN.J 

[NEW SPAIN. See MEXICO.] 

[NEW STOCKBRIDGE. See STOCKBRIDGE. 
NEW.] 

[NEW SWEDELAND was the name of the terri 
tory between Virginia and New York, when in 
possession of the Swedes; and was afterwards pos 
sessed, or rather claimed, by the Dutch. The 
chief town was called Gottenburgh.] 

[NL.W THAMES River. See THAMES.] 

[NEW UTRECHT, a small maritime town of New 
York, situated in King s county, Long Island, op 
posite the Narrows, and seven miles 5. of New 
York city. The whole township contains 562 in 
habitants, of whom 76 are qualified electors, and 
206 slaves.] 

[Nr;w WINDSOR, a township of Ulster county, 
New York, pleasantly situated on the w. bank of 
Hudson river, just above the high lands, three 
miles s. of Newburgh, and six n. of W. point. 
It contains 1819 inhabitants, of whom 261 are 
qualified electors, and 1 17 slaves. A valuable set 
of works in this town for manufacturing scythes 
was destroyed by fire. In 1795, the legislature 
granted the unfortunate proprietor, Mr. Boyd, 
1500/. to enable him to re-establish them. The 
compact part of the town contains about 40 houses 
and a Presbyterian church : 48 miles n. of New 
York. The summer residence of Governor Clin 
ton was formerly at a rural seat, on the margin of 
the river, at this place.] 

[NEW WUENTIIAM, district of Maine, a town 
ship six miles e. of Penobscot river, adjoining Or- 
rington, and 15 miles from Buckston.] 

[NEW YEAR S Harbour, on the n. coast of Staten, 
Land island, at the s. extremity of S. America, 
affords wood and good water ; was discovered Ja 
nuary 1, 1775; hence its name. Lat. 54 49 s. 
Lonir. 64 11 a .] 

[New YEAR S Islands, near the above harbour, 
within which is anchorage at n. half w. from the 
harbour, nt the distance of two leagues from it.] 

[NEW YORK, one of the United States of Ame 
rica, is situated between lat. 40 33 and 45 n, 
and between long. 73 10 and 80 w. ; is about 



400 



NEW YORK. 



[31 1 miles in length, and 265 in breadth ; bounded 
s. e. by the Atlantic ocean, e. by Connecticut, 
Massachusetts, and Vermont, n. by Upper Cana 
da, s. w. and w. l)y Pennsylvania, New Jersey, 
and lake Erie. It is subdivided into 21 counties, 
as follows, viz. New York, Richmond, Suffolk, 
West Chester, Queen s, King s, Orange, Ulster, 
Dutchess, Columbia, Rensselaer, Washington, 
Clinton, Saratoga, Albany, Montgomery, Herhe- 
mer, Onondago, Otsesro, Ontario, and Tioga. 
In 1790, this state contained 340,120 inhabitants, 
of whom 21,324 were slaves. Since that period 
the counties of Rensselaer, Saratoga, Herkemer, 
Onondago, Otsego, and Tioga have been taken 
from the other counties. In 1796 , according to 
the state census, there were 195 townships, and 
64,017 qualified electors. Electors in this state 
are divided into the following classes : 
Freeholders to the value of 1000/. . . 36,338 
Do. to the value of 20/. and under IOC)/. 4,838 
Do. who rent tenements ol 40/. per annum 22,598 
Other freeholders * &amp;gt; 243 

64,017 

By the census of 1810, its population amounted 
to 959,220 souls. 

It is difficult to ascertain accurately the propor 
tion the number of electors bears to the whole num 
ber of inhabitants in this state. In the county of 
Ilerkemer the electors to the whole number of 
inhabitants was, in 1795, nearly as one to six, but 
this proportion will not hold through the state. 
In 17i;0, the number of inhabitants in the state was, 
as already mentioned, 340,120, of whom 41,785 
were electors. In 1795, the number of electors was 
6-4,017, which, if the proportion between the 
electors and the whole number of inhabitants be 
the same, gives, as the whole number of inhabitants 
in 1795, 530,177, an increase, in five years, of 
190,057. 

The chief rivers are Hudson, Mohawk, and 
their branches. The rivers Delaware and Susque- 
iiannah rise in this state. The principal lakes are 
Otsego, Oneida, George, Seneca, Cayuga, Salt, 
and Chautaughque. The principal bay is that 
of York, which spreads to the s. before the city 
of New York. The legislature of New York, 
stimulated by the enterprising and active Pennsyl- 
vanians, who are competitors tor the trade of the 
w. country, have lately granted very liberal sums, 
towards improving those roads that traverse the 
rnost settled parts of the country, and opening such 
as lead into the w. and n. parts of the state, unit 
ing as far as possible the establishments on Hud- 
sou s river, and the most populous parts of the 



interior country, by the nearest practicable dis 
tances. By late establishments of post-roads a 
safe and direct conveyance is opened between the 
most interior w. parts of this state, and the several 
states in the union : and when the obstructions be 
tween Hudson s river and lake Ontario are remov 
ed, there will not be a great deal to do to continue 
the water communication by the lakes and through 
Illinois river to the Mississippi. 

New York, to speak generally, is intersected by 
ridges of mountains extending in a n. e. and s. w. 
direction. Beyond the Alleghany mountains, how 
ever, the country is level, of a fine rich soil, co 
vered in its natural state with maple, beech, birch, 
cherry, black walnut, locust, hickory, and some 
mulberry trees. On the banks of lake Erie area 
few chesnut and oak ridges. Hemlock swamps 
are interspersed thinly through the country. All 
the creeks that empty into lake Erie have falls, 
which afford many excellent mill-seats. The 
lands between the Seneca and Cayuga lakes are 
represented as uncommonly excellent, being most 
agreeably diversified with gentle risings, and tim 
bered with lofty trees, with little underwood. The 
legislature have granted a million and a half acres 
of land, as a gratuity to the officers and soldiers of 
the line of this state. This Tract forms the military 
townships of the county of Onondago. See MILI 
TARY Townships, and ONONDAGO. 

East of the Alleghany mountains, which com 
mence with the Kaat s kill, on the w. side of Hud 
son s river, the country is broken into hills with 
rich intervening valleys. The hills are clothed 
thick with timber, and when cleared afford fine 
pasture ; the valleys, when cultivated, produce 
wheat, hemp, flax, pease, grass, oats, Indian corn, 
&amp;c. Of the commodities produced from culture, 
wheat is the principal. Indian corn and pease are 
likewise raised for exportation ; and rye, oats, 
barley, &amp;c. for home consumption. 

The best lands in the state, along Mohawk river 
and n. of it and w. of the Alleghany mountains, 
but a few years ago were mostly in a state of nature, 
but have been of late rapidly settling. In then. 
and unsettled parts of the state are plenty of moose, 
deer, bears, some beavers, martins, and roost other 
of the inhabitants of the forest, except wolves. 

The Ballstown, Saratoga, and New Lebanon 
medicinal springs are much celebrated ; these are 
noticed under their respective heads. The salt 
made from the Salt springs here is equal in good 
ness to that imported from Turk s island. The 
weight of a bushel of the salt is 136 !b. A spring 
is reported to have been discovered in the Susque- 
hannuh country, impregnated with nitre, from] 



NEW YORK. 



401- 



[which salt-petre is made in the same manner that 
common salt is made from the Onondago springs. 
Large quantities of iron ore are found here. A 
silver mine has been worked at Phillipsburg, which 
produced virgin silver. Lead is found in Herke- 
mer county, and sulphur in Montgomery. Spar, 
zinc or spelter, a semi-metal, raagnez, used in 
glazings, pyrities of a golden hue, various kinds 
of copper ore, and lead and coal mines, are found 
in this state; also petrified wood, plaster of Paris, 
ising-glass in sheets, talcs, and crystals of various 
kinds "and colours, flint, asbestos, and several 
other fossils. A small black stone has also been 
found, which vitrifies with a small heat, and it is 
said makes excellent glass. 

The chief manufactures are iron, glass, paper, 
pot and pearl ashes, earthen ware, maple sugar 
and molasses, and the citizens in general manufac 
ture their own clothing. This state, having a short 
and easy access to the ocean, commands the trade 
of a great proportion of the best settled and best 
cultivated parts of the United States. Their ex. 
ports to the W. Indies are, biscuit, peas, Indian 
corn, apples, onions, boards, staves, horses, sheep, 
butter, cheese, pickled oysters, beef, and pork. 
But wheat is the staple commodity of the state, of 
which no less than 677,7jOO bushels were exported 
so long ago as the year 1775, besides 2555 tons of 
bread, and 2828 tons of flour. The increase since 
lias been in proportion to the increase of the popu 
lation. In wheat and flour more than a million 
bushels are now annually exported. W. India 
goods are received in return for the above articles. 
Besides the articles alreaJy enumerated, are ex 
ported flax-seed, cotton, wool, sarsaparilla, coffee, 
indigo, rice, pig-iron, bar-iron, pot-ash, pearl-ash, 
furs, deer-skin, logwood, fustic, mahogany, bees 
wax, oil, Madeira wine, rum, tar, pitch, turpen 
tine, whale-fins, fish, sugars, molasses, salt, to 
bacco, lard, &amp;c. ; but most of these articles are 
imported for re-exportation. The exports to fo 
reign parts, for the year ending September 30, 

1791, 1792, &amp;c. consisting principally of the 
articles above enumerated, amounted as follows : 
in 1791, to 2,505,465 dollars 10 cents; 1792, 
2,535,790 dollars 25 cents ; 1793, 2,932,370 dol 
lars : 1794, 5,442,183 dollars 10 cents ; 1795, 
10,504,580 dollars 78 cents. This state owned in 

1792, 46,626 tons of shipping, besides which she 
finds employment for about 40,000 tons of foreign 
vessels. 

There are in this state two handsomely endowed 
and flourishing colleges, viz. Columbia, formerly 
King s college, in the city of New York, arid 
Union college, at Schenectady. See NEW YOJIK 

VOL. in. 



City, and SCHENECTADY. Besides these, there 
are dispersed in different parts of the state, 14 in 
corporated academies, containing in the whole as 
many as 6 or 700 students. These, with the esta 
blishment of schools, one at least in every district 
of four square miles, for the common branches of 
education, must have the most beneficial effects on 
the state of society. The sums granted by the 
legislature of this state for the encouragement of 
literature since the year 1790, have been very 
liberal, and is evincive of the wisest policy. In 
March 1790, the legislature granted to the regents 
of the university, who have by law the supcrinten- 
dance and management of the literature of the 
state, several large and valuable tracts of land, on 
the waters of lakes George and Champlain, and 
also Governor s island in the harbour of New 
York, with intent that the rents and income thereof 
should be by them applied to the advancement of 
literature. At the same time they granted them 
1000/. currency, for the same general purpose. 
In April 1792, they ordered to be paid to the re 
gents, 1500/. for enlarging the library, 200/. for a 
chemical apparatus, 1200/. for erecting a wall to 
support the college grounds, and 5000/. for erect 
ing a hall and an additional wing to the college ; 
also 1500/. annually for five years to be discretion* 
ally distributed among the academics of the state; 
also 750/. for five years, to be applied to the pay- 
ment of the salaries of additional professors. In 
their sessions since 1795, the sums they have 
granted for the support of the colleges, academies, 
and of common schools throughout the state, have 
been very liberal. 

The religious sects or denominations in the state 
arc, English Presbyterians, Dutch Reformed, Bap 
tists, Episcopalians, Friends or Quakers, German 
Lutherans, Moravians, Methodists, Roman Catho 
lics, Shakers, a few followers of Jemima Wilkin 
son at Geneva, and some Jews in the city of Nevr 
York. 

The treasury of this state is one of the richest in 
the union. The treasurer of the state reported to 
the legislature in January 1796, that the funds 
amounted to 2,119,068 dollars 33 cents, which 
yields an annuity of 234,218 dollars. Besides the 
above immense sum, there was at that period in 
the treasury 134,207/. 19s. 10|d. currency. The 
ability of the state, therefore, is abundantly com 
petent to aid public institutions of every kind, to 
make roads, erect bridges, open canals, and push 
every kind cf improvement to the most desirable 
length. The body of the Six Nations of Indians 
inhabit the w. part of this state. See Six NA 
TIONS.] 

SF 



402 



NEW YORK. 



[The English language is generally spoken 
throughout the state, but is not a little corrupted 
by the Dutch dialect, which is still spoken in 
some counties, particularly in King s, Ulster, Al 
bany, and that part of Orange which lies s. of the 
mountains. But as Dutch schools are almost, if 
not wholly discontinued, that language, in a few 
generations, will probably cease to be used at all. 
And the increase of English schools has already 
had a perceptible effect in the improvement of the 
English language. 

Besides the Dutch and English, there are in this 
state many emigrants from Scotland, Ireland, Ger 
many, and some few from France. Many Germans 
are settled on the Mohawk, and some Scots people 
on the Hudson, in the county of Washington. 
The principal part of the two former settled in the 
city of New York ; and retain the manners, the 
religion, and some of them the language of their 
respective countries. The French emigrants set 
tled principally at New Rochelle, and on Staten 
island, and their descendants, several of them, now 
fill some of the highest offices in the United States. 
The w. parts of the states are settled and settling 
principally from New England. There are three 
incorporated cities in this state, New York, Al 
bany, and Hudson.] 

[New YORK County, in the above state, com 
prehending the island of New York or Mahattan, 
on which the metropolis stands, and the following 
small islands : Great Barn, Little Barn, Man 
ning s, Nutten, Bedlow s, Bucking, and Oyster 
islands. It contained, in 1790, 33,131 inhabitants, 
including 2369 slaves. In 1796, the number of 
inhabitants amounted to about 70,000, of whom 
7272 were qualified electors.] 

[N T EW YORK City is situated on the s. w. point 
of York island, at the confluence of Hudson and 
E. rivers, and is the metropolis of the state of its 
name, and the second in rank in the union. The 
length of the city on E. river is upwards of two 
miles, and rapidly increasing, but falls short of 
that distance on the banks of the Hudson. Its 
breadth on an average is about a mile ; and its 
circumference four or five miles. The plan of the 
city is not perfectly regular, but is laid out with 
reference to the situation of the ground. The 
ground which was unoccupied before the peace of 
J788, was laid out in parallel streets of convenient 
width, which has had a good effect upon the parts 
of the city lately built. The principal streets run 
nearly parallel with the rivers. These are inter 
sected, though not at right angles, by streets run 
ning from river to river. 
The government of the city (whigh was incor 



porated in 1696) is now in the hands of a mayor, 
alderman, and common-council. The city is di 
vided into seven wards, in each of which there is 
chosen annually by the people an alderman and an 
assistant, who, together with the recorder, are ap 
pointed annually by the council of appointment. 
The mayor s court, which is held from time to 
time by adjournment, is in high reputation as a 
court of law. A court of session is likewise held 
for the trial of criminal causes. The situation of 
the city is both healthy and pleasant. Surrounded 
on all sides by water, it is refreshed with cool 
breezes in summer, and the air in winter is more 
temperate than in other places under the same pa 
rallel. 

A want of good water is a great inconvenience to 
the citizens, there being few wells in the city. 
Most of the people arc supplied every day with 
fresh water, conveyed to their doors in casks, from 
a pump near the head of Queen street, which re 
ceives it from a spring almost a mile from the cen 
tre of the city. This well is about 20 feet deep 
and four feet diameter. The average quantity 
drawn daily from this remarkable well, is 110 
hogsheads of ISO gallons each. In some hot sum 
mer days 216 hogsheads have been drawn from it ; 
and what is very singular, there is never more or 
less than about three feet water in (he well. The 
water is sold commonly at three-pence a hogshead 
at the pump. Several proposals have been made 
by individuals to supply the citizens by pipes, but 
none have yet been accepted. 

New Y"ork has rapidly improved within the last 
20 years, and land, which, then sold in that city 
for 50 dollars, is now worth 1500; but it is a place 
of too much importance, in a political point of view, 
to be treated with a general description. Much 
has been written concerning it by late travellers, 
and we shall divide the remarks we have collected 
from their works, (especially from that of Mr. 
Lambert, to whom we have been indebted for much 
of the information we have given concerning the 
United States) under the following heads, viz. 

CHAP. I. 

The military. The. harbour. The Broadway. 
Bowery road. Shops. Hotels. Public build 
ings. The park. The theatre. Vauxhall. 
JRanefagh. Wharfs. Places of worship. 
Public buildings. King s or Columbia college. 
State prison. Courts of law. Board &amp;lt;_, 
health. Quarantine, station. Chamber of com 
merce. Inspectors of lumber^ Sfc. Commerce 
of New York. Increase of commerce. Mar 
ket places. Abundance of provisions. Articles 



NEW YORK. 



403 



[brought to market. Fly market. Bare mar 
ket. Price of commodities at New York. 
Charitable institutions. The ladies society for 
the relief of poor widozes with small children. 
The Cincinnati. Medical society. Protestant 
Episcopal society. Columbia college. News 
papers. Literary fair. 

CHAP. II. 

Number of deaths at New York. Mode of living. 
-The yellow fever. Population of New York. 
Deaths. Church-yards. Funerals. Socie 
ty of New York. Elegant women. Personal 
attractions. Education.- Thirst after know 
ledge. Arts and sciences. Literature. Taste 
for reading. Salmagundi. The Echo. Bar 
low ? Columbiad. Smoking. Style of living at 
New Jfork. Marriages. Christmas-day. 
Recommendations of the clergy. New-year s 
day. Political parties. Duels. Lat. and 
Long. 

CHAP. 1. 

IT is well known that the 25th of November is 
the anniversary of the evacuation of New York 
by (.lie British troops at the peace of 1783. The 
militia, or rather the volunteer corps, arc accus 
tomed on this day to be assembled from different 
parts of the city, on the grand battery by the 
water-side, so called from a fort having been for 
merly built on the spot, though at present it is 
nothing more than a lawn for the recreation of the 
inhabitants, and for the purpose of military parade. 
The troops do not amount to 600, and are gau 
dily dressed, in a variety of uniforms, every ward in 
the city having a different one : some of them with 
helmets appear better suited to the theatre than the 
field. The general of the militia and his staff are 
dressed in the national uniform of blue, with buff 
facings. They also wear large gold epaulets and 
feathers, which altogether has a very showy ap 
pearance. The gun-boats, which are stationed off 
the battery, fire several salutes in honour of the 
day, and the troops parade through the streets 
leading to the water-side. They then go through 
the forms practised on taking possession of the city, 
manoeuvring and firing feus-de-joye, &amp;c. as oc 
curred on the evacuation of New York. One of 
the corps consists wholly of Irishmen, dressed in 
light green jackets, while pantaloons, and hel 
mets. 

York island (or, as it is sometimes called, Man 
hattan) is separated from the continental part of 
the state of New York by the Ilaerlem river. Its 
length is about 16 miles, and its breadth varies 
from a quarter to a mile and a half. The bay is 
about nine miles long and three broad, without 



reckoning the branches of the livers on each side 
of the town. From the ocean at Sandy hook to 
the city, is not more than 28 miles. The water is 
deep enough to float the largest vessels. Ships of 
90 guns have anchored opposite the city. There 
they lie land-locked, and well secured from winds 
and storms ; and fleets of the greatest number have 
ample space for mooring. During the revolu 
tionary war, New York was the great rendezvous 
for the British fieet ; from the time of its surrender 
in 1776 to the peace of 1783, our ships of war 
passed all - k easons of the year here in security. 

It has been often observed that the cold of winter 
has less effect upon the water of New York har 
bour, than in several places further to the s. 
When Philadelphia, Baltimore, and /Alexandria 
are choked up by ice in severe Avinters, as in that 
of 1804, New York suffers scarcely any inconve 
nience from it. This is owing partly to the salt- 
ness of the sound and the bay ; while the Delaware, 
Patapsco, and Patowmac, at the respective cities 
above mentioned are fresh, and consequently more 
easy to freeze. The water at New York differs 
but little in saltness from the neighbouring Atlan 
tic. The openness of the port is also to be ascribed 
in part to the greater ebb and flow of the tide. 
Another reason of the greater fitness of New Y ork 
for winter navigation is the rapidity of the currents. 
The strength of these in ordinary tides, and more 
especially when they are agitated by storms, is 
capable of rending the solidity of the ice, and re 
ducing it to fragments. And although the whole 
harbour was covered by a bridge of very compact 
ice in 1780, to the serious alarm of the British 
garrison, the like has never occurred since. The 
number of vessels that entered from foreign ports 
only into this port in 1795 amounted to 941. The 
islands in the vicinity of New York are Long 
island, Staten island, Governor s, Bedlow s and 
Ellis s islands. The first is of very considerable 
extent, being 120 miles in length, and about eight 
miles in breadth. It is a fertile and well cultivated 
piece of land; inhabited chiefly by the descen 
dants of the old Dutch settlers. 

The Broadway and Bowery road are the two 
finest avenues in the city, and nearly of the same 
width as Oxford street in London. The first com 
mences from the grand battery situate at the ex 
treme point of the town, and divides it into two 
unequal parts. It is upwards of two miles in 
length, though the pavement does not extend 
above a mile and a quarter; the remainder of 
the road consists of straggling houses which are 
the commencement of new streets, already planned 
out. The Bowery road commences from Chatham! 
SF 2 



404 



NEW YORK. 



[street which branches off from, the Broadway to 
the right, by the side of (lie park. After proceed 
ing 1 about a mile and a half it joins the Broadway, 
and terminates the plan which is intended to be 
carried into effect for the enlargement of the city. 
Much of the intermediate spaces between these 
large streets, and from thence to the Hudson and 
East rivers, is yet unbuilt upon, or consists only 
of unfinished streets and detached buildings. 

The Iiouscs in the Broadway are lofty and well 
built. They are constructed in the English style, 
and differ but little from those of London at the 
w. end of the town ; except, that they are uni 
versally built of red brick. In the vicinity of the 
battery, and for some distance up the Broadway, 
they are nearly all private houses, and occupied 
by the principal merchants and gentry of New 
York ; after which, the Broadway is lined with 
large commodious shops of every description, 
well stocked with European and India goods ; and 
exhibiting as splendid and varied a show in their 
windows, as can be met with in London. There 
are several extensive book-stores, print-shops, 
music-shops, jewellers, and silversmiths; hatters, 
linen-drapers, milliners, pastry cooks, coach- 
makers, hotels, and coffee-houses. The street is 
well paved, and the foot-paths are chiefly bricked. 
In Robinson street, the pavement before one of the 
houses, and the steps of the door, are composed en 
tirely of marble. 

The city hotel is the most extensive building of 
that description in New York ; and nearly resem 
bles in size and style of architecture the London 
tavern in Bishopgate street. The ground-floor 
of the hotel at New York is, however, converted 
into shops, which have a very handsome appear 
ance in the Broadway. Mechanic hall is another 
large hotel at the corner of Robinson street, in the 
Broadway. It was erected by the society of me 
chanics and tradesmen, who associated themselves 
for charitable purposes, under an act of the legis 
lature in 1792. There are three churches in the 
Broadway ; one of them, called Grace church, is a 
plain brick building, recently erected : the other 
two are St. Paul s and Trinity; both handsome 
structures, built with an intermixture of white and 
brown stone. The adjoining church-yards, which 
occupy a large space of ground, railed in from the 
street, and crowded with tomb-stones, are far from 
bein agreeable spectacles in such a populous 
city." At the commencement of the Broadway, 
near the battery, stands the old government-house, 
now converted into offices for the customs. Be 
fore it is a small lawn railed in, and in the centre 
is a stone pedestal, upon which formerly stood a 



leaden statue of George III. In the revolutionary 
war it was pulled down by the populace, and made 
into bullets. 

The city hall, where the courts of justice are 
held, is situated in Wall street, leading from the 
coffee-house slip by the water side into the Broad 
way. It is an old heavy building, and very ina 
dequate to the present population and wealth 
of New York. A court-house on a larger scale, 
and more worthy of the improved state of the city, 
is now building at the end of the park, between 
the Broadway and Chatham street, in a style of 
magnificence, unequalled in many of the larger 
cities of Europe. The exterior consists wholly of 
fine marble, ornamented in a very neat and ele 
gant style of architecture, and the whole is to be 
surmounted by a beautiful dome, which, when 
finished, will form a noble ornament to that part of 
the town, in which are also situated the theatre, 
mechanic hall, and some of the best private 
houses in New York. The park, though not re 
markable for its size, is, however, of service, by 
displaying the surrounding buildings to a better 
advantage ; and is also a relief to the confined ap 
pearance of streets in general. It consists of about 
four acres planted with elms, planes, willows, and 
catalpas ; and the surrounding foot- walk is en 
compassed by rows of poplars : the whole is in 
closed by a wooden paling. Neither the park nor 
the battery arc very much resorted to by the fa 
shionables of New York, as they have become too 
common. The genteel lounge is in the Broadway, 
from eleven to three o clock, during which time, 
it is as much crowded as the Bond street of Lon 
don : and the carriages, though not so numerous, 
are driven to and fro with as much velocity. The 
foot-paths are planted with poplars, and afford an 
agreeable shade from the sun in summer. About 
three years ago the inhabitants were alarmed by a 
large species of caterpillar, which bred in great 
numbers on the poplars, and were supposed to be 
venomous ; various experiments were tried, and cats 
and dogs were made to swallow them ; but it 
proved to be a false alarm, though the city for 
some time was thrown into the greatest consterna 
tion. 

The theatre is on the s. c. side of the park, and 
is a large commodious building. The outside is 
in an unfinished state, but the interior is hand 
somely decorated, and fitted up in as good style 
as the London theatres, upon a scale suitable to 
the population of the city. It contains a large 
coffee room, and good sized lobbies ; and is 
reckoned to hold about J200 persons. The scenes 
are well painted and numerous; and the machinery,] 



NEW YORK. 



405 



[dresses, and decorations, are elegant and appro 
priate to the performances, which consist of all the 
new pieces that come out on the London boards, 
and several of Shakspeare s best plays. The only 
fault is, that they are too much curtailed, by which 
Ihey often lose their effect ; and the performances 
are sometimes over by half past JO, though they 
do not begin at an earlier hour than in London. 
The drama had been a favourite in New York be 
fore the revolution. During the time the city was 
in our possession, threatrical entertainments were 
very fashionable ; and the characters were mostly 
supported by officers of the army. After the ter 
mination of the war, the play-house fell into the 
hands of Messrs. Hallam and Henry, who for a 
number of years exerted themselves with much sa 
tisfaction to please the public. After the death of 
Mr. Henry, the surviving manager formed a part 
nership with a favourite and popular performer, 
under the firm of Hallam and Hodgkinson. Their 
efforts were soon after aided by the addition of 
Mr. W. Dunlap. After some time Hallam and 
Hodgkinson withdrew from the concern, and Mr. 
Dunlap commenced sole manager. In this capa 
city he continued till 1804. During his manage 
ment of the theatrical concerns, he brought forward 
many pieces of his own composition, as well as 
several translations from the German. He is now 
publishing his dramatic works in 10 volumes* 
Mr. Cooper succeeded him in the direction of the 
theatre, and in his hands it at present remains. 
The theatre has been built about 10 years, and of 
course embraces every modern improvement. 

New York has its Vauxhall and Ranelagh ; 
but they are poor imitations of those near London. 
They are, however, pleasant places of recreation 
for the inhabitants. The Vauxhall garden is 
situated in the Bowery road about two miles from 
the city hall. It is a neat plantation, with gravel 
walks adorned with shrubs, trees, busts, and 
statues. In the centre is a large equestrian statue 
of General Washington. Light musical pieces, 
interludes, &amp;c. are performed in a small theatre 
situate in one corner of the gardens : the audience 
sit in what are called the pit and boxes, in the open 
air. The orchestra is built among the trees,, and a 
large apparatus is construced for the display of 
fire-works. The theatrical corps of New York is 
chiefly engaged at Vauxhall during summer. The 
llanelagh is a large hotel and garden, generally 
known by the name of Mount Pilt, situated by the 
water side, and commanding some extensive and 
beautiful views of the city and its environs. 

A great portion of the city, between the Broad 
way and the E. river, is very irregularly built; 



being the oldest part of the town, and of course 
less capable of those improvements which distin 
guish the more recent buildings. Nevertheless, 
it is the chief seat of business, and contains se 
veral spacious streets crowded with shops, stores, 
and warehouses of every description. The wa 
ter side is lined Avith shipping which lie along the 
wharfs, or in the small docks called slips, of 
which there are upwards of 12 towards the E. river, 
besides numerous piers. The wharfs are large and 
commodious, and the warehouses, which are nearly 
all new buildings, are lofty and substantial. The 
merchants, ship-brokers, &amp;c. have their offices in. 
front on the ground floor of these warehouses. 
These ranges of buildings and wharfs extend from 
the grand battery, on both sides the town, up 
the Hudson and E. rivers, and encompass the 
houses with shipping, whose forest of masts gives 
a stranger a lively idea of the immense trade which 
this city carries on Avith every part of the globe. 
New York appears to him the Tyre of the new 
world. 

New York contains 33 places of worship, viz. 
nine Episcopal churches, three Dutch churches, 
one French church, one Calvinist, one German 
Lutheran, one English Lutheran, three Baptist 
meetings, three Methodist meetings, one Mora 
vian, six Presbyterian, one Independent, two 
Quakers and one Jews synagogue. 

Besides the public buildings which we have men 
tioned, there are numerous banks, insurance com- 
panics, commercial and charitable institutions, 
literary establishments, &amp;c. The new state pri 
son is an establishment worthy of imitation in 
England. By the law of New York, treason, 
murder, and the procuring, aiding, and abetting 
any kind of murder, are the only crimes punish 
able by death. The mode of execution is the 
same as in England. All other offences are pu 
nished by imprisonment for a certain period in 
the state prison. This building is situated at 
Greenwich, about two miles from the city hall, on 
the shore of the Hudson river. The space in 
closed by the wall is about four acres, and the pri 
son is governed by seven inspectors appointed by 
the state council. They meet once a month, or 
oftener, together with the justices of the supreme 
court, the mayor and recorder of the city, the 
attorney-general, and district attorney. The in 
spectors make rules for the government of the con 
victs, and other persons belonging to the prison ; 
and appoint two of their own body to be visiting 
inspectors monthly. The board of inspectors have 
charge of the prison, and appoint a keeper or de 
puty, and as many assistants as they find to be ne-J 



406 



NEW YORK. 



[cessary. The salaries of the keepers are paid out 
of the treasury of the state. The inspectors, or 
rather the agents of the prison, are empowered to 
purchase clothing, bedding, provisions, tools, 
implements, and raw or other materials for the em 
ployment of the convicts, and keep accounts of 
the same : also to open an account with each con 
vict, charging- him with his expcnces, and credit 
ing him with his labour: and if there should be 
any balance due to the convict at the time of his 
discharge, to give him a part or the whole of it ; 
but if the whole should not be given to him, to 
convey the residue to the credit of the state. If 
a convict on entering the prison is unacquainted 
\vith any trade, he has the choice of learning one 
most agreeable to him. It is said, that a certain 
man who became a shoe-maker in that prison, 
came out, at the end of his time, with several hun 
dred dollars in pocket. Hence the country is 
benefited ; and individuals, instead of being made 
worse in prison, are rendered useful members of 
society. 

The expence of conveying and keeping the 
convicts is always paid by the state. They are 
dressed in uniforms of coarse cloth, according to 
their classes and conduct, and kept at some kind 
of work. For profane cursing, swearing, inde 
cent behaviour, idleness, negligence, disobedience 
of regulations, or perverse conduct, the principal 
keeper may punish the convicts by confinement in 
the solitary cells, and by a diet of bread and wa 
ter, during such term as any two of the inspectors 
advise. For the greater security, there is a de- 
tachment of firemen allotted to the prison, also 
an armed guard consisting of a captain, a ser- 
jeant, two corporals, a drummer, a fifer, and 
twenty privates. 

The laws are administered by the following 
courts of justice. 

I. The court for the trial of impeachments, and 
the correction of errors. Since the removal of 
the seat of government to Albany, this court is 
now held in that place. It is the court of dernier 
resort, and consists of the president of the senate, 
for the time being, and the senators, chancellor, 
and judges of the supreme court, or the major 
part of them. 

II. The court of chancery. This court, con 
sisting of the chancellor, is held twice a year at 
least in New York, and twice in the city of Al 
bany, and at such other times as the chancellor 
may think proper. Appeals lie from the deci 
sions of the chancellor to the court for the cor 
rection of errors. 

III. The supreme court. This court consists of 



a chief justice, and four puisne judges, and there 
are four stated and regular terms. The court ap 
points circuit courts to be held in the vacation in 
the several counties, before one of the judges, for 
the trial of all causes before a jury. Questions of 
law which arise on the facts, are argued before the 
whole court. Writs of error may be brought on 
the judgments of the supreme court, to the court 
for the correction of errors. 

IV. The court of exchequer. The junior jus 
tice in the supreme court, or, in his absence, any 
other of the puisne judges, is, ex officio^ judge of 
the court of exchequer. This court is held du 
ring the terms of the supreme court, and at the 
same places. It hears and determines all causes 
and matters relating to forfeitures for recognizances 
or otherwise, fines, issues, amercements, and debts 
due to the people of the state. 

V. The courts of oyer and terminer, and gene 
ral gaol delivery. These courts are held pur 
suant to an act of the legislature, without a special 
commission, by one or more of the justices of the 
supreme court; together with the mayor, recorder, 
and aldermen of the ity, or any three of (hem, of 
whom a justice of the supreme court must always 
be one. They have the power to hear and deter 
mine all treasons, felonies, and other crimes and 
misdemeanors, and to deliver the gaols of all pri 
soners confined therein. 

VI. The court of common pleas, commonly call 
ed the mayor s court. This is held before the 
mayor, aldermen, and recorder, or before the 
mayor and recorder only. This court hears and 
determines all actions, real, personal, or mixed, 
arising within the city of New York, or within 
the jurisdiction of the court. Where the sum de 
manded is above 250 dollars, the cause may be re 
moved at any time before the trial, into the su 
preme court. A writ of error lies from all judg 
ments of this court to the supreme court. 

VII. The court of general sessions of the peace. 
This court is also held by the mayor, recorder, 
and aldermen, of whom the mayor or recorder 
must always be one. Courts of special sessions 
of the peace may also be held at any time the 
common council may direct, and may continue 
as long as the court may think proper for the dis 
patch of business. These courts have the power 
to hear and determine all felonies and offences 
committed in the city of New York. There is 
also a court of special sessions for the trial of petty 
offences ; which consists of the mayor, recorder, 
and aldermen. 

VIII. The court of probates. Since the re 
moval of the scat of government to Albany the] 



NEW YORK. 



407 



! judge of this court is required to reside in that city. 
He has all the powers of jurisdiction relative to 
testamentary matters, which were formerly exer 
cised by the governor of the colony, as judge of 
the prerogative court, except as to the appoint 
ment of surrogates. 

IX. Court" of surrogate. Surrogates are ap 
pointed for each county by the council of appoint 
ment, one of which resides and holds his court in 
the city of New York. They have the sole and 
exclusive power to take proof of the last wills and 
testaments of persons deceased, who at the time of 
their de^th were inhabitants of the city, in what 
ever place the death may have happened ; to 
issue probates, and grant letters of administration 
of the goods, chatties, and credits of persons dy 
ing intestate, or with the wills annexed. Appeals 
from the orders and decrees of the surrogate lie to 
the court of probates. 

X. District court of the United States. This 
court, consisting of a single judge, has four regular 
sessions in a year, and sjx cial sessions are held as 
often as the judge thinks necessary. It has ex 
clusive original jurisdiction of civil causes, of ad 
miralty and maritime jurisdiction, including all 
seizures under the laws of impost, navigation, or 
trade of the United States, on the high seas, and 
in the navigable waters, as well as seizures on land 
within other waters, and all penalties and forfei 
tures arising under the laws of the United States. 
It has also jurisdiction, exclusive of the state 
courts, of all crimes and offences cognizable under 
the authority of the United States, committed 
within thedistrict, or upon the high seas, where no 
other punishment than whipping, not exceeding 
30 stripes, a fine not exceeding 100 dollars, or a 
term of imprisonment not exceeding six months, 
is to be inflicted. It also has concurrent jurisdic 
tion with the courts of the state, where an alien 
sues for a tort only, in violation of the laws of 
nations, or treaties of the United States ; and 
where the United States sue, and the matter in dis 
pute does not exceed 100 dollars. It has a juris 
diction over the state courts of all suits against con 
suls and vice-consuls. 

XL The circuit court of the United States for 
the district of New York, in the second circuit, is 
held in the city on the 1st of April and the 1st of 
September in each year. It consists of one of the 
judges of the supreme court of the United States, 
and the judge of the district court. It has origi- 
ginal cognizance of all civil suits, where the mat 
ter in dispute exceeds 500 dollars, and the United 
States are plaintiffs, or an alien is the party; or 
the suit is between citizens of different states. It 



has exclusive cogni/.nnce of all crimrs and offences 
cognizable under the authority of the United 
States, except where it is otherwise provided by 
law ; and a concurrent jurisdiction with the dis 
trict court of the crimes cognizable therein. 

Of late years aboard of health has been esta 
blished at New York, under an act of the legisla 
ture, and a variety of regulations are enjoined, 
for the purpose of preventing the introduction of 
malignant fevers. A station is also assigned on 
Staten island, where vessels perform quarantine: 
the buildings which constitute the hospital are se 
parated from each other, and are capable of ac 
commodating upwards of 300 sick. The situation 
is extremely pleasant, and well adapted to the 
purpose. 

There are five banks and nine insurance com 
panies: one of the latter is a branch of the Phcenix 
company of London. There is a chamber of 
commerce in New York, which has for its object 
the promotion and regulation of mercantile con 
cerns; and is also a charitable institution for the 
support of the widows and children of its members. 
The origin of this institution is of a singular na 
ture ; and proves that non-intercourse acts in Ame 
rica are not of recent origin. The following is an 
account of it. 

On the 5th of April 17GS, 20 merchants met in 
the city of New York, and formed themselves into 
a voluntary association, which they called " The 
New York chamber of commerce." On the 2d 
of May 1769, they received a message of thanks 
from the house of assembly to the merchants of the 
city and colony, for their patriotic conduct in de 
clining the importation of goods from Great Bri 
tain at that juncture. The words on this occa 
sion were the following: " 1 have it in charge 
from the general assembly, to give the merchants 
of this city and colony the thanks of the house, 
for their repeated, disinterested, public-spirited, 
and patriotic conduct, in declining the importa 
tion or receiving of goods from Great Britain, un 
til such acts of parliament as the general assem 
bly had declared unconstitutional, and subversive 
of the rights and liberties of the people of this 
colony, should be repealed." On the 15th of 
March 1770, during the administration of Dr. 
Golden, as lieutenant-governor of the province, a 
charter was granted to the society, by the name of 
" The corporation of the chamber of commerce 
in the city of New York in America." They are 
enabled to hold property not exceeding a clear 
yearly value of 3000/. sterling per annum. The 
objects are to enable them the better 10 carry into 
execution, encourage, and promote, by jmsi" and] 



408 



NEW YORK. 



[lawful ways and moans, such measures as tend to 
promote and extend just and lawful commerce ; 
and to provide for such members as may be 
hereafter reduced to poverty, their widows and 
children. 

The merchants, in their address to the governor, 
for his condescension in allowing the charter, ob 
served, among other things, that they are thereby 
enabled to execute many plans of trade, which, as 
individuals, they could not before accomplish ; 
and promised themselves many and great advan 
tages to the colony from their incorporation. The 
chamber, by its charter, is authorised to make re 
gulations for the government of its officers and 
members, and for regulating all its other affairs, 
with penalties for the violation of them. They 
are also empowered to appoint a committee of five 
members, at each monthly meeting, to adjust and 
determine all mercantile disputes which may be 
referred to them : and the secretary is directed to 
cause the names of this monthly committee to be 
published in one of the public newspapers, for the 
information of those who may wish to submit any 
disputes to their decision. No person can be ad 
mitted as members, but merchants and insurance- 
brokers. 

The committees must report to the chamber, at 
the next stated meeting after their time of service 
is ended, the several objects of dispute which 
have been referred to their decision, with the 
names of the parties, together with the arguments 
and principles upon which their adjudications 
have been founded, in order that they may be re 
corded by the secretary. If the members of the 
chamber refuse to submit all disputed matters of 
accounts between each other, to the final arbitra 
tion and determination either of a monthly com 
mittee, or such members as may be chosen by the 
parties, they may be punished by expulsion. 

Bills of exchange drawn upon any of the W. 
India islands, Newfoundland, or other foreign pos 
sessions in America, and returned protested ibr non 
payment, are liable to 10 per cent, damages, on 
demand, at the current exchange, when the bill 
with the protest is presented either to the drawer 
or indorser thereof. Bills of exchange drawn on 
any part of Europe, and returned protested, are 
liable to 20 per cent, damages. The chamber has 
also published regulations for estimating the ton 
nage of bulky articles, for correcting mistakes in 
freight, and for fixing inland and foreign commis 
sions. By an act of the state legislature, passed 
in the year 1784, all the privileges granted in the 
charter were fully confirmed and perpetuated. 

Inspectors are appointed by the state council to 



examine lumber, staves, and heading, pot and 
pearl ashes, sole leather, flour and meal, beef and 
pork, previous to exportation. Persons shipping 
the above articles without having them inspected, 
are liable to heavy penalties. 

New York is esteemed the most eligible situa 
tion for commerce in the United States. It almost 
necessarily commands the trade of one half New 
Jersey, most of that of Connecticut, part of that 
of Massachusetts, and almost the whole of Ver 
mont, besides the whole fertile interior country, 
which is penetrated by one of the largest rivers in 
America. This city imports most of the goods 
consumed between a line of 30 miles e. of Connec 
ticut river, and 20 miles w. of the Hudson, and be 
tween the ocean and (he confines of Canada, a con 
siderable portion of which is the best peopled of any 
part of the United States ; and the whole territory 
contains upwards of 1,000,000 people, or one-fifth 
of the inhabitants of the union. Besides, some of 
the other states are partially supplied with goods 
from New York. But in the staple commodity, 
flour, Pennsylvania and Maryland have exceeded 
it, the superfine flour of those states commanding 
a higher price than that of New York ; not that 
the quality of the grain is worse, but because 
greater attenlion is paid in those states to the in 
spection and manufacture of that article. In 
the manufacture likewise of iron, paper, cabinet 
works, &amp;c. Pennsylvania exceeds not only New 
York, but all her sister states. In times of peace, 
however, New York will command more com 
mercial business than any town in the United 
States. In time of war it will be insecure without 
a marine force; but a small number of ships will 
be able to defend it frona the most formidable at 
tacks by sea. 

The commerce of New York, before the late 
embargo, was in a high state of prosperity and 
progressive improvement. The merchants traded 
with almost every part of the world, and though 
at times they suffered some privations and checks 
from the belligerent powers of Europe, yet their 
trade increased, and riches continued to pour in 
iipon them. They grumbled, but nevertheless 
pursued their prosperous career, and seldom failed 
in realizing handsome fortunes. What a mortify 
ing stroke, then, was the embargo! a measure 
which obliged them to commit a sort of com 
mercial suicide in order to revenge themselves of 
a few lawless acts, which might have been easily 
avoided if the merchants had speculated with, 
more prudence. The amount of tonnage belong 
ing to the port of New York in 1806 was 
183,671 tons; and the number of vessels iu the] 



NEW YORK. 



409 



[harbour on the 25th of December 1807, when 
ihe embargo took place, was 557. The moneys 
collected in New York for the national treasury, 
on the imports and tonnage, have for several 
years amounted to one-fourth of the public reve 
nue. In 1806, the sum collected was 6,500,000 
dollars, which, after deducting the drawbacks, left 
a nett revenue of 4,500,000 dollars ; which was 
paid into the treasury of the United States, as the 
proceeds of one year. In the year 1808, the 
whole of this immense sura had vanished ! In 
order to shew how little the Americans have suf 
fered upon the aggregate from Berlin decrees and 
orders of council ; from French menaces, and 
British actions ; it is only necessary to state, that 
in 1803 the duties collected at New York scarcely 
amounted to 4,000,000 of dollars ; and that at 
the period of laying on the embargo, at the 
close of the year 1807^ they amounted to nearly 
7,000,000 dollars. After this it is hardly fair to 
complain of the violation of neutral rights ! 

Every day, except Sunday, is a market-day in 
New York. Meat is cut up and sold by the 
joint or in pieces, by the licensed butchers only, 
their agents, or servants. Each of these must sell 
at his own stall, and conclude his sales by one 
o clock in the afternoon, between the 1st of May 
and the 1st of November, and at two, between the 
1st of November and the 1st of May. Butchers 
are licensed by the maj or, who is clerk of the 
market. He receives for every quarter of beef 
sold in the market, six cents ; for every hog, 
shoat, or pig above 141bs. weight, six cents ; and 
for each calf, sheep, or lamb, four cents ; to be 
paid by the butchers and other persons selling the 
same. To prevent engrossing, and to favour 
housekeepers, it is declared unlawful for persons 
to purchase articles to sell again,, in any market or 
other part of the city, before noon of each day, 
except flour and meal, which must not be bought 
to be sold again until four in the afternoon ; huck 
sters in the market are restricted to the sale of ve 
getables with the exception of fruits. The sale of 
unwholesome and stale articles of provisions, of 
blown and stuffed meat, and of measly pork, is ex 
pressly forbidden. Butter must be sold by the 
pound, and not by the roll or tub. Persons who 
are not licensed butchers, selling butchers meat 
on commission, pay treble fees to the clerk of the 
market. 

The markets are abundantly supplied with every 
thing in its season, which the land and water af 
fords. In an enumeration made a few years ago 
by several gentlemen of experience, it appeared 
that the number of different species of wild qua- 

VOL. III. 



drupeds brought to market in the course of the year, 
in whole or in part, alive or dead, was eight ; am 
phibious creatures, five; shell fish, 14 ; birds, 51; 
and of fishes proper, 62. Their names are as fol 
low. Quadrupeds : bear, deer, racoon, ground 
hog, opossum, squirrel, rabbit, hare. Amphibi 
ous : green-turtle, hawksbill, loggerhead, snapper, 
terrebin. Shell fish : oyster, lobster, prawn, crab, 
sea crab, cray fish, shrimp, clam, sea clam, soft 
clam, scollop, grey mussel, black mussel, pern- 
winkle. Birds : wild goose, brant, black duck, 
grey duck, canvas back, wood duck, wigeon, teal, 
broad-bill duck, dipper, sheldrake, old-wife, coote, 
hell-diver, whistling-diver, redhead, loon, cor 
morant, pilestart, sheerwater, curlew, merlin, wil- 
let, woodcock, English snipe, grey snipe, yellow- 
legged snipe, robin snipe, dovertie, small-sand 
snipe, green plover, grey plover, kildare, wild 
turkey, heath hen, partridge, quail, meadow hen, 
wild pigeon, turtle dove, lark, robin, large grey 
snow bird, small blue snow bird, blue jay, yellow 
tail, clape blackbird, woodpecker, blue crane, 
white crane. Fishes: salmon, codfish, blackfish, 
streaked bass, sea bass, sheepshead, mackarel, 
Spanish mackarel, horse mackarel, trout, pike, 
sunfish, lucker, chub, roach, shiner, white perch, 
yellow perch, black perch, sturgeon, haddock, 
pollock, hake, shad, herring, sardine, sprat, man- 
haden, weakfish, smelt, mullet, bonetto, kingfish, 
silverfish, porgey, skipjack, angel fish, grunt s 
tusk, red drum, black drum, sheepshead drum, 
dogfish, killifish, bergall, tommycod, red gurnard, 
grey gurnard, spearmgs, garfish, frost fish, blow 
fish, toad fish, hallibut, flounder, sole, plaice, 
skait, stingray, common eel, conger eel, lam 
prey. 

The principal market in New York is called 
the Fly market. A name which might, perhaps, 
lead a stranger to expect a market swarming with 
flies. This, however, is not the real meaning of 
the term. This part of the city, s.c. of Pearl 
street, was originally a salt-meadow, with a creek 
running through it, from where Maiden lane now 
is, to the bay or East river ; forming such a dis 
position of land and water, as was called by the 
Dutch VlaiC) a valley or wet piece of ground : 
when a market was first held there it was called 
the Vlaie market, from which has originated the 
name of Fly market. 

On the TO. side of the city in Greenwich street, 
and between it and the Hudson river, is the 
market of the second importance. This is known 
by as odd and whimsical a name as the former. 
It arose in the following manner : During the time 
the city was in the hands of the British troops in] 
3 G 



410 



NEW YORK. 



[the revolutionary war, a considerable portion of 
the buildings in that neighbourhood was burnt 
down. Soon alter the peace a market was esta 
blished there, and in the progress of improvement 
it happened that the market-house was finished 
long before the streets were rebuilt, or the gene 
rality of inhabitants re-established. As there were 
for a considerable time but few housekeepers or 
purchasers, so there was but a small number of 
sellers of produce to frequent this public place; 
which led the citizens to distinguish it by the 
name of Bare market, or the market at which 
there was little or nothing brought for sale ; and 
the name is continued to this day, though it is 
now situated in the heart of the town, and the sup- 

Elies are steady and abundant. Besides these two 
irge markets, there are four others, somewhat 
smaller, but always well stocked with provisions 
of every description. 

The price of several commodities before the 
embargo was as follows, in sterling money : beef 
6\d. per Ib, ; mutton 5d. ; veal Id. ; butter lOd. ; 
bread, the loaf of 2| Ib. Id. ; cheese Id. ; tur- 
Ides 7s. each ; chickens 20rf. per couple ; oysters 
Id. per dozen ; flour 27s. per barrel of 1961bs. ; 
brandy 4s. 6d. per gallon ; coffee is. 6d. per Ib. ; 
green tea 5s. ; best hyson 10s. ; coals 70s. per 
chaldron ; wood 20s. per cord ; a coat 71. 10s. 
waistcoat and pantaloons M. 10s. ; hat 54s. ; pair 
of boots 54s.; washing 3s. 6d. per dozen pieces. 
Price of lodging at genteel boarding houses, from, 
ll.lls.6d. to 31. 3s. per week. After the em 
bargo took place, the price of provisions fell to 
nearly half the above sums, and European com 
modities rose in proportion. The manufactures of 
America are yet in an infant state ; but in New 
York there are several excellent cabinet-makers, 
coach-makers, &amp;c. who not only supply the coun 
try with household furniture and carriages, but 
also export very largely to the W. Indies, and to 
foreign possesssons on the continent of America. 
Their workmanship would be considered elegant 
and modern in London, and they have the advan 
tage of procuring mahogany and other wood much 
cheaper than we. 

Game laws are not wholly unknown in Ame 
rica. There is an act in force for the preservation 
of heath hens and other game, which was passed 
in the year 1791. This statute makes it penal 
to kill any heath hen, within Queen s or Suffolk 
counties, or any partridge, quail, or woodcock, 
within Queen s, King s, and New York counties, 
in the following manner. Heath hen, partridge, 
and quail are protected by the law from the 1st of 
April to the 5th of October, and woodcock from 



the 20th of February to the 1st of July ; they who 
violate the law are liable to a penalty of two dollars 
and a half for every bird. There is also a society 
established called the Brush Club, for the pur 
pose of detecting poachers, and interlopers upon 
private property. Laws arc also passed for the 
protection of deer; persons violating them are sub 
ject to penalties of seven dollars and a half; 25 
dollars if the deer are killed within 30 rods of any 
road or highway. 

There are 31 benevolent institutions in New 
York. The names of them are as follows : Tam 
many society, free school, provident society, mutual 
benefit society, benevolent society, Albion benevo 
lent society, ladies society for the relief of poor 
widows with small children, fire department, New 
York manufacturing society, society of mechanics 
and tradesmen, the dispensary, lying-in hospital, 
sailors snug harbour, marine society, manumission 
society, kine-pock institution, city hospital, alms 
house, house carpenters society, Bellevue hos 
pital, marine hospital at Staten island, humane 
society, masonic society, containing 13 lodges, 
German society, society of unitas fratrum, first 
Protestant Episcopal charity school, St. George s 
society, St. Patrick s society, St. Andrew s so 
ciety, the New England society, the Cincinnati. 
Most of these institutions are mere benefit societies, 
resembling those which are so numerous in Eng 
land. The ladies society for the relief of poor 
widows with small children merits, however, parti 
cular notice, since it is an institution most honour 
able to the character of the amiable women of 
that city ; and is worthy of imitation in Great 
Britain. 

This association, of which gentlemen cannot be 
members, though they may be contributors, was 
commenced in November 1797, and organised 
the 29th December following. At their first stated 
meeting in April 1798, it was reported that 98 
widows with 223 children had been brought 
through the severity of winter, with a degree 
of comfort, who without this interposition would 
probably have gone to the alms house, or have pe 
rished. Relief is given in necessaries, but never 
in money, without a vote of the directresses at their 
board. It is not granted in any case until after 
the applicants shall be visited at their dwellings by 
one of the managers, and particular inquiry made 
into their character and circumstances. Immo 
rality excludes from the patronage of Che society ; 
neither is relief given to any applicant who re 
fuses to put out at service or to trades, such of 
her children as are fit, and to place the younger 
ones, of proper age, at a charity school ; unless] 



NEW YORK. 



411 



[in very particular cases, of which the board 
judges. 

The managers are required to exert themselves 
to create and maintain habits of industry among 
their applicants, by furnishing them, as far as pos 
sible, with suitable employment. White and 
checked linen has been extensively distributed 
among the poor widows who could not find em 
ployment elsewhere, to be made into shirts, on 
hire, and afterwards sold by the society at first 
cost. The ladies were incorporated by an act of 
the legislature on April 2, 1802, and are allowed 
to hold an estate of 50,000 dollars, applicable only 
to the relief of poor widows with small children. 
Their affairs are managed by a board of direction, 
composed of a first and second directress, a secre 
tary, treasurer, and not less than six, nor more 
than twelve managers, two-thirds of whom make a 
quorum. Husbands of married women who are 
members or officers of this corporation, are not 
liable for any loss occasioned by the neglect or mis 
feasance of their wives, nor for any subscription or 
engagement of their wives, except in the case of 
their having received from their wives money or 
property belonging to the corporation. 

The New York manufacturing society was ori 
ginally established for the purpose of furnishing 
employment for the honest and industrious poor ; 
and for several years, spinning, weaving, and some 
other branches of business, were carried on at their 
manufactory in Vesey street. But the experiment 
did not answer the expectations of the stock 
holders, and the society discontinued their opera 
tions ; so that it may now be considered as dis 
solved. 

The marine society is established for the pur 
pose of improving maritime knowledge, and to 
assist indigent and distressed masters of vessels, 
their wives, and orphans. They may hold pro 
perty not exceeding the yearly value of 3000/. 
sterling. 

The mannumission society has for its object the 
mitigation of the evils of Negro slavery, to assist 
free blacks unlawfully kept in slavery, to prevent 
kidnapping, and to better the condition of Negroes, 
by teaching them reading, writing, and accounts. 
They have a free school for black children, whose 
number is about 100. 

The humane society is established for a dif 
ferent purpose to that of London, being devoted 
to the relief of distressed debtors confined in the 
city prison, and for supplying soup to the dis 
tressed poor throughout the city, either gatui- 
tously, or for the small consideration of three half 
pence a quart. 



The society of unitas fratrum, or united bre 
thren, has for its object the propagation of the 
gospel among the heathen, and is composed chiefly 
of Moravians. 

The society of the Cincinnati was established at 
the close of the revolutionary war. Many of the 
officers who had meritoriously served their coun 
try, on laying down their commissions, returned to 
their original calling, or some other department 
of civil life. A respectable number of these, struck 
with the resemblance of their situation to that of 
the great Roman dictator Cincinnatus, associated 
themselves into a body of military friends, which 
they denominated the society of the Cincinnati. This 
corps ofheroic genttertteti still preserves its origi 
nal organisation, and holds meetings from time to 
time, to commemorate public events, perform 
deeds of beneficience, and to hold converse on the 
defence of the country. 

There are also two other societies not noticed in 
the preceding enumeration ; these are the medical 
society, and the Protestant Episcopal society for 
promoting religion and learning in the state of New 
York. 

The first is a corporate body, and was esta 
blished in 1806, by virtue of a law to incorporate 
medical societies for the purpose of regulating 
the practice of physic and surgery in the state. 
By this statute it is declared lawful for these phy 
sicians and surgeons (not less than five), who 
were then authorised by law to practise in their 
several professions, to assemble in their respec 
tive counties, and to incorporate themselves by 
choosing a president, vice-president, secretary, 
and treasurer; and depositing in the clerk s office 
a copy of all their proceedings within the 20 days 
immediately succeeding the first Tuesday of July, 
or their other time of meeting. Each county so 
ciety may hold an estate, real or personal, to the 
amount of 1000 dollars. A county society, thus 
organised, is empowered to examine all students, 
who shall present themselves for that purpose, and 
to grant them diplomas, which allow the possessor 
to practise physic and surgery all over the state. 
Such a society may also appoint a board of censors, 
consisting of not less than three, nor more than 
five, whose duty it is to examine students, and re 
port their opinion thereon, in writing, to the pre 
sident. After the Jst of September IS06, all 
persons practising physic and surgery without 
having undergone an examination, and received 
a diploma, are debarred from collecting any 
debts incurred by such practice, in any court of 
law. 

The Protestant Episcopal society for promoting] 
3 G 2 



NEW YORK. 



[religion and learning in the state of New York, 
is established for the following objects : The 
members are to be in amity with the Protestant 
Episcopal church ; to adopt measures for insuring 
a sufficient number and succession of pious and 
learned ministers of the gospel, attached to the 
doctrines and discipline of the Protestant Episco 
pal church ; to afford assistance to such young 
men as are of good character and competent abili 
ties, but in circumstances which do not admit of 
prosecuting the study of divinity without aid ; to 
encourage those who may distinguish themselves 
by extraordinary attainments ; to receive all dona 
tions for pious purposes, and to superintend the 
application of them ; to pro vide funds for establish 
ing a theological library, for the establishment of 
schools, and for providing one or more fellowships 
in Columbia college. In u word, to pursue a 
system of measures whereby the situation of the 
clergy may be rendered respectable, the church 
obtain a permanent support, and learning and piety 
be generally diffused throughout the state. 

Columbia college was incorporated in the year 
1754. The institution was then called King s 
college, and was intended for the instruction and 
education of youth in the learned languages, and 
liberal arts and sciences. And for their further 
encouragement the college was authorised to con 
fer such degrees upon the students and other per 
sons, as are usually granted in the English univer 
sities. Under these powers there have been two 
faculties established in the college, viz. the faculty 
of the arts, and a faculty of medicine. 

The former consists of a president, who is also 
a professor of moral philosophy ; of a professor 
of classical literature, who also gives lectures on 
Grecian and Roman antiquities ; of a professor of 
mathematics, natural philosophy, and astronomy, 
who likewise teaches geography and chronology ; 
and of a professor of logic, rhetoric, belles lettrcs, 
&amp;c. 

The faculty of physic is composed of a pro 
fessor of anatomy and surgery ; of midwifery and 
clinical medicine; of botany and materia medica; 
of the theory and practice of physic, and of che 
mistry. The annual commencement is the first 
Wednesday in August. Lectures are regularly de 
livered on all these literary, scientific, and pro 
fessional subjects ; and the professors labour with 
zeal and ability in their several departments. 
There arc some rare books and valuable apparatus 
belonging to their institution. Since the revolution 
the seminary has been so far altered, as was neces 
sary to adapt it to the new state of affairs ; it is 
wow called Columbia college. The trustees have 



the power of filling up all vacancies in their bodj , 
occasioned by death, removal, or resignation. The 
income of the college is about 15007. but is ex 
pected to increase with the renewal of some of their 
expiring leases of land. To this college Mr. Jo 
seph Murray, an eminent counsellor at taw, left his 
large library, and almost the whole of his fortune, 
amounting to 10,000/. 

There are upwards of twenty newspapers pub 
lished in New York, nearly half of which are 
daily papers ; besides several weekly and monthly 
magazines or essays. The high price of paper, 
labour, and taxes in Great Britain, has been very 
favourable to authorship, and the publication of 
books in America. Foreign publications are also 
charged with a duty of 13 per cent. ; and foreign 
rags are exempted from all impost. These advan 
tages have facilitated the manufacture of paper, 
and the printing of books in the United States ; 
both of which are now carried on to a very large 
extent. The new works that appear in America, 
or rather original productions, are very few ; but 
every English work of celebrity is immediately 
reprinted in the States, and vended for a fourth of 
the original price. The booksellers and printers 
of New York are numerous, and in general men of 
property. Some of them have published very 
splendid editions of the bible, and it was not a 
little gratifying to the American patriot to be told, 
that the paper, printing, engraving, and binding, 
were all of American manufacture. For several 
years past, a literary fair has been held alternately 
at New York and at Philadelphia. This annual 
meeting of booksellers has tended greatly to facili 
tate intercourse with each other, to circulate books 
throughout the United States, and to encourage 
and support the arts of printing and paper-mak 
ing. 

A public library is established at New York, 
which consists of about 10,000 volumes, many 
of them rare and valuable books. The build 
ing which contains them is situated in Nassau 
street, and the trustees are incorporated by an act 
of the legislature. There are also three or four 
public reading-rooms, and circulating libraries, 
which are supported by some of the principal 
booksellers, from the annual subscriptions of the 
inhabitfints. There is a museum of natural curiosi 
ties in New York, but it contains nothing worthy 
of particular notice. 

CHAP. 11. 

IT does not appear that the malignant or yellow 
fever made very great ravages among the inha 
bitants in 1805 j the last time of its appearance in] 



NEW YORK. 



[New York ; for the deaths very little exceeded the 
preceding and subsequent years. 

In J804 the deaths were 2064 

1805 2352 

J806 2252 

Of the above number, 51 were suicides ; and ac 
cording to the statement of Dr. Mitchill, upwards 
of one-third of the deaths are occasioned by con 
sumption and debility. To the influence of mois 
ture and the sudden changes of the weather, has 
been attributed the prevalence of nervous disorders 
and debility, among a great number of the inhabi 
tants of the United States. Much may, no doubt, be 
ascribed to those causes ; but it is thought the mode 
of living has a more immediate effect upon the hu 
man frame than even the climate of the country. 
The higher and middling classes of the Americans 
who reside chiefly in the great towns, or their 
neighbourhood, live, generally speaking, in a more 
luxurious manner than the same description of 
people in England. Not that their tables are more 
sumptuously furnished on particular occasions, 
than ours ; but that their ordinary meals consist of 
a greater variety of articles, many of which, from 
too frequent use, may perhaps become pernicious 
to the constitution. The great consumption of 
green tea, which we reckon the most unwholsome, 
in consequence (as it is said) of its being dried upon 
copper, is most likely very injurious to the consti 
tution. The Americans use scarcely any other 
than this tea, while in England, the souchong, and 
other black teas, are most in request. The con 
stant use of segars by the young men, even from an 
early age, may also tend to impair the constitution, 
and create a stimulus beyond that which nature re 
quires, or is capable of supporting. Their dread 
of the yellow fever has induced a more frequent use 
of tobacco of late years ; but it is now grown into a 
habit that will not be readily parted with. The 
other classes of the community who reside in the 
interior, and back parts of the country, are often 
obliged to live upon salt provisions the greatest 
part of the year, and sometimes on very scanty 
fare ; besides which, they generally dwell in mise 
rable log huts, incapable of defending them effec 
tually from the severity of the weather. Those 
who have the means of living better are great 
eaters of animal food, which is introduced at every 
rr.eal, together with a variety of hot cakes, and a 
profusion of butter : all which may more or less 
tend to the introduction of bilious disorders, and 
perhaps lay the foundation of those diseases which 
prove fatal in hot climates. The effects of a 
luxurious or meagre diet are equally injurious to 
the constitution, and together with the sudden and 



violent changes of the climate, may create a series 
of nervous complaints, consumption, and debility, 
which in the states bordering on the Atlantic, carry 
off at least one third of the inhabitants in the prime 
of life. 

The malignant or yellow fever generally com 
mences in the confined parts of the town, near the 
water side, in the month of August or September. 
It is commonly supposed to have been introduced 
by the French refugees from St. Domingo during 
the French revolution ; though some are of opinion 
that it originated in the States ; and many physi 
cians were puzzling their brains about its origin, 
at a time when they ought to have been devising 
means to stop its ravages. As soon as this dread 
ful scourge makes its appearance in New York, 
the inhabitants shut up their shops, and fly from 
their houses into the country. Those who cannot 
go far, on account of business, remove to Green 
wich, a small village situate on the border of the 
Hudson river, about two or three miles from town. 
Here the merchants and others have their offices, 
and carry on their concerns with little danger from 
the fever, which does not seem to be contagious 
beyond a certain distance. The banks and other 
public offices also remove their business to this 
place : and markets are regularly established for 
the supply of the inhabitants. Very few are left in 
the confined parts of the town except the poorer 
classes and the Negroes. The latter not being 
affected by the fever, are of great service at that 
dreadful crisis ; and are the only persons who can 
be found to administer the hazardous duties of at 
tending upon the sick, and bury ing the dead. Up 
wards of 26,000 people removed from the interior 
parts of the city, and from the streets near the 
water side, in 1805. Since then, the town has 
happily been free from that dreadful scourge ; 
and from the salutary regulations which have since 
been adopted, it is to be hoped, that it will never 
make its appearance again. The finest cities in 
America were no doubt preserved from depopu 
lation, during the prevalence of the fever, by the 
timely retreat of the inhabitants into the country. 
It were to be wished that the same practice was 
permitted in Spain, and other parts of the conti 
nent, which are sometimes visited by pestilential 
fevers, instead of surrounding the towns by a 
cordon of troops, and cutting off all communica 
tion between the unfortunate inhabitants and the 
country. 

The following census of the population of 
New York was taken in 1807, and laid before 
the mayor, aldermen, and commonalty of the city 
in 1808.] 



NEW YORK. 



[CENSUS FOR 1807. 



Census of the Electors and total Population of the City of New York. 
















I 


Wards. 


Free 
Persons. 


Slaves. 


Total 
Inhabitants. 


Electors posses 
sed of Free 
holds of the Va 
lue of 100/. and 


Ditto possessed of 
Freeholds of 200/. 
and under 1001. 


sed of Freeholds, 
but who rent Te 
nements of the 
vearly Value of 


Ditto who were 
Frtenienon ilie 
14th October, 
1775. 


Total. 
Electors. 










upwards. 




40*. 






First 


7,584 


370 


7,954 


374 


. 


707 


5 


1,086 


Second 


7,424 


127 


7,551 


355 





687 





1,042 


Third 


7,303 


406 


7,709 


337 


1 


779 


1 


1,118 


Fourth 


9,089 


147 


9,236 


351 





976 


4 


1,331 


Fifth 


12,603 


136 


12,739 


462 


4 


1,429 


6 


1,901 


Sixth 


9,749 


112 


9,861 


258 





1,163 


6 


1,427 


Seventh 


19,363 


124 


19,487 


413 


5 


2,718 


4 


3,140 


Eighth 


5,959 


108 


6,067 


302 


6 


715 





1,023 


Ninth 


2,680 


246 


2,926 


158 


4 


174 


3 


339 


Total J8 1,754 


1776 


83,530 


3,010 


20 


9,348 


29 


12,407 



Of the preceding number of inhabitants 42,881 
are females, and 40,649 are males : making a 
total of 83,530. In 1805 the population of New 
York was 75,770, thus in the course of one year 
and ten months there has been an increase of inha 
bitants to the amount of 7760 ; and within the 
same period, the number of slaves has decreased 
272. The following table exhibits the population 
of this city at different periods from its earliest 
settlement. 

In the year 1697 there were 4,302 inhabitants. 

1756 . . . 15,000 

1771 . . . 21,863 

1786 . . . 23,614 

1791 . . . 33,131 

1801 . . . 60,489 

1805 . . . 75,770 

1807 . . . 83,530 

Hence it appears that the population of New 
York has, in a period of 20 years from 1786 to 
1805, more than tripled itself ; and should the po 
pulation continue to increase at the rate of five 
per cent, per annum, it will, in 1855, amount to 
705,650, a population nearly equal to that of Paris. 
At this day it is equal to the whole number -of in 
habitants in the state of New York fifty years ago. 
There are about 4000 Negroes and people of 
colour in New York, 1700 of whom are slaves. 
These people are mostly of (lie Methodist persua 
sion, arid have a chapel or two of their own with 
preachers of their colour; though some attend 
other places of worship according to their inclina 



tion. All religious sects in the United States are 
upon an equal footing, no one has any established 
prerogative above another ; but in any place, on 
particular occasions, where precedence is given to 
one over another, the Episcopal church, or that 
sect which is most numerous, generally takes the 
lead. 

If any estimate can be formed of the salubrity 
of the climate, and the healthiness of the inhabi 
tants of a town, by the number of deaths, Lon 
don must be reckoned to have the advantage of 
New York in those respects. The amount of 
deaths in the former city is about a fiftieth part 
of its population, while in New York it is at least 
one thirtieth ; the number of deaths ranging be 
tween 2500 and 3000 per annum . We are, however, 
more inclined to attribute this great mortality to 
improper diet and mode of living, than to the in 
salubrity of the climate. The church-yards and 
vaults are also situate in the heart of the town, and 
crowded with the dead. If they are not prejudi 
cial to the health of the people, they are, at least, 
very unsightly exhibitions. One would think 
there was a scarcity of land in America, by seeing 
such large pieces of ground in one of the finest 
streets of New York occupied by the dead. But 
even if no noxious effluvia were to arise (and 
we rather suspect there must in the months of July, 
August, and September), still the continual view 
of such a crowd of white and brown tomb-stones 
and monuments as is exhibited in the Broadway, 
must, at the sickly season of the year, tend veryj. 



NEW YORK. 



415 



[much to depress the spirits, which should rather 
be cheered and enlivened ; for at that period much 
is effected by the force of imagination. There is 
a large burying ground a short distance out of 
town ; but the cemeteries in the city are still used 
at certain periods of the year. 

They bury their dead within 21 hours; a cus 
tom probably induced by the heat of the climate 
during the summer months ; but we see no reason 
why it should be extended to the winter months, 
which are cold enough &amp;lt;o allow of the dead being 
kept for three or four days, if nothing else pre 
vents it. 

Funerals at New York, as well as in almost 
every other part of the United States, are attended 
by a numerous assemblage of the friends and ac 
quaintances of the deceased, who are invited, by 
advertisements in the newspapers, to attend their 
departed friend to the grave ; it is common to see 
upwards of 500 people attending on such occa 
sions, and the larger the number the more the de 
ceased is supposed to be respected and valued. 
AVe cannot help thinking, however, that these nu 
merous meetings savour somewhat of ostentation, 
though certainly there is no parade of hearses, 
nodding plumes, and mourning coaches. The 
people attend, for the most part, in their ordinary 
dress, except those who are nearly related, or par 
ticularly intimate with the deceased. The clergy 
man, physician, and chief mourners, wear white 
scarfs, which it is also the custom to wear on the fol 
lowing Sunday. The deceased is interred with or 
without prayers, according to the faith he pro 
fessed. 

The society of New York consists of three dis 
tinct classes. The first is composed of the con 
stituted authorities and government officers ; di 
vines, lawyers, and physicians of eminence ; ilie 
principal merchants, and people of independent 
property. The second comprises the small mer 
chants, retail dealers, clerks, subordinate officers 
of the government, and members of the three pro 
fessions. The third consists of the inferior orders 
of the people. The first of these associate toge 
ther in a style of elegance and splendour little infe 
rior to Europeans. Their houses are furnished 
with every thing that is useful, agreeable, or or 
namental ; and many of them are fitted up in the 
tasteful magnificence of modern style. The dress 
of the gentlemen is plain, elegant, and fashion 
able ; and corresponds in every respect with the 
English costume. The ladies in general seem 
more partial to the light, various, and dashing 
drapery of the Parisian belles, than to the elegant 
and becoming attire of our London beauties, who 



improve upon the French fashions. But there are 
many who prefer the English costume, or at least 
a medium between that and the French. 

The young ladies of New York are in general 
handsome, and almost universally fine, genteel 
figures. Fair complexions, regular features, and 
fine forms, seem lo be the prevailing characteris 
tics of the American fair sex. They do not, how 
ever, enjoy their beauty for so long a period as Eng 
lish women, neither do they possess the blooming 
countenance and rosy tinge of health so predomi 
nant among English women. Their climate is, 
however, not so favourable to beauty as that of 
England, in consequence of the excessive heat, 
and violent changes of the weather peculiar to 
America. 

Most travellers who have visited America have 
charged the ladies of the United States, univer 
sally, with having bad teeth. This accusation 
is certainly very erroneous, when applied to the 
whole of the fair sex, and to them alone. That 
the inhabitants of the state are often subject to a 
premature loss of teeth, is allowed by themselves, 
and the cause has even been discussed in the pa 
pers read before the American philosophical so 
ciety ; but it does not particularly attach to the 
females, who are, in truth, much more exempt 
from that misfortune than the men. 

Much has also been said of the deficiency of the 
polite and liberal accomplishments among both 
sexes in the United States. Vv hatever truth there 
may have formerly been in this statement, we do 
not think there is any foundation for it at present, 
at least in New York, where there appears to be a 
great thirst after knowledge. The riches that 
have flowed into that city, for the last 20 years, 
have brought with them a taste for the refinements 
of polished society ; and though the inhabitants 
cannot yet boast of having reached the standard of 
European perfection, they are not wanting in the 
solid and rational parts of education; nor in many 
of those accomplishments which ornament and 
embellish private life. It has become the fashion 
in New York to attend lectures on moral philoso 
phy, chemistry, mineralogy, botany, mechanics, 
&amp;c. and the ladies in particular have made consi 
derable progress in those studies. Many young 
men who were so enveloped in business as to ne 
glect or disdain the pursuit of such liberal and po 
lite acquirements, have been often laughed from 
the counting-house to the lecture-room by their 
more accomplished female companions. The de 
sire for instruction and information, indeed, is not 
confined to the youthful part of the community ; 
many married ladies and their families may be] 



416 



NEW YORK. 



[seen at philosophical and chemical lectures, and 
the spirit of inquiry is becoming more general 
among the gentlemen. The majority of the mer 
chants, however, still continue more partial to the 
rule of three, than a dissertation upon oxygen or 
metaphysics. Most of them have acquired large 
fortunes by their regular and plodding habits of 
business, and loath to part with ;uiy portion of 
it, at their time of life, in the purchase of know 
ledge, or the encouragement of the arts and 
sciences. Some, it must be allowed, are excep 
tions; and others, if they will not partake of in 
struction themselves, arc not sparing of their mo 
ney in imparting it to their children. The im 
mense property which has been introduced into 
the country by commerce, has hardly had time (o 
circulate and diffuse itself through the community. 
It is at present too much in the hands of a few in 
dividuals, to enable men to devote the whole of 
their lives to the study of the arts and sciences. 
Farmers, merchants, physicians, lawyers, and di 
vines, are all that America can produce for many 
years to come ; and if authors, artists, or philoso 
phers, make their appearance at any time, they 
must, as they have hitherto done, spring from one 
of the above professions. 

Colleges and schools are multiplying very ra 
pidly all over the United States ; but education is 
in many places still defective, in consequence of 
the want of proper encouragement and better 
teachers. A grammar-school has recently been 
instituted at New York, for the instruction of 
youth, upon a similar plan to the great public 
schools in England. This seminary, says an Ame 
rican writer, is founded on the principle of train 
ing the students to become sound and accurate 
classical scholars, according to the old plan of ac 
quiring the elements of ancient learning by gram 
mar; discarding the learning by rote. The suc 
cess of this institution will compel the colleges to 
adopt a less superficial and defective plan of in 
struction ; and it will follow that when once libe 
ral and sound education is permanently introduced, 
literature will revive; the trading spirit will be 
checked or modified ; literary rc-.vards and ho 
nours will flow rapidly, and the public will even 
tually become the promoters of genius and learn 
ing, by creating an extensive demand for books. 

A taste for reading has of late diffused itself 
throughout the country, particularly in the great 
towns ; and several young ladies have displayed 
their abilities in writing. Some of their novels and 
fugitive pieces of poetry and prose are written with 
taste and judgment. Two or three at New York 
have particularly distinguished themselves. It 



seems, indeed, that the fair sex of America have 
within these few years been desirous of imitating 
the example of the English and French ladies, 
who have contributed so much to extend the plea 
sures of rational conversation and intellectual en 
joyment. They have cast away the frivolous and 
gossiping tittle tattle, which before occupied so 
much of their attention; and assumed the more 
dignified and instructive discourse upon arts, 
sciences, literature, and moral philosophy. 

Many of the young men, too, whose rninds have 
not been wholly absorbed by pounds, shillings, 
and pence, have shewn that they possess literary 
qualifications and talents, that would, if their time 
and fortune permitted, rank them among some of 
the distinguished authors of Europe. The most 
prominent of their late productions is the Salma 
gundi, published in monthly essays at New York. 
This little work has been deservedly a great fa 
vourite with the public, and bids fair to be handed 
down with honour to posterity. It possesses more 
of the broad humour of Rabelais and Swift, than 
the elegant morality of Addison and Steele, and 
therefore less likely to become a classical work ; 
but as a correct picture of the people of New 
York, and other parts of the country, though 
somewhat heightened by caricature, and as a hu 
morous representation of their manners, habits, 
and customs, it will always be read with interest 
by a native of the United States. 

A publication called the Echo is a smart pro 
duction of detached poetry, commenced for the 
purpose of satirizing the vices and follies of the 
political intriguers of the day, who broached their 
revolutionary dogmas through the medium of the 
public prints. Several other publications of merit 
have originated in America, and are well known 
in England. Mr. Barlow s Columbiad has lately 
made its appearance in a very splendid form. It 
is an enlargement of his vision of Columbus. 

Dancing is an amusement that the New York 
ladies are passionately fond of, and they are said 
to excel those of every other city in the union. 
Many of the young ladies are well accomplished 
in music and drawing, and practise them with 
considerable success ; but they do not excel in 
those acquirements as they do in dancing. Among 
the young men those accomplishments arc but little 
cultivated. Billiards and smoking seem to be their 
favourite amusement. A segar is in their mouth 
from morning to night, when in the house, and 
not unfrequently when walking the street. A box 
full is constantly carried in the coat pocket, and 
handed occasionally to a friend, with a degree of 
interesting familiarity and nonchalance. Billiards] 



NEW YORK 



417 



[are played with two red balls. This is called the 
American game, and differs in no other respect 
from the mode of playing in England. New 
York contains several excellent tables. 

The style of living in New York is fashionable 
and splendid, many of the principal merchants 
and people of property have elegant equipages, 
and those who have none of their own, may be ac 
commodated with handsome carriages and horses 
at the livery stables ; for there arc no coach stands. 
The winter is passed in a round of entertain 
ments and amusements ; at the theatre, public as 
semblies, philosophical and experimental lectures, 
concerts, balls, tea and card parties, cariole ex 
cursions out of town, &amp;c. The American cariole, 
or sleigh, is much larger than that of Canada, 
and will hold several people. It is fixed upon 
high runners, and drawn by two horses in the cur 
ricle style. Parties to dinner and dances arc fre 
quently made in the winter season when the snow 
is on the ground. They proceed in carioles a few 
miles out of town to some hotel or tavern, where 
the entertainment is kept up to a late hour, and 
the parties return home by torch light. 

Marriages are conducted in the most splendid 
style, and form an important part of the winter s 
entertainments. For some years it was the fashion 
to keep them only among a select circle of friends ; 
but of late the opulent parents of the new-married 
lady have thrown open their doors, and invited 
the town to partake of their felicity. The young 
couple, attended by their nearest connections and 
friends, are married at home in a magnificent style, 
and if the parties are Episcopalians, the bishop 
of New York is always procured, if possible ; as 
his presence gives a greater zest to the nuptials. 
For three days after the marriage ceremony, the 
new-married couple see company in great state, 
and every genteel person who can procure an in 
troduction may pay his respects to the bride and 
bridegroom. It is a sort of levee ; and the visitors, 
after their introduction, partake of a cup of coffee 
or other refreshment, and walk away. Sometimes 
the night concludes with a concert and ball, or 
cards, among those friends and acquaintance who 
are invited to remain. 

Several young ladies in New York have for 
tunes of 100 or 150,000 dollars ; and often bestow 
their hand upon a favourite youth, who has every 
thing to recommend him but money. Unhappy 
marriages are by no means frequent, and parents 
are not apt to force the inclinations of their chil 
dren from avaricious motives. Summer affords 
the inhabitants the diversions of hunting, shoot- 
YOL. in. 



ing, fishing, and horse-racing ; excursions upon the 
water to the island in the bay, and to Sandy hook, 
and a variety of beautiful tours within 20 miles of 
the city. Among the most distinguished are those 
of New Utrecht, Rockaway, Islip, the Passaick 
falls, and Kingsbridgc. A place called Ballston, 
within 200 miles of New York, in the interior oif 
the state, contains some mineral springs ; and of 
late years has become a fashionable place of resort 
for invalids. Like most places of that kind in 
England, it is visited by the gentry, who go there 
more for amusement and fashion than to drink the 
waters. Ballston possesses but few natural attrac 
tions, except its mineral springs. 

The inhabitants of New York are not remark 
able for early rising, and little business seems to 
be done before nine or ten o clock. Most of the 
merchants and people in business dine about two 
o clock, others, who are less engaged, about three : 
but four o clock is usually the fashionable hour 
for dining. The gentlemen are partial to the bot 
tle, but not to excess ; and at private dinner parties 
they seldom sit more than two hours drinking wine. 

In consequence of there being no established 
form of worship, the clergy are accustomed only 
to recommend to the people the religious observance 
of certain festivals. The following is one of their 
resolutions for Christmas day, 1807. 

u In common council, December 21, 1807. 
The following communication having been received 
from the reverend clergy of this city : 

" A number of the clergy, of different denomi 
nations, of this city, at a meeting held on Wed 
nesday the 16th inst. having taken into considera 
tion the merciful dispensations of Divine Provi 
dence towards this city, during the last season, and 
also the present aspect of public affairs : 

a Resolved, That it is proper to take public 
and solemn notice of the divine goodness, and as 
a people, to implore the continued protection, and 
those temporal and spiritual blessings, which arc 
so essential to our welfare. 

" Resolved, That it be recommended to the se 
veral congregations under our pastoral care, to set 
apart Friday the 25th instant, as a day of solemn 
thanksgiving and prayer ; and that abstaining from 
all kinds of servile labour and recreations on that 
day, they come together to acknowledge the 
mercy of God, in again exempting us from the 
scourge of pestilence, to praise him for the mul 
tiplied favours of his gracious providence, to be 
seech him to preserve us in peace, and to conti 
nue and extend our national prosperity ; and abov^ 
all, to pray for the sanctifying influences of the! 
3 H 



418 



N E W 



[Holy Spirit on our churches, and that we may 
be favoured with all spiritual and heavenly bles 
sings in Christ Jesus. 

" Signed by order of the meeting, 

" JOHN RODGERS, Chairman." 
t( Resolved, That the board unite in the recom- 
commendation of the reverend clergy of this city, 
upon the above occasion, and accordingly recom 
mend, that Friday the 25th day of December be 
observed and set apart as a day of public and 
special thansgiving and prayer to Almighty God, 
for his benevolent dispensations of mercy to this 
city : and we accordingly recommend to our fel 
low-citizens, that they carefully abstain from nil 
recreations and secular employments on that day. 
" By the common council, 

" JOHN PINTARD, Clerk. 
" New York, Dec. 22, 1807." 
The shops are accordingly shut, the people at 
tend at public worship, and the day is religiously 
and strictly observed. It is not, however, to be 
understood, that roast beef and plum-pudding, 
turkey and chine, mince pies, &amp;c. smoke on the 
American tables as they do in England on that fes 
tival ; though, perhaps, those Americans who yet 
retain a spice of the English character about 
them, may continue the old practice of their an 
cestors. 

New year s day is the most important of the 
whole year. All (he complimentary visits, fun, 
and merriment of the season seem to be reserved 
for this day ; though much is now worn away by 
the innovations of fashion. Many of the shops 
are shut up ; and the Presbyterians and a few 
other religious dissenters, attend public worship. 
The mayor of the city, and others of the consti 
tuted authorities, advertise, two or three days be 
fore, that they will reciprocate the compliments 
of the season, with the inhabitants at their house 
on new year s day. 

The bakers on this day distribute to their cus 
tomers small cakes made in a variety of shapes and 
figures ; arid the newspaper editors greet their 
readers with a poetical retrospect of the events of 
the old year : it accords with their political prin 
ciples, and is generally a severe party philippic. 
New York, like the other large cities of the union, 
is a prey to the viole:&amp;lt;t spirit of the two parties, 
who arc known under the titles of federalists and 
democrats. The newspapers are almost equally 
divided between the two, to whose views they are 
of course subservient, and have the effect of keep 
ing up a continual warfare, in which they belabour 
each other, their rulers, and the English and 



N E W 

French nations, without mercy. " Every day, * 
as Mustapha Rubadub observes in Salmagundi, 
(the work to which we have before alluded) " have 
these slang-whangers made furious attacks on each 
other, and upon their respective adherents, dis 
charging their heavy artillery, consisting of large 
sheets, loaded with scoundrel ! villain ! liar ! ras 
cal ! numskull ! nincompoop! dunder-head ! wise 
acre ! blockhead ! jackass ! and 1 do swear by my 
beard, though I know thou wilt scarcely credit 
rne, that in some of these skirmishes the grand ba 
shaw himself has been wofiilly pelted ! yea, 
most ignominiously pelted ! and yet have these 
talking desperadoes escaped without the bati- 
nado !" 

The drinking of toasts at public dinners is a 
very common method of venting party spleen in 
America, and of drinking destruction to their ene 
mies. The newspapers publish long lists of these 
toasts the next day, as so many poofs of patriot 
ism and virtue; and take a pride in shewing how 
brilliantly their partisans can blackguard public 
characters in their cups.J 

[NEW YORK, an Indian town of the Creek na 
tion ; situated on Tallapoose river, in Georgia; 
and so named by Col. Ray, a New York British 
loyalist.] 

[NEW YORK Island, on which the city of that 
name stands, is about 15 miles long, and does not 
extend two in any part in breadth. It is joined to 
the mainland by a bridge called King s bridge, 15 
miles n. of New York city.] 

[NEWARK, a township in Essex county, in 
Vermont.] 

[NEWARK Bay, in New Jersey, is formed by 
the confluence of Passaick and Hackensack rivers 
from the n. and is separated from that part of 
North river opposite to New York city, by Bergen 
neck on the e. which neck, also, with Staten island 
on the s. of it, form a narrow channel from the 
bay to North river e. Newark bay also commu 
nicates with Rariton bay, at the mouth of Rariton 
river, by a channel in a x. by w. direction along 
the w. side of Staten island. The water passage 
from New York to Elizabeth Town point, 15 miles, 
is through this bay.] 

[NEWARK, a post-town of New Jersey, and 
capital of Essex county, is pleasantly situated at a 
small distance w. of Passaick river, near its mouth 
in Newark bay, and nine miles w. of New York 
city. It is a handsome and flourishing town, cele 
brated for the excellence of its cider, and is the 
seat of the largest shoe manufacture in the state: 
the average number made daily throughout the] 



NEW 

year, is estimated at about 200 pairs. The town 
is of much the same size as Elizabeth town, and is 
six miles n. e. of it. There is a Presbyterian 
church of stone, the largest and jnost elegant build 
ing of the kind in the state. Besides these is an 
Episcopal church, a court-house, and gaol. The 
academy which was established here in June 1792, 
promises to be a useful institution. In Newark 
and in Orange, which joins it on the n.w. there 
are nine tanneries, and valuable quarries of stone 
for building. The quarries in Newark would 
rent, it is said, for 1000/. a year, and the number 
of workmen limited. This town was originally 
settled by emigrants from Branford, Connecticut, 
as long ago as 1662.] 

[NEWARK, a village in Newcastle county, De 
laware; situated between Christiana and White 
Clay creeks, nine miles w. of New-Castle, and 10 
5. w. of Wilmington.] 

[NEWARK, a town lately laid out by the British 
in Upper Canada, on the river which connects 
lake Erie and Ontario, directly opposite Niagara 
town and fort.] 

[NEWBERN, one of the e. maritime districts 
of N. Carolina ; bounded e. and s. e. by the At 
lantic, s. w. by Wilmington, w. by Fayette, n. w. 
by Hillsborough, n. by Halifax, and n.e. by 
Edenton district. It comprehends the counties of 
Carteret, Jones, Craven, Beaufort, Hyde, Pitt, 
Wayne, Glasgow, Lcnoir, and Johnston ; and con 
tains 55,540 inhabitants, including 15,900 slaves.] 

[NEWBERN, the capital of the above district, is 
a post-town and port of entry ; situated in Craven 
county, on a flat, sandy point of land, formed by 
the confluence of the rivers Neus on the n. and 
Trent on the s. Opposite to the town, the Neus 
is about a mile and a half, and the Trent three 
quarters of a mile wide. Newbern is the largest 
town in the state, contains about 400 houses, all 
built of wood except (he palace, the church, the 
gaol, and two dwelling-houses, which are of brick. 
The palace was erected by the province before the 
revolution, and was formerly tbe residence of the 
governors. It is large and elegant, two stories 
high, with two wings for offices, a little advanced 
in front towards the town ; these wings are con 
nected with the principal building by a circular 
arcade. It is much out of repair ; and the only 
use to which this once handsome and well fur 
nished building is now applied, is. for schools. 
One of the halls is used for a school, and another 
for a dancing room. The arms of the king of 
Great Britain still appear in a pediment in front 
of the building. The Episcopalian church is a 
small brick building with a bell. It is the only 



NEW 



419 



house for public worship in tTie place. The court 
house is raised on brick arches, so as to render the 
lower part a convenient market-place ; but the 
principal marketing is done with the people in 
their canoes and boats at the river side. In Sep 
tember 1791, near one third of this town was con 
sumed by fire. It carries on a considerable trade 
to the W. Indies and the different states, in tar, 
pitch, turpentine, lumber, corn, &amp;c. The ex 
ports in 1794 amounted to 69,615 dollars. It is 
77 miles n. e. from Raleigh, 54 s. by w. of Eden- 
ton, 78 n. e. by n. of Wilmington, 120 s. of 
Petersburg!! in Virginia, and 305 s. s. w. of Phila 
delphia. l,at. 35 17 30" n. Long. 77 18 aU 

[NEWBURGH, a township in Ulster county, 
New York ; bounded e. by Hudson s river, and 
s. by New Windsor, and contains 2365 inhabitants; 
of whom 373 are electors, and 57 slaves. The 
compact part of the town is neatly built, and plea 
santly situated on the w. bank of the Hudson, 50 
miles n. of New York, opposite Fish Kill landing, 
five miles from Fish Kill, 19 from Goshen, and 
13 s. from Poughkeepsie. It consists of between. 
50 and 60 houses and a Presbyterian church, si 
tuated on a gentle ascent from the river. The 
country n. is well cultivated, and affords a rich 
prospect. Vessels of considerable burden may 
load and unload at the wharfs, and a number of 
vessels are built annually at this busy and thriving 
place.] 

[NEWBURY, a county of Ninety-six dis 
trict, S. Carolina, which contains 9342 inhabitants,, 
of whom 1 144 are slaves. Newbury court-house 
is 37 miles from Columbia, and 23 from Luurens 
court-house.] 

[NEWBURY, a township in York county, Penn 
sylvania.] 

[NEWBURY, the capital of Orange county, Ver 
mont, pleasantly situated on the w. side of Con 
necticut river, opposite to Haverhill, in Grafton 
county, Ne\v Hampshire, and from which it is five 
miles distant. It contains about 50 houses, a gaol, 
a court-house, and a handsome church for Con 
gregational ists with a steeple, which was the first 
erected in Vermont, The court-house stands on 
an eminence, and commands a pleasing prospect 
of what is called the Great Oxbow of Connecticut 
river, where are the rich intervale lands called the 
Little Coos. Here a remarkable spring was dis 
covered, about 20 years since, which dries up once 
in two or three years. It has a strong smell of 
sulphur, and throws up continually a peculiar 
kind of white sand ; and a thick yellow scum rises 
upon the water when settled. This is the more- 
noticeable as the water of the ponds and rivers in; 
3 n 2 



420 



N E W 



NEW 



Vermont is remarkably clear and transparent. Jt 
is 87 miles n. e. of Bennington, and 287 n.e. by n. 
of Philadelphia. Lat. 44 5 . Long. 72 2 
w. Number of inhabitants 873.] 

[NEW BURY, a township in Essex county, Mas 
sachusetts, incorporated in 1635; situated on the 
s. bank of Merrimack river, and contains 3972 in 
habitants. It formerly included Newbury port, 
and with Merrimack river encircles it. It is di 
vided into five "parishes, besides a society of 
Friends or Quakers. Dummer academy, in this 
township, is in a flourishing state ; it was founded 
by Lieutenant-governor Dummer in 1756, opened 
in 1763, and incorporated in 1782. The inhabi 
tants are principally employed in husbandry. 
The land, particularly in that part of the town 
which lies on Merrimack river, and is here called 
Newbury Newton, is of a superior quality, under 
the best cultivation, and is said by travellers to be 
little inferior to the most improved parts of Great 
Britain. Some of the high lands afford a very ex 
tensive and variegated view of the surrounding 
country, the rivers, the bay, and the sea-coast, 
from cape Ann to York in the district of Maine. 
Some few vessels are here owned, and employed in 
the fishery, part of which are fitted out from Parker 
river. It rises in Rowley, and after a course of a 
few miles, passes into the sound which separates 
Plumb island from the mainland. It is navigable 
about two miles from its mouth. A woollen ma 
nufactory has been established on an extensive 
scale in Byfield parish, and promises to succeed. 
This township is connected with Salisbury by 
Essex Merrimack bridge, about two miles above 
Newbury port, built in 1792. At the place where 
the bridge is erected, an island divides the river 
into two branches : an arch of 160 feet diameter, 
40 feet above the level of high water, connects this 
island with the main on the opposite side. The 
whole length of the bridge is 1030 feet; its breadth 
34; its contents upwards of 6000 tons of timber. 
The two large arches were executed from a model 
invented by Mr. Timothy Palmer, an ingenious 
house- wright in Newbury port. The whole is 
executed in a style for exceeding any thing of the 
kind hitherto essayed in this country, and appears 
to unite elegance, strength, and firmness. The 
day before the bridge was opened for the inspec 
tion of the public, a ship of 350 tons passed under 
the great arch. There is a commodious house of 
entertainment at the bridge, which is the resort of 
parties of pleasure, both in summer and winter.] 

[NEWBUIIY Port, a port of entry and post-town 
in Essex county, Massachusetts ; pleasantly situ 
ated on the s. side of Merrimack river, about three 



miles from the sea. In a commercial view it is 
next in rank to Salem ; but it suffered considerably 
of late, by a fire which broke out on the evening 
of the 31st of May 1811, and which consumed 
200 houses, stores, &amp;c. the loss being stated at 
2,000,000 of dollars. It contains 4837 inhabi 
tants, although it is, perhaps, the smallest town 
ship in the state, its contents not exceeding 640 
acres. It was taken from Newbury, and incorpo 
rated in 1764. The churches, six in number, are 
ornamented with steeples ; the other public build 
ings are the court-house, gaol, a bank, and four 
public school-houses. To the honour of this town, 
there are in it 10 public schools, and three print 
ing offices. Many of the dwelling houses are ele 
gant. .Before the war there were many ships built 
here ; but some years after the revolution the busi 
ness was on the decline : it now begins to revive. 
The Boston and Hancock continental frigates 
were built here, and many privateers during the 
war. The harbour is safe and capacious, but dif 
ficult to enter. See MERRIMACK River. The 
marine society of this town, and other gentlemen 
in it, have humanely erected several small houses 
on the shore of Plumb island, furnished with fuel 
and other conveniences, for the relief of ship 
wrecked mariners. Large quantities of rum are 
distilled in Newbury port, there is also a brewery; 
and a considerable trade is carried on with the 
W. Indies and the s. states. Some vessels are 
employed in the freighting business, and a few in 
the fishery. In November 1790, there were owned 
in this port, six ships, 45 brigantines, 39 schooners, 
and 28 sloops ; making in all 11,870 tons. The 
exports for a year, ending September 30, 1794, 
amounted to 363,380 dollars. A machine for cut 
ting nails has been lately invented by Mr. Jacob 
Perkins of this town, a gentleman of great mecha 
nical genius, which will turn out, if necessary, 
200,000 nails in a day. Newbury port is 32 miles 
n. n. e. of Boston, 16 s. by w. of Portsmouth, nine 
n. of Ipswich, and 264 n. e. of Philadelphia. The 
harbour has 10 fathoms water : high water at full 
and change 15 minutes after 11 o clock. The 
light-house on Plumb island lies in 1 at. 42 47 n. 
and long. 70 47 re).] 

[NEWENHAM, Cape, is the n. point of Bris 
tol bay, on the n.w. coast of N.America. All 
along the coast the flood tide sets strongly to the 
n. w. and it is high water about noon on full and 
change days. Lat. 58 42 n. Long. 162 24 ro.l 

NEWFOUNDLAND, a large island of the 
N. sea, in N. America; discovered by John Gabot 
in 1494, who took possession of it for the English, 
and to these it at present belongs. Jt is of a trian- 



NEWFOUNDLAND. 



pillar figure, and is 930 miles in circumference. 
On the w. it is separated from the land and country 
of Labrador or New Britain by the straits of Belle- 
isle; surrounded on the w. by the gulf of S. Law 
rence, and s. and e. by the Atlantic ocean. The 
most s. part of the island is cape Race, which is 
in lat. 46 45 , the most w. is cape Anguille in 
47 54 , and its most w. point is in lat. 51 40 . 
This island is full of mountains covered with firs; 
so that it is only passable in such parts as where 
the inhabitants have cut paths through the middle 
of its woods. The trees seldom exceed 18 or 
feet in height, excepting those which grow in the 
valleys, being sheltered from the winds ; and here 
they will rise to 40 feet. 

The cold is excessive in the winter, and the 
frosts, which are very severe, begin about Novem 
ber, when after a short time all the ports and bays 
become frozen. With these the whole of the 
island is surrounded, and they are very large and 
\vcll sheltered by the mountains, so that vessels 
may lie in them in perfect security. Some are a 
league and an half or two leagues deep, and nearly 
half a league wide ; and into them flow several 
rivers and streams of sweet water which descend 
from the mountains ; many arc so close together as 
to be separated merely by a point of land ; there 
are very few that are two leagues apart from each 
other, and thus is the whole coast a continued line 
of ports, although in the very principal only are 
there any settlements or towns, and this too where 
the natural advantages of the country have induced 
the inhabitants to form establishments. 

The population, with respect to the extent of 
coast, is very small. The cod-fishery is here 
the only occupation ; and there are large store 
houses where they preserve their tackle and ac 
coutrements against the season when the fisheries 
commence, and which they use for laying up their 
merchandize, which they export, either on their 
account, or by foreign vessels, taking in exchange 
or payment such goods as these vessels, which are 
very numerous, may bring. In every settlement 
there is a battery, for its defence in time of war, 
the coast being much frequented by pirates. 

Thiscountry was first peopled by a race of Indian 
savages, who retired to the continent, sometimes 
however visiting their old .abodes. They lived 
by hunting, there being foxes, bears, and other 
quadrupeds here, the same as iiv Canada, but these 
animals, being in great request on account of their 
skins, are not so numerous as they were. In spite 
of the severity of the climate the inhabitants are not 
without flocks, but the difliculty of preserving them 
through ihe winter is great. In the gardens no 



thing is produced but, a few pot-herbs, all other 
necessary fruits being brought from (he other co 
lonies of Europe. Although cod-fish is caught 
along ihe whole coast of Newfoundland, all parts 
are not equally abundant in these fish : they lie 
mostly in sandy bottoms, are found less in sea-weedy 
places, and never in rocky parts ; the best deptli 
for them is a little above 30 fathoms. As soon as 
a vessel anchors here, the crew form cabins on the 
shore, which soon have the appearance of a small 
village ; and at the water s edge they build a kind 
of wharf, where arrive the innumerable fishing- 
boats ; the above habitations being allowed to re 
main for the next season, the lawful property of the 
first coiner. With regard to the above fishery, 
the necessaries being provided, the boats divide 
themselves into companies, each having their re 
spective crews with the different services entrusted 
to each man, some being employed in the actual 
taking of the fish, others in cutting it open, others 
in salting it, and others in heaping it up. The 
fishermen leave the coast at day-break, and do not 
return before the evening, unless, indeed, their 
boats should be filled. They catch the fish with 
an hook, and every boat goes well provided with 
these and lines to guard against losses. As soon as 
they arrive at the shore, it is heaped up in piles, 
and turned and salted and cleansed for some suc 
ceeding days, after which, when quite dry, it is 
done up in small packets with the skins outward ; 
though it still continues to be turned and salted till 
the time of embarkation. As the boats are con 
tinually out, the fatigue of the fishermen is very 
great, and they frequently go with little rest for 
nights and days. 

The great bank of Newfoundland is a large 
heap of sand 580 miles long, and 233 wide, the 
depth of the water varying from 15 to b O fathoms, 
and the bottom strewed .with shells, and abounding 
with small fish serving as food for the cod, the 
numbers of which here are incredible ; though 
some idea may be formed when it is known that 
500 vessels were laden annually with it for sonic 
time past, and that, although the present, consump 
tion be much greater, their abundance is not found 
to be the least diminished ; and it is indeed doubled 
whether this fishery is not a mine of greater wealth 
than those either of Mexico or Peru. 

[In illustration of what our author has advanced, 
we have to observe, that in 1785, Great Britain 
and the United States, at the lowest computation, 
used to employ 3000 sail of small craft in this 
fishery; Onboard of which, and on shore to cure 
and puck the fish, were upwards of 100,000 hands * 
so that this fishery is not only a very valuable 



422 



NEW 



branch of trade to the merchant, but a source of 
livelihood to many thousands of poor people, and 
a most excellent nursery to the royal navy. This 
fishery is computed to increase the national stock 
300,000/. a year in gold and silver, remitted for 
the cod sold in the North, in Spain, Portugal, 
llaly, arid the Levant. Not only plenty of cod, 
but several other species of fish, are caught in al 
most equal abundance along the shores of Nova 
Sco ia,New England, and the isle of Cape Breton ; 
and very profitable fisheries are carried on upon 
ajl their coasts. 

This island, after various disputes about the 
property, was entirely ceded to England by the 
Treaty of Utrecht, in .1713; but the French were 
left at liberty to dry their nets on the n. shores of 
the island; and by the treaty of 1763, they were 
permitted to fish in the gulf of St. Lawrence, but 
with this limitation, that they should not approach 
within three leagues of any of the coasts belonging 
to England. The small islands of St. Pierre and 
Miquelon, situated to the s. of Newfoundland, 
were also ceded to the French, who stipulated to 
erect no fortifications on these islands, nor to keep 
more than 50 soldiers to enforce the police. By 
the last treaty of peace, the French are to enjoy 
the fisheries on the n. and on the w. coasts of the 
island ; and the inhabitants of the United States 
are allowed the same privileges in fishing, as be 
fore their independence. The chief towns in New 
foundland are, Placentia, Bonavista, and St. 
John s ; but not above 10CO families remain here 
in winter. A small squadron of men of Avar are 
sent out every spring to protect the fisheries and 
inhabitants, the admiral of which, for the time 
being, is governor of the island ; besides whom, 
there is a lieutenant-governor, who resides at Pla 
centia. 

In June of this year, 1812, the British had on 
the Halifax, Newfoundland, and W. India stations, 
three sail ef the line, 21 frigates, 19 sloops of war, 
and 18 smaller vessels, making a total of 61 armed 
vessels. 

Vessels, it lias been stated, lie in the bays and 
harbours of this island in perfect security, being 
well sheltered, except at the entrance, by the moun 
tains. Some of these bays, (the whole circuit of 
the island being full of them) it should appear, are 
a league or two leagues in length, and near half 
a league in breadth ; and it is a subject of curious 
inquiry for the philosopher to determine the causes 
of their contiguity and depth, and the conse 
quent narrowness of the slips by which they are 
separated. The towns and villages are only on 
the larger and more commodious bays. The num- 



N E W 

ber of fowls called penguins, are certain marks for 
the bank of Newfoundland, and are never found oft 
it ; these are sometimes seen in flocks, but more 
usually in pairs. The French used to employ in 
this fishery 264 ships, tonnage 27,459 ; and 9403 
men. Total value 270,000/. sterling. 

The spaces of ground called ships rooms in 
Newfoundland, were by an act passed last year, 
181 1, exempted from the clause hitherto attached 
to them by the first coiners, and are now let out 
as private property, for building dwelling houses 
and store houses, and for other uses necessary to 
the trade and fishery. It was also lawful under 
the same act for the governor to institute surrogate 
courts in the adjacent islands. 1 

[NEW1CHWAWANICK. See PISCATA- 

QUA.J 

[NEW1NGTON, a township ; formerly part 
of Portsmouth and Dover, in Rockingham county, 
New Hampshire, five miles distant from the former. 
It contains 542 inhabitants. J 

[NEWL1N, a township in Chester county, 
Pennsylvania.] 

[NEWMANSTOWN, Pennsylvania; situate 
in Dauphin county, on the e. side of Mill creek. 
It contains about 30 houses, and is 14 miles e.byn. 
of Harrisburg, and 72 n. w. by w. of Philadelphia.] 

[NEWMARKET, a township in Rockingham 
county, New Hampshire, n. of Exeter, of which it 
was formerly a part, and 10 miles w. of Portsmouth. 
It was incorporated in 1727, and contains 1137 in 
habitants. Fossil shells have been found near 
Lamprey river in this town, at the depth of 17 
feet ; and in such a situation as that the bed of the 
river could never have been there. The shells 
were of oysters, muscles, and clams intermixed.] 

[NEWMARKET, a village in Frederick county, 
Maryland, on the high road to Frederickstown, 
from which it lies nearly 13 miles w. s. u\ and 
about 30 miles n. w. of the Federal city.] 

[NEWMARKET, a village in Dorchester county, 
Maryland, three miles n. e. of Indian town, ou 
Choptank river, nine n. e. of Cambridge, and as 
far n. w. of Vienna.] 

[NEWMARKET, a town in Virginia, Amherst 
county, on the w. side of James river, at the mouth 
of Tye river. It is a small place, contains a tobacco 
warehouse ; is 68 miles above Richmond.] 

[NEWNHAM Cape. See NEWENHAM.] 

[NEWPORT, a township in Cheshire county, 
New Hampshire, e. ofCIaremont. It was incor 
porated in 1761, and contains 780 inhabitants.] 

[NEWPORT, a township of Nova Scotia in Hants 
county, on the river Avon. The road from Halifax 
runs part of the way between this township and 



NEW 

Windsor ; and has settlements on it at Certain dis 
tances.] 

[NEAVPORT, a maritime county of the state of 
Rhode Island, comprehending Rhode island, 
Canon icutj Block, Prudence, and several other 
small islands. It is divided into seven townships, 
and contains 14,300 inhabitants, including 366 
slaves.] 

[NEWPORT, the chief town of this county, and 
the semi-metropolis of the state of Rhode Island, 
stands on the s. w. end of Rhode island, about five 
miles from the sea. Its harbour (which is one of 
the finest in the world) spreads w. before the 
town. The entrance is easy and safe, and a large 
fleet ma} r anchor in it and ride in perfect security. 
It is probable this may, in some future period, be 
come one of the man-of-war ports of the American 
empire. The town lies n. and s. upon a gradual 
ascent as you proceed e. from the water, and ex 
hibits a beautiful view from the harbour, and from 
the neighbouring hills which lie w. upon the main. 
AVest of the town is Goat island, on which is fort 
Washington. It has been lately repaired and a 
citadel erected in it. The fort has been ceded to 
the United States. Between Goat island and 
Rhode island is the harbour. Newport contains 
about 1000 houses, built chiefly of wood. It has 
10 houses for public worship, four for Baptists, 
two for Congregationalists, one for Episcopalians, 
one for Quakers, one for Moravians, and one for 
Jews. The other public buildings are, a state- 
house, and an edifice for the public library. The 
situation, form, and architect tire of the state-house, 
give it a pleasing appearance. Jt stands suffi 
ciently elevated, and a long wharf and paved pa 
rade lead up to it from the harbour. Front of 
Water street is a mile in length. Here is a flou 
rishing academy, under the direction of a rector 
and tutors, who teach the learned languages, Eng 
lish ganimar, geography, &amp;c. A marine society 
was established here in 1572, for the relief of dis 
tressed widows and orphans, and such of their 
society as may need relief. This city, far famed 
for the beauty of its situation and the salubrity of 
its climate, is no less remarkable for the great 
variety and excellent qualify of fresh fish which 
the market furnishes at all seasons of the year. No 
less tli an 60 d iUerent kinds have been prod need in t h is 
market. The excellent accommodations and regula 
tions of the numerous packets which belong to this 
port, and which ply thence to Providence and 
New York, are worthy of notice. They are said, 
by European travellers, to be superior to any 
thing of the kind in Europe. This town, although 
greatly injured by the late war, and its conse- 



N E W 



423 



quences, has a considerable trade. A cotton and 
duck manufactory have been lately established. 
The exports for a year, ending September 30, 
1794, amounted to 311,200 dollars. It was first 
settled by Mr. William Coddington, afterwards 
governor, and the father of Rhode island, with 17 
others, in 1659. It is 23 miles s. by e. of Provi 
dence, 10 s. of Bristol, 54 s. za. by s. of Boston, 
75 e.n: e. of New Haven, and 201 w. e. bv e. of, 
Philadelphia. Lat. 41 25 n. Long, from Green 
wich 71 14 SO 7 .] 

[NEWPORT, a small post-town in Newcastle 
county, Delaware ; situated on the n. side of 
Christiana creek, three miles w. of Wilmington. 
It contains about 200 inhabitants, and carries on a 
considerable trade with Philadelphia in flour. It 
is six miles n. e. by n. of Christiana bridge, and 28 
s. w. of Philadelphia, j 

[NEWPORT, a township in Luzerne county, 
Pennsylvania.] 

[NEWPOIIT, a small post-town in Charles coun 
ty, Maryland, 11 miles s. e. of port Tobacco, 50 
s. by w. of Baltimore.] 

("NEWPORT. See ISLE OF WIGHT County, 
T7 -.- . . _ j f 

Virginia.] 

[NEWPORT, a very thriving settlement in Li 
berty county, Georgia ; situated on a navigable 
creek, 34 miles s. of Savannah, and seven or eight 
s. ~o. from Sunbury. This place, commonly known 
by the name of Newport Bridge, is the rival of 
Sunbury, and commands the principal part of the 
trade of the whole country. A post-office is kept 
here.] 

[NEWTON, a pleasant township in Middle 
sex county, Massachusetts; situated on Charles 
river, and is nine miles w. of Boston. It was in 
corporated in 1791, and contains 1360 inhabitants.] 
[NEWTON, a small town in Chester county, 
Pennsylvania, 22 miles from Philadelphia.] 

[NEWTON, a township in Rockingham county, 
New Hampshire, on Powow river, adjoining 
Amesbury in Massachusetts, 10 or 12 miles s. of 
Exeter, and 20 from Portsmouth. It was incor 
porated in 1749, and contains 530 inhabitants.] 

[NEWTOWN, a post-town in Fairfield coun 
ty, Connecticut, nine miles e. n. e. of Dan bury, 
20 re. n. w. of New Haven, 34 s. w. of Hartford, 
and 59 n. e. of New York. The town stands plea 
santly on an elevated spot, and was settled in J70S.] 
[NEWTOWN, on Staten island, New York, is 
tli.- .-e miles . e. of Old town, as far e. of Rich 
mond, and nine s. w. of New York.] 

["NEWTOWN, a township in Queen s county, 
New York, includes all the islands in the sound 
opposite the same. It is about eight miles e. of 



424 



N E X 



N E X 



New York, and contains 2111 inhabitants, in 
cluding 533 slaves.] 

[NEWTOWN, a township in W. Chester county, 
New York ; of whose inhabitants 276 are electors.] 

[NEWTOWN, a township in Tioga county, New 
York, lies between the s. end of Seneca lake and 
Tioga river ; having Chemung township c. from 
which it was taken, and incorporated in 1792. In 
1796, 169 of its inhabitants were electors.] 

[NEWTOWN, a township in Gloucester county, 
New Jersey.] 

[NRWTOWN, the seat of justice in Sussex coun- 
\ v, New Jersey, is about 10 miles e. of Sandyston.] 

[NEWTOWN, the capital of Bucks county, Penn 
sylvania. It contains a Presbyterian church, a 
stone gaol, a court-house, an academy, and about 
50 houses. It was settled in 1725, and is eight 
miles w. of Trenton in New Jersey, and 19 n. e. 
by n. of Philadelphia. There aretwoother town 
ships of this name, the one in Delaware county, 
the other in that of Cumberland.] 

[NEWTOWN, a small town of Virginia, situated 
in Frederick county, between the n. and s. branches 
of Shenandoah river ; seven miles s. of Winches 
ter, and 104 n. n. w. of Richmond.] 

NEXAPA, a jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor 
of Nueva Espaua, in the province arid bishopric 
ofOaxaca, one of the best peopled, largest, and 
most lucrative. It comprehends also the district 
of Los Mistepcques, where there is a lieutenant 
and alcalde mayor. It enjoys different tempera 
tures from being in the sierra, though some parts of 
it consist of a llano or plain land, watered by se 
veral rivers, which render it extremely fertile in 
cochineal, indigo, and sugar-cane, of which it has 
a great commerce, and which causes it to be one 
of the most considerable alcaldius in the kingdom. 
The capital is the settlement of San Pedro de 
Quiechapi, and the other settlements of the juris 
diction are, 

S. Baltasar, Sta. Ana, 

S. Francisco, S. Juan de Lachixila, 

S. Pedro Lcspi, S. Juan Beca, 

S. Domingo, S. Pedro Acatlan, 

S. Thomas Quiri, Santiago Tuctla, 

Santiago Lachivea, Sta. Cruz, 

S. Juan Xanagueche, S. Pedro, 
Sta. Catalina, Sta. Maria Lagicojani, 

Quiquitane, S. Agustin Mistepec, 

S. Pedro, S. Joseph Lachiguiri, 

S. Juan, S. Andres Mixtepec, 

S. Lorenzo, Santiago, 

Nexapa, S. Juan Tepalcaltepec, 

S. Bartolome Yautepcc, S. Pablo Topiltepec, 
S. Juan de la Xarcia, Sta. Maria, 



S. Pedro Marti r, 

Sta. Cruz Huilotepec, 

Chiltepec, 

Sta. Lucia, 

Santiago Tecolotepec, 

Santiago, 2, 

Sta. Maria Coatlan, 

Iscuintepcc, 

S. Lucas Cocatlan, 

Sta. Margarita, 

S. Miguel Quezaltepec, 

S. Juan Mazatlan, 

Sta. Maria Nizagui, 

Sta. Maria Totolapa, 

Zoquitlaii, 

Candelaria, 

Zuchiltepec, 

S. Matias, 



S. Lorenzo, 
Acatepec, 

S. Lucas Hiscotcpec, 
S. Juan, 2, 
Santo Tomas, 
S. Domingo, 
S. Andres, 

Sta. Maria Quieguelani, 
Santiago, 3, 
S. Juan, 3, 
S. Juan Xicula, 
S. Pedro Ocotepec, 
Sta. Maria Cacalotepec, 
Sta. Maria Acatlazinto, 
Santiago Malacatepec, 
Chimaltepec, 
Santiago Xilotepec, 
S. Sebastian. 

NEXAPA, SANTIAGO DE, a town of this juris 
diction, situate in a flourishing plain, through 
which passes the royal road from Mexico to the 
kingdom of Guatemala; inhabited by 27 families 
of Indians, and 15 of Negroes and Mulattoes. It 
contains a convent of the religious order of S. 
Domingo, and its population was formerly nume 
rous, but it suffered much by the epidemic dis 
temper, called there matlazuaga, in 1736. Five 
leagues w. of its capital. 

NEXAPAM, SAN ANTONIO DE, a settlement 
of the province and kingdom of Guatemala ; situate 
in the valley of this name. It is large and inha 
bited by 1730 Indians, who speak the Xachiquel 
idiom ; but amongst the above are counted the 
Indians of the two settlements annexed to its 
curacy, called San Bernabe Acatenango and San 
Pedro Yepocapa. The curacy of this settlement 
belonged to the religious order of San Francisco, 
before it was put under the clergy by decree of 
his Majesty, with the exception, however, of the 
reductions made by the missionaries. 

NEXAPAM, another settlement, in Nueva Es 
paua, close to which runs a river rising from a 
volcano and passing near the settlement. Jt is said 
of this river by the Fr. Juan de Torquemada, that 
it only runs between the hours of seven and eight 
in the day, and loses itself near the mountain of 
San Juan. 

NEXPA, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district of Xoxutla, and alcaldia mayor of 
Cuernavaca, in Nueva Espaiia. 

NEXQUIPAYAC, SAN CIIRISTOVAL DE, a 
settlement of the head settlement of the district and 
alcaldia mayor of Tezcoco in Nueva Espana ; 
situate in a plain fertile in wheat and other seeds, 
which the natives cultivate. It is reduced to 58 



N I A 



425 



families of Indians and six of Spaniards. Two 
leagues n. of its capital. 

NEXTlPACva settlement of the province of 
Mexico in the lime of the Mexican Indians, who 
established themselves in it, having fled from those 
of Mexiltcatzinco. It stood about half a league 
from the capital of Mexico, on which account it 
was abandoned. 

NEXTLALPAN, a settlement of the alcaMia 
mayor of Tula in Nueva Espafia ; annexed to the 
curacy of this settlement, from whence it lies one 
league to the n. containing 143 Indian families. 

fNEYBE. SeeNEivA.] 

NIAGARA, a large and abundant river of 
the country of the Iroquees Indians in Canada and 
N. America. It is, properly speaking, the great 
river of St. Lawrence, winch runs from the lake 
Erie and enters the lake Ontario by a large channel 
of 20 miles in length, and at 19 miles in this course, 
it forms the celebrated falls of its name, the largest 
known in the world, where the water rushes down 
a precipice of 140 feet. The French geographer 
Del Isle, by the relation of the Baron dc la Hon- 
tan and the Father Hennepin, makes it 600 feet, 
and Mr. Bowen above 700, but this exaggeration 
arises from the difficulty of measuring it, as it is 
not possible to approach very near to, or to regard 
it otherwise than by a profile view : what we have 
given respecting it is the best received and believed 
by the most intelligent of those who have seen it. 
The river, at this cascade, is nearly half a league 
wide, and just before it comes to it, the stream is 
so rapid that animals attempting to cross it are 
sometimes hurried away by its impetuosity and pre 
cipitated down the abyss to certain destruction. 

At the top of the cascade and in the centre of the 
river, is an island which divides the falling water 
into two large sheets, and when it has reached the 
bottom, it (lashes up with a white foam like snow, 
and is in constant agitation just as if it were boil 
ing. The vapours ascending from it have the ap 
pearance of a thick smoke, but when the sun shines 
rainbows arc formed of the most beautiful colours. 

[Niagara river receives Chippeway or Welland 
river from the w. and Tonewanto creek from the e. 
and embosoms Great and Navy islands. Fort 
Slusher stands on the e. side of this river near 
Navy island The falls, in this river, are oppo 
site fort Slusher, about seven or eight miles .v. of 
lake Ontario, and form the greatest curiosity 
which this, or indeed any other country, a fiords. 
In order to have a tolerable idea of this stupendous 
fall of water, it will be necessary to conceive th;ft 
part of the country in which lake Erie is situated, 
to be elevated above that which contains lake On- 

VOL. III. 



tario about SOO feet; the slope which separates 
the upper and lower country is generally very 
steep, and in many places almost perpendicular; 
it is formed by horizontal strata of stone, great part 
of which is lime-stone. The slope may be traced 
by the n. side of lake Ontario, near the bay of To- 
rento, round the w. end of the lake ; thence the 
direction is generally e. Between lake Ontario 
and lake Erie it crosses the strait of Niagara and 
the (Tennessee river; after which it becomes lost 
in the country towards Seneca lake. It is to this 
slope the country is indebted both for the cataract 
of Niagara and the great falls of Gennessce. The 
cataract of Niagara, some have supposed, was 
formerly at the n. side of the slope near the land 
ing; and that from the great length of time, and 
the quantity of water, and distance which it falls, 
the solid stone is worn away for about seven miles 
up towards lake Erie; but for this latter opinion, 
observes General Lin-coin, who visited and examin 
ed these falls in 1794, " on a careful examina 
tion of the banks of the river, there appears to be 
no good foundation." 

There is a chasm down which the water rushes 
with a most astonishing noise and velocity, after 
it makes the great pitch. Here the fancy is con 
stantly engaged in the contemplation of the most 
romantic and awful prospect imaginable ; when 
the eye catches the falls, the contemplation is in 
stantly arrested, and the beholder admires in si 
lence. The river is about 742 yards wide at the 
falls. The perpendicular pitch of this vast body 
of water produces a sound that is frequently heard 
at the distance of 20 miles, and in a clear day, and 
fair wind, 40 and even 50 miles. A perceptible 
tremulous motion in the earth is felt for several rods 
round. Just below the Great pitch, the water and 
foam may be seen puffed up in large spherical 
figures ; they burst at the top, and project a column 
of the spray to a prodigious height, and then sub 
side, and are succeeded by others which burst in 
like manner. This appearance is most remarkable 
about halfway between the island that divides the 
falls and the w. side of the strait, where the largest 
column of water descends. The descent into the 
chasm of this stupendous cataract is very diflicult, 
on account of the great height of the banks; but 
when once a person has descended, he may go up 
to the foot of the falls, and take shelter behind the 
descending column of water, between that and the 
precipice, where there is a space sufficient to con 
tain a numherof people in perfect safety, and where 
conversation may be held without interruption from 
the noise, which is less here than at a considerable 
distance. On Christmas 1795, a severe shock of 
3 i 



426 



N I C 



an earthquake was felt here, and by which a large 
piece of the rock that forms the famous cataract 
was broken off. 

Whatever else is curious in this stupendous 
fall has been accurately stated by Alcedo.] 

NIAGARA, a fort built by the French in 1687, 
near the former river, under the direction of Mr. 
Denonville, governor of New France, in spite of 
the opposition made by the English and the go 
vernor of New York, Colonel Dongan. Mr.de 
Troye, with a detachment, was nominated gover 
nor, but the greater part of his men dying from the 
badness of the climate, it was abandoned and 
ruined. In 1721 it was rebuilt by Mr. de Joncayre, 
who also met with some opposition from the Eng 
lish, who at last took it, being headed by William 
Johnson, in 1759. [It was delivered up to the 
United States, according to the treaty of 1794, by 
the British in 1796. 

Niagara is now a post-town as well as fort, and 
is situate on the e. side of Niagara river, at its 
entrance into lake Ontario, and opposite to Newark 
in Canada. Niagara fort is a most important post, 
and secures a greater number of communications 
through a large country, than probably any other 
pass in interior America. It is about nine miles 
below the cataract, 63 n. zv. of Williamsburgh on 
Gennessee river, 266 n. w. of Philadelphia, and 
305 w. by n. of Boston. Lat. 43 16 n. Long. 
79 4 w. Although it is a degree n. of Boston, 
yet the season is quite as mild here as at that town, 
and vegetation quite as early and forward. It is 
thought that the climate meliorates in the same 
latitude as one proceeds from the Atlantic w.~] 

NIBEQUETEN, a river of the kingdom of 
Chile. It is abundant, and rises in the cordillera, 
and enters the Biobio, gives its name to a tribe of 
valorous Indians, amongst the Araucanos, who 
dwell on its shores. 

NICAGUA, a small river of the island of S. 
Domingo, which rises in thee. head of the island, 
and enters the sea in the great bay of Samanu. 

NICARAGUA, a province and government of 
the kingdom of Guatemala in N. America ; 
bounded n. by the province of Guatemala, s. by 
that of Costa Rica, e. by the N. sea, and w. by 
the S. sea. It is 50 leagues long from e. to zo. and 
nearly as many wide from n. to s. of an hot tem 
perature, and the most woody part of Nueva Es- 
pana, although not without many llanuras. 

This province has very few rivers, and is sub 
ject to tempests in the winter; extremely fertile, 
and abounding in all the productions that can be 
mentioned, except wheat, so that it provides itself 
with flour from the provinces of Peru. It has 



NIC 

large breeds of neat cattle, swine, and goats, but 
particularly of mules and horses, carrying on a 
great trade in these with the kingdom of Tierra 
Firme, supplying the drovers of Costa Rica, who 
are employed in carrying goods from Panama to 
Portobelo ; but this trade was much greater when 
the galleons used to arrive. To the above it adds 
the considerable branches of commerce of cotton, 
honey, pita, wax, maize, (igi, and French beans. 
It produces also indigo, sugar, cochineal, and 
cacao, quantities of fish and fine salt, the whole 
being sold here at a very reasonable price. In the 
woods arc found excellent sorts of timber, namely, 
Brazil wood, and some zcibas, so large that 10 men 
with their arms extended cannot encompass them. 
In this province there is likewise found amber, 
turpentine, pitch, naptha, and various balsams 
and medicinal drugs much esteemed in Europe. 

It abounds in deer and animals of the chase of 
all kinds, as well as in birds ; but it is not without 
snakes, vipers, scorpions, bats, lizards, mice, and 
mosquitoes of various sorts, which render in some 
degree disagreeable a country which some Spa 
niards of consequence have called the paradise of 
Mexico, and others, with greater justness, the 
paradise of Mahomet. 

This province was conquered by Gil Gonzalez 
Davila and Francisco Fernandez de Cordoba. It 
has a large lake called Del Desaguadero, seen into 
the waters of the great lake Nicaragua empty them 
selves ; and at three leagues from this lake is a 
very lofty volcano, continually vomiting smoke 
and stones ; also at the distance of four leagues is 
another lake which is small and round, and may 
rather be denominated a well, as from the surface 
of its water to the top of its bank there is no less a 
distance than 2000 yards, and although the de 
scent is nearly perpendicular, yet will the Indians 
go down to fetch water, climbing by certain holes 
which they have made in the rock, and ascend 
Avith the pitcher on their heads with a velocity 
truly surprising. This is one of the provinces of 
thegreatest number of inhabitants, and the natives 
are ingenious and diligent in the pursuit of the 
arts, in which they excel the other Americans, 
especially in their silversmiths and musicians, to 
which employments they have a natural turn. 
The capital is the city of Nicaragua, in lat. 1 1 
16 n. and long. 85 4 w. 

Bishops who have presided in Nicaragua. 

1. Don Diego Alvarez Osorio, native of Ame 
rica, although we know not of what settlement ; 
he was chanter of the church of Panama when he 
was elected first bishop of this diocese, in 1531. 

2. Don Fr. Antonio de Valdivieso, of the order 



NICARAGUA. 



of S. Domingo, native of Villa-hermosa in the 
archbishopric of Burgos ; presented to the bishop 
ric of Nicaragua ; he died of some blows he re 
ceived from Juan Bermejo, one of the partisans of 
the two rebel brothers the Contreras, who had rob 
bed the treasury, whilst manifesting his zeal in the 
king s cause, in 1549. 

3. Don Fr. Gomez Fernandez de Cordoba, of 
the order of San Geronimo, native of Cordoba, of 
whom we have treated amongst the bishops of 
Guatemala, to which place he was promoted in 
1574. 

4. Don Fernando cle Menavias, of the same 
order as the former, a preacher of great repute ; 
he died here. 

5. Don Fr. Antonio de Zayas, of the order of 
San Francisco, native of Eeija ; presented to the 
bishopric of Nicaragua in 1574; entered to take 
possession in 1577, according to Gil Gonzalez Da- 
vila ; although the Fr. Antonio Daza says that at 
this timethe bishop of that place was Fr. Geronimo 
Villa Carrillo, of the order of San Francisco. 

6. Don Fr. Domingo de Ulloa, of the order of 
S. Domingo, of the house of the Marquises of 
Mota, collegiate in the college of San Gregorio de 
Valladolid and its rector, prior of various convents 
of his order, vicar-general of the province of Cas- 
tilla, and presented by his Majesty Philip II. to 
the bishopric of Nicaragua in 1584, and promoted 
to the church of Popayan, 1591. 

7. Don Fr. Geronimo de Escobar, native of 
Toledo, of the order of San Agustin, a celebrated 
preacher; elected bishop of Nicaragua in 159^, 
but, after having embarked to go to its church, 
lie was forced to put into the port of Cadiz, where 
lie died. 

8. Don Fr. Antonio Diaz de Salcedo, of the 
order of San Francisco ; promoted from the bishop 
ric of Cuba to this in 1597. 

9. Don Fr. Gregorio Montalvo, of the order of 
S. Domingo, native of Coca in the bishopric of 
Segovia, prior of his convent at Placoncia ; elected 
bishop, and afterwards promoted to Yucatan. 

10. Don Pedro de Villareal, native of Andujar, 
visitor of the archbishopric of Granada, and pre 
sented to the bishopric of Nicaragua, where he 
died in 1619. 

11. Don Fr. Benito dc Valtodano, of the order 
of San Benito, collegiate of the college of San 
Vicente of Salamanca, abbot of San Claudio, 
visitoi- of its order; elected bishop in 1620; lie 
died in 1627. 

12. Don Fr. Agustin de Hinojosa, of the order 
of San Francisco, native of the court of Madrid, 
guardian of his convent at Sevilla, jubilee lecturer, 



dcfinidor, and preacher of great fame ; elected bi 
shop of Nicaragua in 1630; he died in Villanueva 
de la Serena before that he passed to his destina 
tion in the following year of 1631. 

13. Don Juan de Baraona Zapata, also native 
of Madrid, where he studied in the imperial col 
lege arts and philosophy, and in the university of 
Salamanca canons and laws, graduating as licen 
tiate and doctor; chaplain of the royai chapel of 
Alcala, an honest, pious, and charitable man, and 
a great observer of silence, presented to the bi 
shopric in 1631 ; he died before he departed for it, 
in 1632. 

14. Don Fr. Hernando Nunez Sagredo, of the 
order of La Santisima Trinidad, native of Rodilla 
in the archbishopric of Burgos, lecturer in his con 
vent of Toledo at Alcala and Valladolid, calificador 
of the inquisition of Cuenca and of the supreme 
council of the same, minister of his order in the 
convents of Santa Maria del Campo, Segovia, Cu 
enca, and Burgos, provincial and vicar-general of 
the province of Castilla, presented to the bishopric 
of Nicaragua in 1633; he died in 1639. 

15. Don Fr. Alonso Breceno, of the order of 
San Francisco, native of Santiago of Chile, a lec 
turer and philosopher of great talents, twice jubi- 
list and grand theologist, guardian of the college 
of Lima, definidor of the province, commissary and 
visitor of those of Charcas and Chile, vicar-general 
in Xauxa and Caxanmrca, guardian of this con 
vent, definidor of the province of Lima : he as 
sisted at the general chapter in Rome, was nomi 
nated calificador of the holy office, presented to 
the bishopric of Nicaragua in 1644, of which he 
took possession in 1646 ; promoted to the bishopric 
of Charcas in 1659. 

16. Don Andres de las Navas Quevedo, of the 
order of Nuestra Senora de la Merced, native of 
the city of Baza : after having received different 
prelacies in his order, he was presented to the bi 
shopric of Nicaragua in 1667, and promoted to 
that of Guatemala in 1682. 

17. Don Fr. Diego Morcillo Rubio, of Auiion, 
of the order of La Santisima Trinidad Calzada, 
native of Villa Rolledo in La Mancha, a man of 
great virtues and powers of government ; elected 
bishop of Nicaragua, from whence he was pro 
moted to that of La Paz ; afterwards archbishop of 
Charcas and Lima, where he by a special autho 
rity from his Majesty was endowed with the vice- 
royship of that kingdom, and where he governed 
with address. 

18. Don Fr. Benito Garrat, premostratensian 
canon of the order of San Noberto ; nominated bi 
shop of Nicaragua in 1708. 



428 



NICARAGUA. 



19. Don Jr. Andres Quiios Galindo, of the 
order of San Francisco, native of Zelaya in the 
bishopric of Mechoacan : he studied in the uni 
versity of Mexico, and in the Colegio Maximo of 
San Pedro and San Pablo, Latin, rhetoric, philo 
sophy, and theology ; after adopting the religion, 
he maintained the professorships for 15 years, was 
consultorand calificador of the holy office; destined 
to be pro-n/hrixtro provincial to Europe, when he 
was elected bishop of Nicaragua, in 1718. 

20. Don Fr. Dionisio de V illavisencio, of the 
order of San Agustin, in 1725. 

21. Don Domingo Antonio Zeratain, chanter of 
the church of La Pnebla tie los Angeles in 1736. 

22. Don Lsidro Marin liulion y Figueroa, of the 
order of Alcantara, rector of its college at Sala 
manca, of the lap and cloister of that university, 
honorary chaplain to his Majesty in 1743; he died 
in J749. 

23. Don Pedro Agustin Morel of Santa Cruz, 
dean of the holy church of Santiago of Cuba; 
elected bishop of Nicaragua in 1749, and pro 
moted to that of Santiago in 1753. 

24. Don Joseph Florez de Rivera, elected bi 
shop of this church of Nicaragua in 1753; he died 
in 1757. 

25. Don. Jr. Mateo dc Navia y Bolauos, of the 
order of San Agustin, native of Lima, master in 
his religion ; immediately upon his coaling to Eu 
rope he was presented to the bishopric of Nicara 
gua in 1757 ; he tLied in the city of Granada in 
1762, whilst on the visitation. 

26. Don Juan de Vilches y Cabrera, dean of the 
same holy church of Nicaragua, elected bishop in 
1763; he died in 1774. 

27. Don Esteban Lorenzo de Tristan, native of 
Jaen in Andalucia, nominated chanter of the holy 
church of Guadix, and before he took possession, 
elected to that of Nicaragua in 1775 ; afterwards 
promoted to the church of Durango in 1783. 

28. Don Juan Felix de Villegas, native of Co- 
breces in the bishopric of Santander, elected bishop 
of Nicaragua in 1784, being then inquisitor of 
Cartagena. 

NICARAGUA, a lake of fresh water of the above 
province, being in extent 120 miles long, and 41 
wide, navigable by the largest vessels, as it is of 
an immense depth. On its coasts are many estates 
of large cattle, and in each a small port for the 
canoes and vessels which run in to lade with the 
productions of the country, and which are em 
ployed for the expediting traffic. 

In this lake are several isles, and it enters the 
sea by the e. through a channel called the river 
Sun Juan, or Del Desaguadero, of 64 miles direct 



distance long. In this channel sail flat-bottomed 
vessels of the size of bilanders ; also very large 
canoes laden with tallow and other effects, which 
they carry to Portovelo, 236 miles from the port of 
S. Juan de Nicaragua; and in the time when the 
galleons arrived, they carried, under a licence, 
clothes and other articles for the supply of the pro 
vince, though not without great risk from the at 
tacks of the Zatnbos and Mosquitos Indians, who 
used to be making continual depredations on this 
lake, and who still infest it, as also on the coast of 
Honduras, near to which they live dispersed on the 
numerous islands. The above vessels make this 
voyage under a necessity of discharging their bur 
then in these shallow parts, called the raudalcs, 
since there is not depth of water for them other 
wise. On one of these raudales is situate the castle 
of Nuestra Seilora dela Concepcion, upon a moun 
tain of living rock, and although this castle be not 
of any considerable size, it serves to guard the pass 
of the river against an enemy : it is furnished with 
36 cannon, and has a very well constructed mound, 
from whence, although the enemy should take the 
fortress, such an attack might be continued against 
him as to make him abandon his purpose. At the 
water s edge is a platform with six cannons, and on 
the land side it is fortified by a ditch and estacade 
which reaches as far as the river. It is ordinarily 
defended with 100 men, besides 16 artillery-men, 
a constable, 40 musketeers, a governor, chaplain, 
lieutenant, and 20 militia-men, for the manage 
ment of the champanes or barks, two of which are 
posted every night on guard above and below the 
fort upon the river ; also with 18 slaves, men and 
women, to do the cooking, &amp;c. of the garrison, a 
supply of maize, meat, vegetables, fowl, and other 
things being sent from the city of Granada, 60 
leagues distance, and a six months supply being 
always reserved. 

The temperature here is very sickly, the rain 
falling continually; and thus it is usual every 
two years, or earlier if necessary, for the governor 
to demand at the capital of Guatemala a fresh sup 
ply of 50 men, to restore the loss occasioned by the 
fatality of the place ; and the governor of the pro 
vince has strict injunctions to send whatever num 
ber may be required. 

This castle is called the qntemural^ or great wall 
and barrier, of the kingdoms of Nueva E&amp;gt;pana and 
of Peru ; for should an enemy make his v&amp;gt;ay up 
this river, as was twice effected, namely, by the 
pirates Lolonois and John Morgan, they might 
go on to occupy Nueva Espafia, and, having 
established themselves in the port of Realejo, which 
is 30 leagues from the city of Granada, to make 



NIC 

themselves masters of the S. sea ; where also, by 
the facilities offered by abundance of fine timber, 
and of every other requisite, save that of iron 
bolts and nails, they might soon construct a noble 
fleet. The castle of La Concepcion has, for these 
reasons, been an object of great jealousy with the 
Spanish government. 

N1CASIA, a settlement of the province and cor- 
reginiiento of Larnpa in Peru, distinct from the 
following. 

NICASIO, a settlement of the same province 
and kingdom as the former. 

NICE, BERNARDO DK, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregim lento of Caxamarca in Peru ; 
annexed to the curacy of Chalique. 

[N1CHOLA, or NJCHOLA TOWN Gut, on the 
n. e. coast of the island of St. Christopher s.] 

[NICHOLAS, Cupe ST. the n.w. extremity of 
the island of St. Domingo, in the W. Indies. It 
is four miles ay. of the town of its name, but more 
commonly called the Mole, 40 miles e. of cape 
Mayzi, at (he e. end of the island of Cuba, and 94 
miles n.c. by n. of cape Dame Marie, and, with 
this last cape, forms the entrance into the large 
bay called the Bight of Leogane. 

In the beginning of July last, a severe shock 
of an earthquake was experienced at cape Nicho 
las Mole, which threw down eight houses. Two 
lives were lost. See The MOLE.] 

[NICHOLAS, Port ST. on the coast of Peru in 
S. America, lies n. of port St. John, about a league 
to leeward of the river Masca, and six leagues 
5.5. e. of port Cavallo. It is safer than St. John s 
harbour, but affords neither wood nor water.] 

[NICHOLAS. See NICOLAS.] 

NICHOLSON, a fort of the English, in the 
province and colony of New York ; situate on 
the shore of the river Hudson, near the confines 
of the country of the Iroquees Indians. 

[i\ICKAJACK,an Indian town on the s. e. side 
of IVnessee river, at the point of a large b Mid, 
about 33 miles n.e. of the Creeks crossing place. 
Halfway between these lies the Crow town, on the 
same side of the river. ~] 

NICKER, a small "island of the N. sea, inha 
bited by the English, and one of those called the 
Virgin isles. It lies between the Anegada and the 
Virgen Gorda, on which it is dependent. 

NICLETON, a small river of the island of San 
Christoval, one of the Antilles. It runs e. and 
enters the sea on the coast, running from . &amp;lt;. to 
s. e. in the district of the parish of Cinq Combles. 

NICODEL, a small river of Canada in N.Ame 
rica. It runs n. w. and enters the S. Lawrence, 
opposite tho Three Rivers. 
2 



NIC 



429 



NICOLAO,BAxo, a shoal or isle of the N. sea, 
near the coast of this rhumb, of the island of Cuba, 
between cape Blanco and that of La Cruz. 

N 1 COLAS, S. a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district of Tantima, and alcaldia mayor of 
Tampico, in Nueva Espafia, of a warm and moist 
temperature; situate amongst uncultivated woods. 
It contains 8J families of Indians, who cultivate 
much cotton, of which they make several kinds of 
woven studs. It is three leagues from its head set 
tlement, and 15 s. of the capital. 

NICOLAS S. another settlement, in the head set 
tlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Te- 
peaca of the same kingdom. It contains 27 fami 
lies of Indians, and lies a little more than two 
leagues from its capital. 

NICOLAS, S. another, of the head settlement and 
alcaldia mayor of Marinalco in the same kingdom ; 
situate at a league and an half s distance from the 
foot of a very lofty mountain. 

NICOLAS, S. another, of the head settlement of 
the district and alcaldia mayor of Guejozingo in 
the same kingdom. It contains 54 families of In 
dians, and lies s. of its capital. 

NICOLAS, S. another, of the head settlement of 
Armadillo, and alcaldia mayor of San Luis de Po- 
tosi, in the same kingdom. It contains 32 families 
of Indians, whose trade and employment is re 
duced to the dressing of hides and making of har 
ness and riding equipage. Three leagues from its 
head settlement. 

NICOLAS, S. another, of the same alcaldia mayor 
and kingdom as the former. Six leagues to the e. 
of Santa Maria del Rio. 

NICOLAS, S. another of the same, which is th 
real of silver mines of the province of Ostimnri, 
formerly a large and rich (own, but at present re 
duced to great poverty. Seven leagues e. n. e. of 
the real Ac Rio Chico. 

NICOLAS, S. another, of the missions which 
were held by the Jesuits in the province of Tepe- 
guana arid kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya, on the 
shore of the river Las Nasas. 

NICOLAS, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Damn, and kingdom of Tierra Finne ; 
situate on the coast, on the shore of the Rio Grande 
de Tuira, near the gulf of San Miguel. 

NICOLAS, S. another, called De la Barranquilla, 
in the province and government of Cartagena, and 
Nuevo llcyno de Granada; situate in the extre 
mity or point of the island in which that city 
stands, and at the entrance or mouth of the Rio 
Grande de la Magdalena. 

NICOLAS, S. another, of the same province and 
kingdom as the former, in the district of Zinu; 



430 



N I C 



situate on the shore of the river of its name, and 
near its mouth or entrance into the sea. 

NICOLAS, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Venezuela in the same kingdom ; si 
tuate in an extensive llanura, which extends from 
the coast on the shore of the river Aroa, and is al 
most to the n. of the town of San Felipe. 

NICOLAS, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Antioquia in the same kingdom; si 
tuate on the Rio Grande de la Magdalena. 

NICOLAS, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito; a 
reduction of Indians of this nation, made by the Je 
suits, to the s. of the mountains of Oro, and on the 
shore and at the source of the river Bauras or Gua- 
zumuri. 

NICOLAS, S. a town of the province and go 
vernment, of Buenos Ayres ; situate on a small 
river, about 130 miles n, w. of Buenos Ayres, 
in lat. 33 19 . Long. 60 25 4". 

NICOLAS, S. a settlement of Indians, also of (he 
province and government of Buenos Ayres ; si 
tuate on a small branch of the river Piratiny, on 
the s. side of the Uruguay. Lat. 28 12 s. Long. 
55 19 53"o&amp;gt;. 

NICOLAS, S. another, called Mole de S. Nicolas, 
a parish of the French, in the part they possess in 
the island S. Domingo ; situate at the w. extremity 
of the island, by the cape of its name. 

NICOLAS, S. another, of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Cuenca in the kingdom of Quito ; 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of Delec. 

NICOLAS, S. another, of the Nuevo Rey no 
de Leon in N. America, near the town of Ca- 
dereita. 

NICOLAS, S. a large river of Nueva Espafia, 
called thus from an estate of this name on its 
shores. It rises 10 leagues n. of the settlement 
of Mascota, in the alcaldia mayor of Ostotipac, 
and runs into the S. sea, through the valley of 
Vanderas, at the cape of Corrientes ; its mouth 
being of the settlement of Ostotipac, 20 leagues to 
the w. 

NICOLAS, S. another, a small river of Canada 
in N. America. It runs is. between those of Mar- 
quet and Sable, and enters the lake Michigan. 

NICOLAS, S. a bay on the n. coast of the strait 
of Magellan, between cape Galand and the bay of 
Pico, "according to the voyage and description of 
Nod ales. 

NICOLAS, S. another port, on the n. coast of 
the river St. Lawrence in Canada, between the port 
S. Paricras and Trinite bay. 

[NICOLAS, S. See S. NICHOLAS.] 
N1COPERAS, ASPEHEZAS, some rough and 



N I E 

impassable mountains of the province and captain* 
ship of Rey in Brazil. 

NICOYA, a province and aJcaldia mayor of 
the kingdom of Guatemala in N. America : bounded 
e. by the province of Costarica, n. by the lake of 
Nicaragua, w. and s. by the Pacific ocean. It is 
of limited extent, and is looked upon as a district 
of the province of Nicaragua, the governor of it 
being nominated by the alcaldla mayor. The po 
pulation is contained in only three settlements ; 
which are Cantren, Orotina,and Chorote, besides 
the capital, which is the town of the same name, 
situate on the shore of the river Capanso, near its 
entrance into the S. sea. 

This province produces much maize, honey, 
pulse, and herbs, witli which, by means of the sea, 
it carries on a great trade with Tierra Firme. It 
has a very good port and dock, where many fine 
vessels have been built. Here is also gathered 
much cotton, of which various stuff s are made, 
being dyed with the juice of the caracal caught in 
the bay of Las Salinas, and which cannot be 
washed out, and is much esteemed in all parts ; 
cotton thread, which is likewise made here, is dyed 
in the same manner. In the above port are found 
pearls of a very fine quality. In lat. 9 46 n. 
Long. 84 55 SO 11 w. 

[NICTAU, a river of Nova Scotia, which waters 
the township of Annapolis ; on its banks are quan 
tities of bog and mountain ore. A bloomery lias 
been erected in the town.] 

[NICUESA, Gulf of, is on the e. coast of the 
country of Honduras, on the Spanish main, having 
cape Gracias a Dios for its n. limit, and cape Blan 
co on the s. ; Catharine, or Providence, is due 
e. from it.] 

N1CULLIPAI, a small river of the kingdom 
of Chile. It runs s. very near the coast, and 
enters the Valdivia near its entrance into the sea. 

NIEBEBay. See NEIVA. 

N1ERUIN, a settlement of the province and 
government of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Rey no 
de Granada ; situate n. e. of the valley of Tene- 
rife. 

NIEUA, NUESTRA SENORA DE, a small city of 
the province and government of Mainas in the 
kingdom of Quito ; founded by Captain Juan de 
Salinas, in 1541, on the shore of the river of its 
name, to the s. w. of the Marafion. It is destroyed, 
and nothing but its ruins remain. 

NIEUA. The aforesaid river rises in the centre of 
the mountains of the province, and runs nearly due 
n. till it enters the Marafion or Amazonas between 
the narrow pass of Guaracayo and the Pon^o of 
Manseriche. 



N I G 

[NIEVA Island lies s. n&amp;gt;. of Mistake bay, and 
on the n. e. side of Hudson s straits.] 

[NiEVA TERRA, near the e. end of Hudson s 
straits, in N. America, in lat. 62 4 n. and long-. 
C7 T w. and has high water on the spring-tide 
days at 50 minutes past nine o clock.] 

NIEVE, BAHIA DE MUCHA, or Bay of Much 
Snow, on the coast of the strait of Magellan, and at 
the third narrow pass called the Passage. 

NIEVES, NUESTRA SENOIIA DE LAS, a settle 
ment of the province and government of Mainas 
and kingdom of Quito. 

NIEVES, SANTA MARIA DE LAS, another settle 
ment, of the head settlement of the district and al- 
cnldia mayor of Gnejozingo in Nueva Espana. It 
contains GO families of Indians, and is a very short 
league w. of its capital. 

NIEVIS. See NEVIS. 

NIGANDARI, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Caxamarquillain Peru. 

NIGANICHE, a small island of the N. sea, 
near the e. coast of Cape Breton, between the port 
of Achepe and cape Fume. 

NIGANICHE, a large and convenient bay of the 
same coast. 

[NIGUA, a river on the s. side of the island of 
St. Domingo. Its mouth is seven leagues e. of the 
Nisao. The rivers Nigua and Jayna are not very 
far apart. But as they advance from their springs 
they recede from each other, the former running 
w. from the latter. Between them lies an exten 
sive and fertile plain. The quantity of pure gold 
that was dug from its cavities, its sugar, cocoa, 
indigo, and other plantations, paid duties of a 
greater amount than those now paid by all the 
Spanish part of the island put together. All these 
rivers might be easily rendered navigable. The 
parish and small town of Nigua contain about 2500 
persons, partly free people of colour.] 

NIG HAS, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Esmeraldas in the kingdom of Quito. 
It is small, situate in a wood of an hot and moist 
climate ; surrounded by some small rivers, in 
which are caught excellent skates, which are car 
ried to be sold at Quito. It produces many and 
delicate plantains, is annexed to the curacy of 
Mindo. In lat. 3 8 n. 

NIGUAS, another settlement, in the same pro 
vince and kingdom ; situate to the w. 12 leagues 
from the capital, on the w. shore of the river Coca; 
annexed to the curacy of Yambe. Its territory is 
full of woods ; and it produces abundance of wild 
wax, zarzaparilla, plantains, and some tobacco 
and cotton. In lat. 44 52" n. 

NIGUATA, a port of the coast of the province 



N I N 



431 



and &amp;lt;overnment of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; between those of Guaira and Cara- 
coli. On its shore is a small settlement and a fort 
for the defence and security of merchant vessels. 

NIGUE, a point on the coast of the kingdom of 
Chile, between the mouths of the rivers Token and 
Queuli. 

NIJAQUE, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chachapoyas in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of Soritor. 

NIKESA, a river of the colony and government 
of Surinam, in the part of Guayana possessed by 
the Dutch. It runs n. making many windings, 
and enters the sea very close to the river Corentin. 

N1LHAUE, a large, fertile, and beautiful val 
ley of the district of Chanco in the kingdom of 
Chile, between the river of its name and that of 
Martaquino. 

NILHAUE. The aforesaid river runs to n. n. w. 
and enters the sea near the quebrada of Lora. 

NILCOS, a port of the N.sea, on the coast of 
the gulf of Uraba, of the province of Darien and 
kingdom of Tierra Firme ; the only port in that 
part capable of receiving large vessels. It lies to 
wards the e. near San Sebastian de Buena Vista, in 
lat. 6 50 n. 

NIMAIMA, a settlement of the corregimiento of 
Panches in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; of an 
hot temperature, and abounding in sugar canes, 
plantains, yncas, and some tobacco. If is poor ; 
its population of Indians is scanty, and the Spa 
niards are very few. Sixteen leagues w. of Santa 
Fe. 

NINACACA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tarma in Peru. 

NINDASOS, a barbarous nation of Indians of 
the province of Guanuco in Peru. It is divided 
into various tribes, who wander about through the 
woods without fixed abode. They are bounded n. 
by the Guatahuagas and e. by the Panataguas. 

[NINET Y-SIX, a district of the upper country 
of S. Carolina, ZG. of Orangeburg district, and 
comprehends the counties of Edgefield, Abbeville, 
Laurens, and Newbury. It contains 33,674 white 
inhabitants, sends 12 representatives and four se 
nators to the state legislature, three of the former 
and one of the latter for each county, and one 
member to congress. It produces considerable 
quantities of tobacco for exportation. Chief town, 
Cambridge, or as it was formerly called, Ninety-six, 
which is 48 miles w. byn. of Columbia, 127 n. w. 
of Charleston, and 49 w. of Augusta in Georgia. 
In May 1781, this town was closely besieged by 
General Greene, and bravely defended by the 
British, commanded by Colonel Cruger.] 



N I R 



NINHUE, a settlement of Indians of the king 
dom of Peru ; situate at the source of the river 
Biobio. 

NIO, a settlement of the missions which were 
held by the Jesuits in the province and govern 
ment of Cinaloa in N. America. 

NIO1JE, a settlement of Indians of the province 
of Sagadahock in N.America ; situate on the shore 
of the river Pcnobscot. 

N1OURE, Bay of, on the e. coast of the lake 
Ontario, of the province and country of the Iro- 
quees Indians. 

NIPE, a settlement of the French, in their part 
of the island of St. Domingo; on the n. coast, at 
the w. head, and on the shore of the river of its 
name. 

NIPE. This river runs n. and enters the sea op 
posite the island of Goanava. 

[NIPEGON, a large river which empties into 
Jake Superior from the n. It leads to a tribe of 
the Chippewas, who inhabit near a lake of the 
same name. Not far from the Nipegon is a small 
river, that, just before it enters the lake, has a 
perpendicular fall, from the top of a mountain of 
COO feet. It is very narrow, and appears like a 
white garter suspended in the air.] 

NIPES, a bay on the n. coast of the island of 
Cuba, between port Altabonita and the river Pla- 
tanos; with a settlement between the points of 
Mulas and Maisi. 

N1PISIGU1T, a river of Nova Scotia or Aca- 
dia, which rises from lake Nipisigouche, runs e. 
for many leagues, and enters the sea in the bay of 
Chaleurs. 

[NipisiGUiT, a small village of New Bruns 
wick, on the s. side of Chaleur bay, inhabited by 
Roman Catholics ; above 12 leagues w. of Cara- 
quit island ; between which and point Masanette, 
are the capes of Poiquchaw. At this village a 
number of coasting traders touch during the sum 
mer, where they purchase of the inhabitants cod 
fish and salmon, as also feathers, peltry, and some 
furs.] 

[NIP1SSINS, Indians inhabiting near the head 
waters of the Oltowas river. Warriors 300.] 

N1P1SS1NG, a small lake of the province and 
country of the Iroqnees Indhns in N. America ; 
formed by the river Francois, and running out by 
a large arm into the Utawas. 

NfQUE, a river of the province and government 
ofDarien, and kingdom of Ticrra Firme, which 
rises in the centre of the same province and enters 
the river Cupa. 

NIRUA DEL COT, LA no, a town of the province 
and government of Venezuela, in the Nuevo 



NIT 

Reyno de Granada; founded in 1553 from the 
fugitives of the city of Las Palmas, which was 
abandoned on account of the invasion of the 
infidel Indians. This town was rebuilt in the 
neighbourhood of the mines called Villa Rica, after 
which its situation was thrice removed ; but such 
was the distress it experienced from the repeated 
attacks of the Indians, and so great were the dif 
ficulties of procuring Negroes to work the mines, 
that there remained of this unfortunate settlement 
nothing but the name, when it was at last founded 
by Francisco Faxardo in 1560, on the spot where 
it now stands, two leagues from the port of 
Guaira. 

[The environs of this city (says Depons) are 
fertile, but the air is unwholesome, and the inha 
bitants are subject to agues, which always end fa 
tally. There are not more than four or five white 
families. All the offices in the calrildo are held by 
the Sambos. The lieutenant "de justicia mayor," 
appointed by the governor, is the only person whe 
can be a white. The city appears completely in 
decay. The population is about 3200 souls, chiefly 
Sambos, who are the offspring of the Indians and 
Negroes. They are robust, strong, and healthy, 
but lazy, addicted to drunkenness, theft, and every 
species of vice. Nirua is in lat. 10 and long. 
71 10 from Paris. It is 48 leagues from Ca 
racas.] 

[NISAO, a river which rises in the centre of 
the island of St. Domingo, and falls into sea on 
the s. side, and on the w. side of the point of its 
name ; seven leagues w. of Nigua river.] 

[NISQUEUNIA, a settlement in the state of 
New York, above the city of Albany. This is 
the principal seat of the society called Shakers. 
A few of this sect came from England in 1774 ; 
and a few others are scattered in different parts of 
the country.] 

N1SUCO, or NISETCO, as some call it, a river 
of the province and government of Yucatan, 
which runs into the sea close to the island of Co- 
zumel. 

NITAHAURITS, a settlement of Indians of 
S. Carolina ; situate on the shore of the river Al- 
bama or Cousas. 

N1TO, a settlement of the province and govern 
ment of Honduras, the spot where the fair or 
market of the whole province used to be celebrated, 
and consequently very rich. It was conquered by 
by Gil Gonzalez Davila, who polled down the 
greater part of it and built it up anew. It stood opoa 
thesea-coast, and formed a pleasing retreat to-Her- 
nan Cortes, after all his perils in his journ cy from 
Mexico, undertaken to chastise the rebellious 



NOB 

Christoval de Olid, who, before he arrived, had 
suffered death at the hands of Francisco de las 
Casas. 

[NITTANY Mountain, in Pennsylvania, is 
between the Juniatta and the w. branch of Sus- 
quehannah river.] 

[NIV ERNOIS, a large bay at the e. end of 
lake Ontario.] 

[NIXONTON, a post-town of N. Carolina, 
and capital of Pasquotank county, lies on the n. 
water of Albemarie sound, and contains a court 
house, gaol, and a few dwelling-houses. It is 
12 miles e. of Edenton.] 

N1ZAQUI, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor 
of Nexapa in the province and bishopric of Oax 
aca, and kingdom of Nueva Espana; situate on 
the middle of a lofty plain. Of a cold tempera 
ture, and inhabited by 62 families of Indians, de 
voted solely to the commerce of cochineal. Twelve 
leagues e. of the capital. 

N1ZAO, a settlement of the island of Cuba ; 
situate on the n. coast, between the Caragaya and 
the Jagua Grande. 

NIZAO, a river of the island of S. Domingo, 
"which rises in the mountains of the centre of the 
same, runs s. and enters the sea at the point of 
its name, between the point of Palenque and the 
river Bani. 

NIZAO. The aforesaid point is on the s. coast 
of the same island, between the points Salina and 
Palenque. 

NOADAN, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Vera Cruz in Nueva Espaiia, which runs 
w. and enters the sea between the settlements of 
Alrneri and Zenapoala. 

NOANAMA, SAN JOSEPH DE, a settlement of 
the province and government of Choco in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; situate on the shore 
of the river S. Juan. 

NOASI, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Tucunmn in Peru, of the jurisdiction 
of Santiago del Estero ; situate on the shore of the 
river Choromoros. 

NOBAN1, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district of Teotalzinco and alcaldia mayor 
of Villalta in Nneva Espana ; of an hot tempe 
rature. It contains 17 families of Indians, and is 
18 leagues n. of its capital. 

[NOBLEBO ROUGH, a township in Lincoln 
county, district of Maine, incorporated in 1788, 
and contains 516 inhabitants. It is 10 miles s. e. 
of Newcastle.] 

[NoiiLiiBOROUfui, a township in the n. e. part 
of Herkemer county, New York ; situated on the 
n. w. side of Canada creek.] 

VOL. III. 



N O C 



NOCAIMA, a settlement of the jurisdiction of 
the town of Honda in the Nuevo Reyno dc Gra 
nada ; of an hot temperature, abounding in cot 
ton, sugar-canes, maize, yucas^ plantains, &amp;c. 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of La 
Vega . 

NOCATABURI, a settlement of the province 
of Taraumara and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya ; 
situate at the source of the river Iliaqui. 

NOCM1HA, a settlement of the province of 
Itza in the kingdom of Guatemala. 

NOCHITLAN, a settlement of the alcaldia 
mayor of Tixtlan in Nueva Espaiia ; of a hot 
temperature, very fertile and pleasant, and abound 
ing in fruit and sugar-canes. It contains 233 fa 
milies of Indians. 

NOCHJZTLAN, a jurisdiction and alcaldia 
mayor of Nueva Espaiia, in the province and 
bishopric of Oaxaca. It is very fertile in cochi 
neal and cotton, and a place of great traffic, as 
lying in the direct and high road from Mexico to 
Oaxaca. Its jurisdiction consists of the following 
settlements, 

NOCHIZTLAN, the capital, which is of the same 
name, contains in it a convent of the religious or 
der of S. Domingo, 30 families of Spaniards, Mus- 
tees, and Mulattoes, and 134 of Mistecos Indians, 
engaged in the cultivation and commerce of grain, 
and in the manufacture of woven cotton stuffs. 
It is 155 miles e. Avith an inclination to the s. of 
Mexico, in lat. 17 14 . Long. 97 36 . The 
settlements are, 

Santa Cruz Mitlatongo, Guautla, 
Xaltepec, Texultepec, 

Santiago Mitlatongo, Tiltepec, 
Tilantongo, San Juan Tamazula, 

Santiago Yucunduche, Cachuapa. 

NOCHIZTLAN, another settlement of the head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Cuquio in the same kingdom. Its population is 
very large, and it is three leagues n. one-quarter to 
n. e. of its head settlement. 

[NOCKAMIXON, a township in Buck s coun 
ty, Pennsylvania.] 

NOCUPETAJO, a settlement of the alcaldia 
mayor of Cinagua in Nueva Espaiia. It conatins 
24 families of Indians, who trade in large cattle 
and maize, which they grow. Its population con 
sisted formerly of more than 4000 families, ar.d it 
was fertilized by a river which passed through it ; 
but it is said that the inhabitants having ill treated 
and beaten their curate after having stripped him, 
received the vengeance of heaven by the river 
drying up; so that their fields became parched 
and barren, and a noxious heat arose, which caused 



o u 



434 



N O I 



an epidemical distemper, which soon swept off 
this numerous people. Thirty-seven leagues s. e. 
of its capital. 

[NODDLE S Island, a small, pleasant, and fer 
tile island in Boston harbour, Massachusetts. It 
is about two miles e. n. e. of the town, on the 
Chelsea shore. It is occupied as a farm, and 
yields lanje quantities of excellent hay.] 

[NODDWAY, a river or rather a long bay 
which communicates with James bay, at the*, e. 
extremity of Rupert s river.] 

NOEL, a settlement of Nova Scotia or Acadia 
in N. America; situate on the shore of the Basin 
des Mines, in the interior part of the bay of 
Fundy. 

NOGALES, SAN JUAN BAPTISTA DE, a set 
tlement of the head settlement of the district of 
Maltrata, andalcaldia mat/or of Orizava, in Nueva 
Espana. It contains 124 families of Indians and 
50 of Mustces, Mulattoes, and Negroes, includ 
ing those of its wards, which are at about a 
league and a half s distance ; the greater part 
of the inhabitants employing themselves as dro 
vers. One league and a half from its head set 
tlement. 

NOG ALES, another settlement, of the province and 
government of Tucuman in Peru, of the jurisdic 
tion of the capital ; on the shore of the river Cho- 
romoros. 

NOGUERA, a settlement of the missions which 
were held by the Jesuits in the province and go 
vernment of Cinaloa. 

NOGUNCHE, a settlement of the Indians of 
the province and corregimiento of Itata in the 
kingdom of Chile; situate on the coast, near the 
mouth of the river Itata. 

NOHUKUN, or Rio GRANDE, a great river 
of the province and government of Yucatan, which 
runs e. and enters the sea in the gulf of Honduras, 
passing through the city of Salamanca. 

INOIR, Cape, on the s. w. coast of the island 
of Tierra del Fuego,at the entrance of the straits of 
Magellan. Lat. 54 30 s. Long. 73 13 o&amp;gt;.] 

[Nom, Cape, or BLACK Cape, on the w. side 
of Chaleur bay, is about seven leagues w. n. w. of 
Bonaventure.] 

NOIRE, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Neiva in theNuevo Reyno de Granada, 
which runs w. between those of Cobo and Otaz, 
and enters the Grande de la Magdalena. 

NOT HE, another, a small river of S. Carolina, 
in the county of Craven. It runs s. e. and unites 
itself with the Blackmingo to enter the Pedi. 

NOIRE, another, also a small river of the same 
province, which runs e. and enters the Congari. 



NOM 

NOIRE, another, a small river of the province 
and government of Louisiana. It runs s. e. be 
tween those of Ailes and Quiovecovet, and enters 
the Mississippi. 

Noi UK, another, a small river of Canada, which 
runs .?. w. and enters the lake Michigan at the end 
of the e. coast. 

NOIRE, another, a small river of the province 
and country of the Iroquees Indians in New 
France. It runs n. and enters the lake Ontario. 

NOIRE, a cape or point of land on the e. coast 
of the island of Newfoundland, close to S. 
Francis. 

[NOIX, ISLE AU, or NUT Isle, a small isle of 
50 acres, near the n. end of lake Champlain, and 
within the province of Lower Canada. Here the 
British have a garrison containing 100 men. It is 
about five miles n. n. e. of the mouth of La Cole 
river, 20 n. of isle La Motte, and 12 or 15 s. of 
St. John s.] 

[NOLACHUCKY, a river in the e. part of the 
state of Tennessee, which runs w. s. w. into French 
Broad river, about 26 miles from Holstein river. 
Near the banks of this river Greenville college is 
established.] 

[NOLIN Creek, a branch of Green river in 
Kentucky. The land here is of an inferior qua- 
lity.] 

[NOMAN S LAND Island lies a little s. w. of 
Martha s Vineyard, and is about three miles long 
and two broad. It belongs to Duke s county, 
Massachusetts. Lat. 41 14 n. Long. 70 45 
30" w.] 

NOMBRE DE DIGS, a town of the province 
and bishopric of Guadalaxara in N. America. It 
is populous and rich from the abundance of the 
silver mines in its district. It has a very good 
parish church, besides a convent of the order of 
San Francisco. It has this name, because, when 
Pedro de Espinareda came to preach the gospel to 
these Indians, by order of St. Francis, he said, " Let 
us begin this work in the name of God ;" and from 
this time this title was always given to the settle 
ment, the which, from its concourse of inhabi 
tants, was raised into a city. It is situate a little 
n. of the tropic of Cancer. One hundred and se 
venty miles n. of the city of Guadalaxara, in long. 
103 7 . Lat. 24. 

[Nombre de Dios is (according to -Hum- 
boldt) in the intendancy of Durango, on the road 
from the famous mines of Sombrerete to Dnrango ; 
and he states its population at 6SOO souls.] 

NOMBRE DE Dios, another city, formerly in 
the province and kingdom of Tierra Firme, with a 
good port in the N, sea, discovered by Admiral 



N O N 

Christ6val Colon at the same time as was that of 
Portobelo, and founded by Diego de Albitez in 
1510. It is of bad temperature, moist, and rainy ; 
for which reason, and also because the port of Por 
tobelo was preferable, the city was removed to this 
Jast-mentioned place, by order of Philip II. in 
1585, by Don Inigo de la Mota, when the former 
city became reduced to a miserable village, its 
port being frequented by foreign vessels, which 
carried on a contraband trade. The English pirate 
Francis Drake sacked the city in 1598. The 
Admiral Don Francisco Cornejo had off the coast 
a combat with two Dutch frigates, in 1724, and 
the Count de Clavijo, who was commander of the 
vessels for guarding the coast, had also two other 
engagements in the following years of 1725 and 
1726. The English admiral Hosier blockaded 
in this port, for a whole year, some galleons under 
the command of the General Don Bias de Leso, 
in 1538. It is five leagues from Portobelo. 

NOMBRE DE Dios, a settlement of the missions 
which are held by the religious order of San Fran 
cisco, in the province of Taraumara, and kingdom 
of Nueva Vizcaya; situate 12 leagues w. n. w. of 
the town and real of mines of San Felipe de Chi- 
guagua. 

NOMBRE DE Dios, another city, founded in 
the strait of Magellan by Pedro Sarmiento, in 
1582; but it had only existed three years when 
all its inhabitants perished of hunger, except Fer 
nando Gomez, who was taken up by Thomas 
Cavendish, who passed that strait in 1587. Since 
that time the port has been called De Hambre or 
Famine. 

NOMBRE DE Dios, a river of the province and 
corregim iento of Arequipa in Peru ; called also 
Tambapalla, since it traverses the valley of this 
name. It runs w. and enters the sea opposite the 
island of Chile. 

NOMSCOT, a small river of the province of 
New Hampshire in N. America; one of New 
England. It rises from a lake, runs s. forming in 
its course various other lakes, and enters the 
Amariscoggin. 

[NONESUCH, a river of Cumberland county, 
district of Maine. It passes to the sea through 
the town of Scarborough ; and receives its name 
from its extraordinary freshets.] 

[NONESUCH, a harbour at the c. end of the 
island of Antigua. The road is foul and full of 
rocks ; and it has not more than six or eight feet 
water, except in one place, which is very dif 
ficult.] 

NONET, a port of the s. coast of the island of 



N O O 



435 



S. Domingo, and w. head, in the part of the 
French, between points Cascajo and Abacu. 

NONO, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Esmeraldas in the kingdom of Quito. 

NONURA, a small island of the S. sea, near 
the coast of the province and corregimiento of 
Piura in Peru, to the n. of that of Lobos. It is 
barren and uninhabited, in lat. 5 48 s. 

NONURA, a point of land on the same coast and 
province. 

NOODLE, a small island of the N. sea, in 
Boston bay. 

[NOOHEVA, one of the Ingraham or Mar 
quesas islands, said to be the parent of them all ; 
situate about lOleaguess. zv. of Ooahoona. Capt. 
Roberts named it Adams; it is the same which 
Ingraham called Federal island. The lat. of the 
body of the island is 8 48 s. and nearly in the 
same meridian with VVooapo, between 139 53 
and 140 4 w. long, from Greenwich. All ac 
counts of the natives concurred, says Captain Ro 
berts, in representing it as populous and fruitful, 
and to have a large bay with good anchorage.] 

[NOORT Point, on the coast of Chile, is the 
n. point of the bay or port of Coquimbo, the other 
is called point Tortugas.] 

[NOOTKA or KING GEORGE S Sound, on 
the n. zo. coast of N. America, is very extensive. 
That part of it where the ships under Capt. Cook 
anchored, lies in lat. 49 36 n. and long. 126 42 
w. from Greenwich. Capt. Cook judged the sound 
to occupy a degree and a half in latitude, and two 
of longitude, exclusive of its arms and branches 
unexplored. The whole sound is surrounded by 
high land, in many places broken and rugged, and 
in general covered with wood to the very top. 
The natives were very numerous, and were in pos 
session of iron and beads ; which probably were 
conveyed to them across the continent from Hud 
son s bay. They are rather below the middle size, 
and besmear their bodies with red paint, but their 
faces are bedaubed with various colours. 

Notwithstanding the accurate information which 
we owe to the English and French navigators, it 
would still be interesting to publish the observa 
tions of M. Mozino on the manners of the Indians 
of Nootka. These observations embrace a great 
number of curious subjects, viz. the union of the 
civil and ecclesiastical power in the person of the 
princes or tays ; the struggle between Quautz and 
Matlox, the good and bad principle by which the 
world is governed ; the origin of the human spe 
cies at an epocha when slags were without horns, 
birds ^without wings, and dogs without (ails ; the 
SK 2 



436 



N O P 



Eve of the Nootkians, who lived solitary in a 
flowery grove of Yucuatl, when the god Quautz 
visited her in a fine copper canoe ; the education 
of the first man, who, as he grew up, past from 
one small shell to a greater ; the genealogy of the 
nobility of Nootka, who descend from the oldest 
son of the man brought up in a shell, while the 
rest of the people (who even in the other world 
Lave a separate paradise called Pinpula) dare not 
trace their origin farther back than to younger 
branches ; the calendar of the Nootkians, in which 
the year begins with the summer solstice, and is 
divided into 14 months of 20 days, and a great 
number of intercalated days added to the end of 
several months, &amp;c. &amp;c. 

The strait DeFuego encompasses the large cluster 
of islands among which this sound is situated. 
See FCJCA, PINTAHD, WASHINGTON Islands, 
and NORTH-WEST Coast; also Index to new 
matter respecting MEXICO, Chap. XI. 

All pretensions to tli is sound were abandoned by 
Spain in favour of the court of London, by a treaty 
signed at the Escurial on the 28th October 1790 ; 
and it was formally taken possession of by Lieute 
nant Pearce of the British navy, in 1795, in the 
name of his Britannic Majesty.] 

NOPALLAN, a province of Nueva Espana in 
the time of the gentilism of the Indians ; con 
quered by Mocthcutzuma in the 12th year of his 
reign, arid six before the entrance of the Spaniards. 

"NOPALUCA, a settlement and head settlement 
of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Tepeaca in 
Nueva Espana ; situate on the top of a lofty and 
extensive plain. Is is of a cold and dry tempera- 
tare, scanty of water, having no other than such 
as is preserved in two cisterns made for this pur 
pose. It contains JO families of Spaniards, 63 of 
Mustees and Mulattoes, and 176 of Mexican In 
dians. In its district are 17 estates, in the tillage 
of which the inhabitants are employed, as also in 
making saltpetre from a lake close to the settle 
ment. It happened here in the year 1740, that 
the earth experienced a trembling shock for the 
space of three months unremittingly. Six leagues 
to the n. one-fourth to the n. e. of its capital. 

NOPSA, a settlement of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada. It is of a cold temperature, abounding in 
wheat and other fruits of a cold climate. It is very 
dangerous to be out in the evening air on account 
of the vapours which exhale from the lakes with 
which the settlement is surrounded. In the dis 
trict is an estate of the religious order of San 
Agustin, where there is a chapel, in wbich is ve- 



NOR 

nerated an image of Nucstra Senora de Belen. It 
contains more than 100 white and as many black 
inhabitants; also as many Indians. Seven leagues 
n. of Tunja. 

NOQUETS, a river of New France or Canada 
in N. America. It runs e. and enters the bay of 
Puants of the lake Michigan. 

NOQUETS, a bay on the w. coast of the lake 
Michigan, in the same province. 

NOQURTS, a barbarous nation of Indians of Ca 
nada in N. America, dwelling by the gulf or bay 
of its name. It once was on the shore of the lake 
Superior, but established themselves in the former 
place when they had fled from a war in which 
they were almost all exterminated. It consists now 
of nothing but some dispersed families. 

NORD, or NORTH, Islands of the, some islands 
of the w. coast of Cape Breton. They are two, 
and situate opposite to the e. point of St. John s 
island. 

NORD, a cape or point of land, the e. extre 
mity of the island S. John in Nova Scotia or 
Acadia. 

Noun, another, on the e. coast of Hudson s 
bay. 

NORD, another, the extremity of Cape Breton, 
which looks upon Newfoundland. 

NORD, a small river of Virginia, which runs 
n. e. in the county of Albemarle. 

[NORD, Rio DEL, or Rio BRAVO. See NORTH 
River, in the gulf of Mexico.] 

NORD, another, of the same province, called 
the n. branch or arm. 

NORDESTE, or NORTH-EAST, a point or ex 
tremity of the island of Jamaica, which looks 
upon S. Domingo, between Long bay and Cold 
bay. 

NORFIELD, a city of the province of Massa 
chusetts, one of those of New England, on the 
shore of the river Connecticut. 

[NORFOLK, a populous maritime county of 
Massachusetts, lately taken from the s. part of 
Suffolk county, and lies to the s. around the town 
and harbour of Boston. It contains 20 townships, 
of which Dedham is the seat of justice. Number 
of inhabitants 24,280.] 

[NORFOLK, a populous county of Virginia, 
bounded n. by James s river, which divides it Irom 
Warwick. It contains 14,524 inhabitants, includ 
ing 5345 slaves.] 

[NORFOLK, a port of entry and post-town and 
seat of justice in the above county, on the e. side 
of Elizabeth river, immediately below the con 
fluence of the e. branch. It is the most consider- 
2 



NOR 

able commercial town in Virginia. The channel 
of the river is from 350 to 400 yards wide, and at 
common flood tide has 18 feet water up to the 
town. The harbour is safe and commodious, and 
large enough to contain 300 ships. It was burnt 
on the 1st of January 1776, by the Liverpool man 
of war, by order of the British governor Lord Dun- 
more, and the loss amounted to 300,000/. sterling. 
It now contains about 500dwclling-houses, a court 
house, goal, an Episcopal and Methodist church, 
a theatre, and an academy. In 1790, it contained 
2959 inhabitants, including 1294 slaves. The 
town is governed by a mayor and several alder 
men. It carries on a brisk trade to the W. Indies, 
Europe, and the different states, and constitutes, 
with Portsmouth, which stands on the opposite 
side of the river, a port of entry. The exports 
for one year, ending Sept. 30th, 1794, amounted 
to 1,660,752 dollars. A canal of 16 miles in 
length is now cutting from the n. branch of Albe- 
marle sound in N. Carolina, to the waters of the s. 
branch of Elizabeth river. It will communicate 
with Elizabeth river nine miles from Norfolk. 
Merchant vessels of the largest size may go within 
a mile from the mouth of the canal; and here, the 
water being fresh, the worm, which does such da 
mage to vessels in Norfolk and Portsmouth, will 
not affect them. It is 74 miles e. s. e. of Rich 
mond, 29 from \Villiamsburgh, 13 e. of Suffolk, 
and 195 s. by w. of Philadelphia. Lat. 36 55 
n. Long. 76 23 o&amp;gt;.] 

[NORFOLK, a township in Litchfield county, 
Connecticut, 15 miles n. of Litchfield, on the Mas 
sachusetts line.] 

NOR1, a large, fertile, and beautiful valley of 
the government of Antioquia in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada, between the rivers Cauca and To- 
nusco. 

NORIA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Tucuman in Peru ; situate on the 
shore of the river Dulce. 

[NORMAN Cape, on the w. coast of New 
foundland island, is on the gulf of St. Lawrence, 
and the w. entrance of the narrow bay of Mauco, 
20 leagues from cape Ferrol. Lat. 51 39 n. 
Long. 55 58 w. High water at full and change 
days at nine o clock.] 

NORONA, an island of the N. sea, opposite 
the Brazil coast, discovered in 1517, by Fernando 
Norona, a Portuguese, who gave it this name. 
It is two leagues long, and has two very good ports, 
one to the n. defended by three forts, and another 
to the n. w. defended by two, the one of which is 
in a lofty and inaccessible spot. The Portuguese 



NOR 

abandoned this island as useless and barren, and 
it was taken possession of by the French company 
of the W. Indies, but was recovered by the for 
mer, who fortified it. It produces nothing, and 
the food is brought from Pernambuco. The coasts 
are full of rocks and shoals which render its access 
difficult. The principal settlement is San Pablo, 
distant a mile and a half from the sea, being the 
residence of the Portuguese governor, before that 
it was ceded by these to the Spaniards, its present 
possessors. The fort of Los Rernedios is the best. 
The island is 70 leagues e. of the coast, in lat. 
38 31 . 

NOROSI, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; situate on the shore of the cap^ of La 
Loba, where the river Grande de la Magdalenu 
communicates with the Colorado. 

[NORRIDGEWALK, or NOIHUDGEWOCK, 
a post-town in Lincoln county, on Kennebeck 
river, Maine, incorporated in 1788, and contains 
376 inhabitants. It is 12 miles w. of Canaan, and 
160 n. by e. of Boston. The Indian town of this 
name stood about 40 miles above fort Halifax, 
where Kennebeck river, as you ascend it, after 
taking a s. w. course, turns to the n. and forms a 
point where the town stood. It was destroyed by 
a party under Colonal Harman, in 1724.] 

[NORR1TON, the principal town in Montgo 
mery county, Pennsylvania^ about 15 miles n. w. 
of Philadelphia, on the n. bank of the Schuylkill, 
having about 20 houses, a court-house and gaol, 
and a handsome edifice of stone for the preserva 
tion of records, and an observatory. 

This town was the residence of that celebrated 
philosopher and philantrophist, Dr. David Ritten- 
house. In his observatory, near his mansion-house, . 
he was interred, agreeably to his request, June 1796. 
His tomb-stone contains nothing but his name and 
the simple record of the days and years of his birth 
and death. " Here," says the elegant writer of 
his eulogy, Dr. Rush, " shall the philosophers of 
future ages resort to do homage to his tomb, and 
children yet unborn shall point to the dome which 
covers it, and exultingly say, There lies our 
Rittenhouse. "] 

NORTE, a large and abundant river of Nuevo 
Mexico, the last boundary of the known lands or 
countries of N, America, being also called the 
river Colorado. It runs towards the s. and enters 
the sea at the n. end of the gulf of California or 
Mar Roxo de Cortes, in lat. 32 35 n. 

[For further account of this river, see King 
dom of MEXICO, NUEVO, (new matter).] 



438 



NOR 



NORTE, a bay of the island of S. Domingo, in 
the e. rhumb and at the cape of Samaiui, between 
the river Limones and port Gozicr. 

NORTE, a settlement and garrison of the pro 
vince of Taraumara and kingdom of Nucva Viz- 
caya in N. America, where there is a captain and 
sufficient number of troops to restrain the incursions 
of the infidel Indians. 

NORTE, a cape or point of land on the coast of 
the province and country of Las Amazonas, one 
of those which form the mouth or entrance of the 
river Marailon or Amazon, and that which looks 
to the n. from whence it is thus called. Lat. 1 
49 30" n. Long. 49 48 to. 

NORTE, another, of the island Margarita; and 
it is one of those extremities which form the bay 
here. 

NORTE, a port of the island in which is the 
above point. 

NORTH, a small river of the province of Mas 
sachusetts, which runs e. and enters the sea close 
to cape Cod. 

NORTH, another, also a small river in the dis 
trict of Carteret in S. Carolina. It runs .9. and 
enters the sea. 

[NORTH AMERICA comprehends all that part of 
the continent of America which lies n. of the isth 
mus of Darien, extending n. and ,. from about the 
9 of n. lat. to the n. pole, and e. and w. from 
the Atlantic to the Pacific ocean, between the 52 
and J 68 of w. long, from Greenwich. Beyond 
the 70 n. lat. few discoveries have been made. 
North America was discovered in 1495, in the 
reign of Henry VII. by John Cabot, a Venetian, 
and was then thickly inhabited by Indians. In July 
] 779, Captain Cook proceeded as far as lat. 7 l,when 
he came to a solid body of ice from continent to con 
tinent. The vast tract of country, bounded w. by 
the Pacific ocean, s. and e. by California, New 
Mexico and Louisiana, the United States, Ca 
nada and the Atlantic ocean, and extending as 
far n. as the country is habitable, (a few scattered 
British, French, and some other European settle 
ments excepted), is inhabited wholly by various 
nations and tribes of Indians. The Indians also 
possess large tracts of country within the Spanish, 
American, and British dominions. Those parts of 
N. America, not inhabited by Indians, belong (if 
we include Greenland) to Denmark, Great Britain, 
the American states, and Spain. Spain claims E. 
and part of W. Florida, and all a?, of the Missis 
sippi, and s. of the n. boundaries of Louisiana, 
New Mexico, and California. Great Britain 
claims all the country inhabited by Europeans, 



NOR 

lying n. and c. of the United States, except. Green 
land, which belongs to Denmark. The remaining 
part is the territory of the Sixteen United States. 
The particular governments, provinces, and states 
of N. America, are exhibited in the table at the be 
ginning of this work, vol. i. 

On casting one s eyes upon the map of N. Ame 
rica, it is immediately perceived that the English 
still possess vast possessions on the continent, the 
most important parts of which are Canada and 
Nova Scotia. Masters of Canada, they command 
the navigation of the river St. Lawrence, from 
Montreal to Quebec. This river is navigable for 
large ships, which transport either to England or 
to the English Antilles, articles of the first neces 
sity. The navigation of these rivers is protected 
by the maritime station of Halifax, considered as 
the capital of Nova Scotia. Tin s is not the only 
advantage which the English derive from the pos 
session of Canada ; it affords them the means of 
eluding the non-intercourse laws passed by the 
American congress. From Montreal to fort St. 
Jean the distance by land is very inconsiderable, 
therefore this town has become an entrepot for 
English goods, which by lake Champlain are 
easily introduced into the states of Vermont and 
New York. 

We proceed to insert An alphabetical list of the 
mountains of N. America, a corresponding list of 
those of Spanish America being given under article 
MOUNTAINS ; and conclude the article, of which 
we treat, with A summary account of the first dis 
covery and settlement of A. America, arranged in 
chronological order. N. B. The discoveries re 
specting Spanish N. America will be found under 
article MEXICO, (new mattery Chap. XI.) 

Alphabetical list of the mountains of N. America, 
a corresponding list of those of Spanish America 
being given under article MOUNTAINS. 
Acha, sierra de Blackleg mountains 

Agamont hill Bonabeag hills 

Allegany or Apallachian Bostan, volcano de 

mountains Bradeard mountains 

Almagre, sierra de Broad mountains 

Amilpas, volcano de la Brushy mountains 
Ararat mountains Burros, cerro de las 

Bald mountains Camaron, alta del 

Baker mountains Carcay, sierra de 

Barigan, sierra de Carieboef mountains 

Battle hills Carmilo, sierra del 

Bearstooth hill Chanate, sierra del 

Beaver hills Chesnut mountains 

Blue mountains Chigni, sierra de] 



NORTH AMERICA. 



439 



[Clinches mountains 

Clara, cerro de 

Cola del Aguila, sierra 

de la 

Colima, volcano de 
Coronel, cerro del 
Cosinas, sierra de las 
Cumberland mountains 
Diablo, sierra de 
Elias, St. mountain 
Encomiendo, sierra de la 
Enfado, sierra de 
Evits mountains 
Fainveather mountains 
Flattop mountains 
Florida, sierra de la 
Gauley mountains 
Genela, cerro de la 
Grandfather s mountains 
Grun mountains 
Grullas, sierra de las 
Guacaros, sierra de las 
Guadalupe, sierra de 
Guatemala, volcano de 
Hart mountain 
Hood mountain 
Horn mountain 
Iron mountains, Great 
Jack s mountains 
Jackson s mountains 
Jere mountains 
Jurillo or Juruyo, vol 
cano de 

Iztacibath, sierra de 
Katskill mountain 
King mountain 
Laurel mountains 
Long mountains 
Lucerno, sierra del 
Mahony mountains 
Maiz, cerro del 
Maraval, volcano de 
Martinez, cerro de 
Miguel, St. volcano de 
Mimbres, sierra de los 
Mixes, cerro de los 
Montague mountains 
Nevada, sierra 
North mountains 
Nunic mountains 
Obscura, sierra de 
Occonec mountains 
Organos, sierra de los 
Orizabo pico 
Orosi, volcano de 



Palma, sierra de 
Papagayo, volcano de 
Penobscot hills 
Perpetua, cerro de 
Peter s mountans 
Piernas de Dona Maria, 

sierra de las 
Pilares, sierra de 
Plata, sierra de la 
Popocateptl de la cordil- 

lera Inahuac 
Powel s mountains 
Rainier mountains 
Rattlesnake mountains 
Rocky mountains 
Sacatuoluca, volcano de 
Sacramento, sierra de 
Saddle mountains 
San Saba, montanas de 
Sapanza, cerro de 
Savage mountains 
Scuttock hills 
Sel Geme, montanas de 
Sentualtepec pico 
Sewel mountains 
Shade mountains 
Shavungunk mountains 
Sideling mountains 
Sincoque, cerro de 
Slate mountains 
Soconusco, volcan de 
Sonsonate, volcano de 
Sopot itlan, volcano de 
South mountains 
Stone mountains 
Suchetepec, volcano 
Tacon mountains 
Tancitaro, pic de 
Tecapa, volcano de, 
Tenonco, volcano de 
Timpingos, sierra de 
Tlica, volcano de 
Tuscarora mountains 
Tussey moun tains 
Valle, cerro del 
Varu, volcano de 
Verde, sierra 
Vergines, volcans de las 
Viego, volcans del 
Volcano mountain 
Wambacho, volcano de 
White mountains 
White Oak mountains 
Wills mountains 
Yellow mountains 



A summary account of the first discovery and set 
tlement of N. America, arranged in chrono/ogi- 
cal order. N. B. The discoveries respecting 
Spanish America will be found under article 
Mtxico, (new nutter). 

North America was discovered in the reign of 
Henry VIJ. a period when the arts and sciences 
had made very considerable progress in Europe. 
Many of the first adventurers were men of genius 
and learning, and were careful to preserve au 
thentic records of such of their proceedings as 
would be interesting to posterity. These records 
afford ample documents for American historians. 
Perhaps no people on the globe can trace the his 
tory of their origin and progress with so much 
precision as the inhabitants of N. America ; par 
ticularly that part of them who inhabit the terri 
tory of the United States. 

The fame which Columbus had acquired by 
his first discoveries on this w. continent, spread 
through Europe, and inspired many with the 
spirit of enterprise. As early as 1495, four years 
only after the first discovery of America, John 
Cabot, a Venetian, obtained a grant or commission 
from Henry VII. to discover unknown lands and 
annex them to the crown. (See Hazard s His 
torical Collection, vol. i. p. 9, where this grant 
is recited at large. It is dated A. D. 1495.) 

In the spring of 1496, he sailed from England 
with two ships, carrying with him his three sons. 
In this voyage, which was intended for China, he 
fell irt with the n. side of Terra Labrador, and 
coasted n. as far as the 67 of latitude. 

1497. The next year he made a second voyage 
to America with his son Sebastian, who afterwards 
proceeded in the discoveries which his father had 
begun. On the 24th of June he discovered Bona- 
vista, on the n. e. side of Newfoundland. Before 
his return he traversed the coast from Davis s 
straits to cape Florida. 

1502. Sebastian Cabot was this year at New 
foundland ; and on his return, carried Ihree of the 
natives of that island to King Henry VII. 

1513. In the spring of 1513, John Ponce 
sailed from Porto Rico n. and discovered the 
continent in lat. 30 8 n. He landed in April, 
a season when the country around was covered 
with verdure, and in full bloom. This circum 
stance induced him to call the country Florida, 
which, for many years, was the common name for 
N. and S. America. 

1516. In 1516, Sir Sebastian Cabot and Sir 
Thomas Pert, explored the coast as far as Brazil 
in S. America. 

This vast extent of country, the coast of which] 



NORTH AMERICA. 



[was thus explored, remained unclaimed and un 
settled by any European power (except by the 
Spaniards in S. America) for almost a century 
from the time of its discovery. 

1524. It was not till the year 1524 that France 
attempted discoveries on the American coast. Sti 
mulated by his enterprising neighbours, Francis I. 
who possessed a great and active mind, sent John 
Verazano, a Florentine, to America, for the pur 
pose of making discoveries. lie traversed the 
coast from lat. 28 to 50 n. In a second voyage, 
some time after, he was lost. 

1525. The next year Stephen Gomez, the first 
Spaniard who came upon the American coast for 
discovery, sailed from Groyn in Spain, to Cuba 
and Florida, thence n. to cape Razo, in lat. 46 n. 
in search of a n. passage to the E. Indies. 

1534. In the spring of 1534, by the direction 
of Francis I. a fleet was fitted out at St. Malo s in 
France, with design to make discoveries in Ame 
rica. The command of this fleet was given to 
James Cartier. He arrived at Newfoundland in 
May of this year ; thence he sailed n. ; and on the 
day of the festival of St. Lawrence, he found him 
self in about lat. 48 SO . in the midst of a broad 
gulf, which he named St. Lawrence. He gave the 
same name to the river which empties into it. In 
this voyage he sailed as far n. as lat. 51, expect 
ing in vain to find a passage to China. (In Ha 
zard s Historical Collections, vol. i. p. 19, is a 
commission from Francis I. to James Cartier or 
Quartier, for making an establishment in Canada, 
dated October 17, 1540. Probably this commis 
sion was given him in consequence of his former 
discoveries.) 

1535. The next year he sailed up the river St. 
Lawrence 300 leagues, to the great and swift fall. 
He called the country New France ; built a fort, 
in which he spent the winter, and returned in the 
following spring to France. 

1539. On the 12fh of May 1539, Ferdinand 
tie Soto, with 900 men, besides seamen, sailed from 
Cuba, having for his object the conquest of Flo 
rida. On the 30th of May he arrived at Spiiito 
Santo, from whence he travelled ??. to the Chicka- 
saw country, in about lat. 55 or 36. He died 
and was buried on the bank of Mississippi river, 
May 1542, aged 42 years. Alverdo succeeded 
him. 

1542. In 1542, Francis la Roche, Lord Robe- 
well, was sent to Canada by the French king, with 
three ships and 200 men, women, and children. 
They wintered here in a fort which they had built, 
and returned in the spring. About the year 1550, 
a large number of adventurers sailed for Canada, 



but were never after heard of. In 159S, the king 
of France commissioned the Marquis de la Roche 
to conquer Canada, and other countries not pos 
sessed by any Christian prince. We do not learn, 
however, that La Roche ever attempted to execute 
his commission, or that any further attempts were 
made to settle Canada during this century. 

January 6, 1548-49. This year King Henry VI f. 
granted a pension for life to Sebastian Cabot, in 
consideration of the important services he had ren 
dered to the kingdom by his discoveries in Ame 
rica. (See Hazard s Hist. Coll. vol. i. p. 23. 
Hackluyt calls this, "the large pension granted by 
King Edward VI. to Sebastian Cabot, constituting 
him grand pilot of England.") Very respectable 
descendants of the Cabot family now live in the 
commonwealth of Massachusetts. 

1562. The admiral of France, Chatillon, early 
in this year, sent out a fleet under the command 
of John Ribalt. He arrived at cape Francis on 
the coast of Florida, near which, on the 1st of 
May, he discovered and entered a river, which he 
called May river. It is more than probable that 
this river is the same which we now call St. Mary s, 
which forms a part of the s. boundary of the 
United States. As he coasted n. he discovered 
eight other rivers, one of which he called Port 
Royal, and sailed up it several leagues. On one 
of the rivers he built a fort, and called it Charles, 
in which he left a colony under the direction of 
Captain Albert. The severity of Albert s measures 
excited a mutiny, in which, to the ruin of the co- 
only, he was slain. Two years after, Chatillon 
sent Rene Laudonier with three ships to Florida. 
In June he arrived at the river May, on which 
he built a fort, and, in honour to his king, 
Charles IX. he called it Carolina. 

In August, this year, Captain Ribalt arrived at 
Florida the second time, with a fleet of seven ves 
sels, to recruit the colony, which, two years before, 
he had left under the direction of the unfortunate 
Captain Albert. 

The September following, Pedro Melandes, with 
six Spanish ships, pursued Ribalt up the river on 
which he had settled, and overpowered him in 
numbers, cruelly massacred him and his whole 
company. Melandes, having in this way taken 
possession of the country, built three forts, and 
left them garrisoned with 1200 soldiers. Laudo 
nier Bud his colony on May river, receiving infor 
mation of the fate of Ribalt, took the alarm and 
escaped to France. 

1567. A fleet of three ships was this j-ear sent 
from France to Florida, under the command of 
Dominique de Gourges. The object of this ex-] 



NORTH AMERICA. 



[pedition was to dispossess the Spaniards of that 
part of Florida which they had cruelly and un 
justifiably seized three years before, lie arrived 
on the coast of Florida, April 1568, and soon after 
made a successful attack upon the forts. The re 
cent cruelty of Melandes and his company excited 
revenge in the breast of Gourges, and roused the 
unjustifiable principle of retaliation. He took the 
forts, put most of the Spaniards to the sword, and 
having- burned and demolished all their fortresses, 
returned to France. During the 50 years next 
after this event, the French enterprised no settle 
ments in America. 

1576. Captain Frobisher was sent this year to 
find out a n. w. passage to the E. Indies. The 
first land which he made on the coast was a cape, 
which, in honour to the queen, he called Queen 
Elizabeth s Foreland. In coasting n. he dis 
covered the straits which bear his name. He pro 
secuted his search for a passage into the W. ocean, 
till he was prevented by the ice, and then returned 
to England. (Hazard s Hist. Coll. vol. i. p. 23.) 

June llth, 1578. In 1578, Sir Humphrey 
Gilbert obtained a patent from Queen Elizabeth, 
for lands not yet possessed by any Christian prince, 
provided he would ta-ke possession within six 
years. With this encouragement he sailed for 
America, and on the first of August 1583, an 
chored in Conception bay. Afterwards he dis 
covered and took possession of St. John s harbour, 
and the country s. of it. In pursuing his dis 
coveries he lost one of his ships on the shoals of 
Sablon, and on his return home, a storm overtook 
him, in which he was unfortunately lost, and the 
intended settlement was prevented. 

1584. This year two patents were granted by 
Queen Elizabeth, one to Adrian Gilbert, (Feb. 6) 
the other to Sir Walter Raleigh, (March 25) for 
lands not possessed by any Christian prince. (Ha 
zard s Hist. Coll. vol. i. p. 28 and 33.) By the 
direction of Sir W alter, two ships were fitted and 
sent out under the command of Philip Amidas 
and Arthur Barlow, witli 107 passengers. In June 
1585 they arrived on the coast, and anchored in a 
harbour seven leagues w. of the Itoanoke. This 
colony returned to England in June 1586. On 
the 13th of July, they, in a formal manner, took 
possession of the country, and, in honour of their 
virgin queen, Elizabeth, they called it Virginia. 
Till this time the country was known by the ge 
neral name of Florida. After this Virginia be 
came the common name for all N. America. 

1586. This year, Sir Walter Raleigh sent Sir 
Richard Greenville to America, with seven ships, 
lie arrived at Wococon harbour in June. Hav- 

VOL. III. 



ing stationed a colony of more than 100 people at 
Roanoke, under the direction of Captain Ralph 
Lane, he coasted n. e. as far as Chesapeak bay, 
and returned to England. 

The colony under Captain Lane endured ex 
treme hardships, and must have perished, had not 
Sir Francis Drake fortunately returned to Virginia, 
and carried them to England, after having- made 
several conquests for the queen in t se W. Indies 
and other places. 

A fortnight after, Sir Richard Greenville arrived 
with new recruits ; and although lie did not find 
the colony which he had before left, and knew not 
but they had perished, he had the rashness to leave 
50 men at the same place. 

1587. The year following, Sir Walter sent 
another company to Virginia, under Governor 
White, with a charter and 12 assistants. In July 
he arrived at Roanoke. Not one of the second 
company remained. He determined, however, to 
risk a third colony. Accordingly he left 115 
people at the old settlement, and returned to Eng 
land. 

This year (Aug. 13) Manteo was baptized in 
Virginia. He was the first native Indian who re 
ceived that ordinance in that part of America. 
He, Avith Towaye, another Indian, had visited 
England, and returned home to Virginia with the 
colony. On the 18th of August, Mrs. Dare was 
delivered of a daughter, whom she called Virginia. 
She was born at Roanoke, and was the first Eng 
lish child that was born in N. America. 

1590. In the year 1590, Governor White 
came over to Virginia with supplies and recruits 
for his colony ; but, to his great grief, not a man 
was to be found. They had all miserably famished 
with hunger, or were massacred by the Indians. 

1602. In the spring of this year, Bartholomew 
Gosnoljd, with 32 persons, made a voyage to N. 
Virginia, and discovered and gave names to cape 
Cod, Martha s Vineyard, (and Elizabeth islands, 
and to Dover cliff. Elizabeth island was the place 
which they fixed for their first settlement. But 
the courage of those who were to have tarried, 
failing, they all went on board and returned to 
England. All the attempts to settle this continent 
which were made by the Dutch, French, and Eng 
lish, from its discovery to the present time, a pe 
riod of 110 years, proved ineffectual. The Spa 
niards only, of all the European nations, had been 
successful. There is no account of there having 
been one European family, at this time, in all the 
vast extent of coast from Florida to Greenland. 

1603. Martin Pring and William Brown were 
this year sent by Sir Walter Raleigh, with two] 

3 J&amp;gt; 



442 



NORTH AMERICA. 



[small vessels, to make discoveries in N. Virginia. 
They came upon the coast, which was broken with 
a multitude of islands, in lat. 45 30 n. They 
coasted s. to Cape Cod bay ; thence round the 
cape into a commodious harbour, in lat. 41 25 , 
where they went ashore and tarried SCVCH weeks, 
during which time they loaded one of their ves 
sels with sassafras, and returned to England. 

Bartholomew Gilbert, in a voyage to S. Vir 
ginia, in search of the third colony which had 
been left there by Governor White in 1587, hav 
ing touched at several of the W. India islands, 
landed near Chesapeak bay, where, in a skirmish 
with the Indians, he and four of his men were un 
fortunately slain. The rest, without any further 
search for the colony, rclurned to England. 

France, being at this time in a state of tranquil 
lity, in consequence of the edict of Nanlz in favour 
of the Protestants, passed by Henry IV. (April 
1598), and of the peace with Philip, king of Spain 
and Portugal, was induced to pursue her discove 
ries in America. Accordingly the king signed a 
patent (see Hist. Coll. vol. i. p. 46) in favour of 
De Mons, (Nov. 8, 1603) of all the country from 
Jat. 40 to 46 n. under the name of Acadia. The 
next year De Mons ranged the coast from St. Law 
rence to cape Sable, and round to cape Cod. 

1605. In May J605, George s island and Pen 
tecost harbour were discovered by Captain George 
Weymouth. In May he entered a large river in 
lat. 43 20 , (variation 11 15 &amp;gt;.) which Mr. 
Prince, in his Chronology, supposes must have 
been Sagadahock ; but from the latitude, it was 
more probably the Piscataqua. Captain Wey 
mouth carried with him to England five of the 
natives. 

1606. April 10th this year, James I. by pa 
tent, (see Hist. Coll. vol. i. p. 50) divided Vir 
ginia into two colonies. The s. included all lands 
between lat. 34 and 41 n. This was styled the 
first colony, under the name of S. Virginia, and 
was granted to the .London company. The n. 
called the second colony, and known by the gene 
ral name of N. Virginia, included all lands be 
tween lat. 38 and 45 n. and wus granted to the 
Plymouth company. Each of these colonies had 
a council of 13 men to govern them. To prevent 
disputes about territory, the colony which should 
last place themselves was prohibited to plant within 
100 miles of the other. There appears to be an 
inconsistency in these grants, as the lands lying 
between the 38 and 41 are covered by both pa 
tents. 

Both the London and Plymouth companies en- 
terpriscd settlements within the limits of their re 



spective grants. With what success will now be 
mentioned. 

Mr. Piercy, brother to the earl of Northumber 
land, in the service of the London company, went 
over with a colony to Virginia, and discovered 
Powhatan, now James river. In the mean time 
the Plymouth company sent Captain Henry Chal- 
lons, in a vessel of 55 tons, to plant a colony in N. 
Virginia ; but in his voyage he was taken by a 
Spanish fleet and carried to Spain. 

1607. The London company this spring sent 
Captain Chistopher Newport, with three vessels, 
to S. Virginia. On the 26th of April he entered 
Chesapeak bay, and landed, and soon after &amp;lt;jave 
to the most s. point the name of Cape Henry, 
which it still retains. Having elected Mr. Ed 
ward Wingfield president for the year, they next 
day landed all their men, and began a settlement 
on James river, at a place which they called James 
Town. This is the first town that was settled by 
the English in N. America. The June following, 
Captain Newport sailed for England, leaving with 
the president 104 persons. In August died Cap 
tain Bartholemew Gosnold, the first projector of 
this settlement, arid one of the council. The fol 
lowing winter James town was burnt. 

During this time, the Plymouth companv fitted 
out two ships under the command of Admiral Raw- 
ley Gilbert. They sailed for N. Virginia on the 
31st of May, with 100 planters, and Captain 
George Popham for their president. They arrived 
in August, and settled about nine or 10 leagues to 
the s. of the mouth of Sagadahock river. A great 
part of the colony, however, disheartened by the 
severity of the winter, returned to England in De 
cember, leaving their president, Captain Popham, 
with only 45 men. 

it was in the fall of this year that the famous 
Mr. Robinson, with part of his congregation, who 
afterwards settled at Plymouth in New England, 
removed from the n, of England to Holland, to 
avoid the cruellies of persecution, and for the sake 
of enjoying " purity of worship and liberty of 
conscience. * 

This year a small company of merchants at 
Dieppe and St. Malo s founded Quebec, or rather 
the colony which they sent built a few huts there, 
which did not take the form of a town until the 
reiffn of Lewis XIV. 

1608. Sagadahock colony suffered incredible 
hardships after the departure of their friends in 
December. In the depth of winter, which was 
extremely cold, their store-house caught fire and 
was consumed, with roost of their provisions and 
loggings. Their misfortunes were increased soon] 



NORTH AMERICA. 



44S 



["after by th&amp;lt;* death of their president. Raw ley 
Gilbert was appointed to succeed him. 

Lord Chief Justice Popharn made every exer 
tion to keep this colony alive, by repeatedly send 
ing them supplies. But the circumstance of his 
death, which happened this year, together with 
that of president (filbert s being called to England 
to settle his aiiairs, broke up the colony, and they 
all returned with him to England. 

The unfavourable reports which these first un 
fortunate adventurers propagated respecting the 
country, prevented any further attempts to settle 
N. Virginia for several years after. 

1609. The London company, last year, sent 
Captain Nelson, with two ships and 120 persons, 
to James town ; and this year, Captain John 
Smith, afterwards president, arrived on the coast 
of S. Virginia, and by sailing up a number of 
the rivers, discovered the interior country. In 
September, Captain Newport arrived with 70 per 
sons, which increased the colony to 200 souls. 

Mr. Robinsof* and his congregation, who had 
settled at Amsterdam, removed this year to Ley- 
den; where they remained more than 11 years ; 
till a part of them came over to New England. 

The council for S. Virginia having resigned their 
old commission, (the second charter of Virginia 
bears date May 23, 1609. Hist. Coll. vol. i. p. 58) 
requested and obtained a new one; in consequence 
of which they appointed Sir Thomas West, Lord 
de la War, general of the colony ; Sir Thomas 
Gates, his lieutenant ; Sir George Somers, admi 
ral ; Sir Thomas Dale, high-marshal ; Sir Ferdi 
nand Wainman, general of the horse; and Cap 
tain Newport, vice-admiral. 

June 8. In June, Sir Thomas Gates, Admiral 
Newport, and Sir George Somers, with seven 
ships, a ketch and a pinnace, having 500 souls 
on board, men, women, and children, sailed from 
Falraouth for S. Virginia. In crossing the Ba 
hama gulf, on the 24th of July, the fleet was 
overtaken by a violent storm, and separated. Four 
days after. Sir George Somers ran his vessel ashore 
on one of the Bermuda islands, which, from this 
ciieumvstance, have been called the Somer Islands. 
The people n board, 150 in number, all got safe 
oa shore ; and there remained until the following 
May. The remainder of the fleet arrived at Vir 
ginia in August. The colony was now increased 
to50Qmeiu Captain Smith, then president, a little 
before the arrival of the fleet, had been very badly 
burnt by means of some powder which had acci 
dentally caught fire. This unfortunate circum 
stance, together with the opposition he met with 
irora those who had lately arrived, induced him to 



leave the colony and return to England; which 
he accordingly did the last of September. Francis 
\\ s , hi.s successor in oilice, soon followed him, 
and George Piercy was elected president. 

1610. The year following, the S. Virginia or 
London company sealed a patent to Lord de la 
War, constituting him governor and captain-ge 
neral of S. Virginia. He soon after embarked fos 
America with Captain Argal and J50 men in three 
ships. 

The unfortunate people, who, the year before, 
had been shipwrecked on (he Bermuda islands, 
had employed themselves during the winter and 
spring, under the direction of Sir Thomas Gates, 
Sir George Somers, and Admiral Newport, in 
building a sloop to transport themselves to the 
continent. They embarked for Virginia on the 
10th of May, with about 150 persons on board; 
leaving two of their men behind, who chose to 
stay ; and landed at James town on the 23d of the 
same month. Finding the colony, which at the 
time of Captain Smith s departure consisted of 
500 souls, now reduced to 60, and those few in a 
distressed and wretched situation, they with one 
voice resolved to return to England ; and for this 
purpose, on the 7th of June, the whole colony re 
paired on board their vessels, broke up the settle 
ment, and sailed down the river on their way to 
their native country. 

Fortunately, Lord de la War, who had em 
barked for James town the March before, met 
them the day after they sailed, and persuaded 
them to return with him to James town, where they 
arrived and landed the 10th of June. The go 
vernment of the colony of right devolved upon 
Lord dc la War. From this time we may date 
the effectual settlement of Virginia. Its history 
from this period will be given in its proper place. 

As early as the year 1607 and 1608, Henry 
Hudson, an English man, under a commission from 
King James, in the employ of certain merchants, 
made several voyages for the discovery of a n. w. 
passage to the E. Indies. In 1609, upon some 
misunderstanding, he engaged in the Dutch ser 
vice, in the prosecution of the same design, and 
on his return ranged along the sea-coast of what 
has since been called New England, (which three 
years before was granted by King James to his 
English subjects, the Ph mouth company) and en 
tered Hudson s river, giving it his own name. 
He ascended this river in his boat as far as what 
has since been called Aurania or Albany. In 
1613, the Dutch VV. India company sent some 
persons to this river, to trade with the Indians ; 
and as early as 1623, the Dutch had a trading*] 
3 L 2 



444 



NORTH AMERICA. 



[house on Connecticut river. In consequence of 
these discoveries and settlements, the Dutch claim 
ed all the country extending from cape Cod to 
cape flenlopen along the sea-coast, arid as far 
back into the country as any of the rivers within 
those limits extend. But their claim has been dis 
puted. This extensive country the Dutch called 
New Netherlands, and in 1C 14 the states-general 
granted a patent to sundry merchants for an ex 
clusive trade on Hudson s river, who the same 
year (1614) built a fort on the zo. side near Al 
bany. From this time we may date the settlement 
of New York, the history of which will be annexed 
to a description of the State. 

Conception Bay, on the island of Newfound 
land, was settled in the year 1610, by about 40 
planters under Governor John Guy, to whom 
King James had given a patent of incorporation. 

Chaplain, a Frenchman, had begun a settlement 
at Quebec 1608. St. Croix, Mount Mansel, and 
port Royal were settled about the snme time. 
These settlements remained undisturbed till 1613, 
when the Virginians, hearing that the French had 
settled within their limits, sent Captain Argal to 
dislodge them. For this purpose he sailed to Sa- 
gadahock, took their forts at Mount Mansel, St. 
Croix, and port Royal, with their vessels, ord 
nance, cattle and provisions, and carried them to 
James town in Virginia. Quebec was left in pos 
session of the French. 

1614. This year Captain John Smith, with 
two ships and 45 men and boys, made a voyage to 
N. Virginia, to make experiments upon a gold 
and copper mine. His orders were, to fish and 
trade with the natives, if he should fail in his ex 
pectations with regard to the mine. To facilitate 
this business, he took with him Tantum, an In 
dian, perhaps one that Captain Weymouth carried 
to England in 1605. In April he reached the 
island Monahigan, in lat. 43 30 . Here Captain 
Smith was directed to stay and keep possession 
with ten men, for the purpose of making a trial of 
the whaling business, but being disappointed in 
this, he built seven boats, in which 37 men made 
a very successful fishing voyage. In the mean 
time the captain himself with eight men only, in a 
small boat, coasted from Penobscot to Sagadahock, 
Acocisco, Passataquack, Trngabizanda, now call 
ed cape Ann, thence to Acomac, where he skir 
mished with some Indians; thence to cape Cod, 
where he set his Indian, Tantum, ashore, and left 
him, and returned to Monahigan. In this voyage 
he found two French ships in the bay of Massa 
chusetts, who had come there six weeks before, 
aud during that time had been trading very ad 



vantageously with the Indians. It was conjec 
tured that there were, at this time, 3000 Indians 
upon the Massachusetts islands. 

In July, Captain Smith embarked for England 
in one of the vessels, leaving the other under the 
command of Captain Thomas Hunt, to equip for 
a voyage to Spain. After Captain Smith s de 
parture, Hunt perfidiously allured 20 Indians (one 
of whom was Squanto, afterwards so serviceable 
to the English) to come on board his ship at Pa- 
tuxit, and seven more at Nausit, and carried them 
to the islaud of Malaga, where he sold them for 
201. each, to be slaves for life. This conduct, 
which fixes an indelible stigma upon the character 
of Hunt, excited in the breasts of the Indians such 
an inveterate hatred of the English, as that, for 
many years after, all commercial intercourse with 
them was rendered exceedingly dangerous. 

Captain Smith arrived at London the last of 
August, where lie drew a map of the country, and 
called it New England. From this time N. Vir 
ginia assumed the name of New England, and the 
name Virginia was confined to the southern 
colony. 

Between the years 1614 and 1620, several at 
tempts were made by the Plymouth company to 
settle New England, but by various means they 
were all rendered ineffectual. During this time, 
however, an advantageous trade was carried on 
with the natives. 

1617. In the year 1617, Mr. Robinson and 
his congregation, influenced by several weighty 
reasons, meditated a removal to America. Various 
difficulties intervened to prevent the success of their 
designs until the year 1620, when a part of 
Mr. Robinson s congregation came over and settled 
at Plymouth. At this time commenced the settle 
ment in New England. 

The particulars relating to the first emigration 
to this n. part of America, the progress of its 
settlement, &amp;c. will be given in the history of New 
England, to which the reader is referred. 

In order to preserve the chronological order in 
which the several colonies, now grown into inde 
pendent states, were first settled, it will be neces 
sary that we should just mention, that the next year 
(1621) after the settlement of Plymouth, Captain 
John Mason obtained of the Plymouth council a 
grant of a part of the present state of New Hamp 
shire. Two years after (1623), under the autho 
rity of this grant, a small colony fixed down near 
the mouth of Piscataqua river. From this period 
we may date the settlement of New Hampshire. 

1627. In 1627, a colony of Swedes and Finns 
came over and landed at cape Ilcnlopen ; and af-J 



NORTH AMERICA. 



445 



perwards purchased of the Indians the land from 
cape Ilenlopen to the falls of Delaware, on both 
sides the river, which they called New Swedeland 
Stream. On this river they built several forts, and 
made settlements. 

1628. On the 19th of March 1628, the coun 
cil for New England sold to Sir Henry Roswell, 
and five others, a large tract of land lying round 
Massachusetts bay. The June following, Captain 
John Endicot, with his wife and company, came 
over and settled at Naurnkeag, now called Salem. 
" Among others who arrived at Naumkeag, were 
Ralph Spragne, with his brethren, Richard and 
William, who, with three or four more, by Go 
vernor Endicot s consent, undertook a journey 
through the woods above 12 miles westward, till 
they came to a neck of land called Mishawum, 
between Mystic and Charles rivers, full of In 
dians, named Aberginians. Their old sachem be 
ing dead, his eldest son, called by the English 
John Sagamore, was chief; a man of gentle and 
good disposition, by whose free consent they set 
tled here ; where they found but one English 
house thatched and pallisadoed, possessed by 
Thomas Walford, a smith." (Prince s Chronicle, 
p. 174.) 

" June 1629, Mr. Thomas Graves removed 
from Salem to Mishawum, and with the governor s 
consent called it Charlestown. He laid the town 
out in two-acre lots, and built the great house, 
which afterwards became the house of public wor 
ship. Mr. Bright, minister." (Ibid. p. 188.) 

Naumkeag then was the first English settle 
ment which was made in Massachusetts bay. 
Plymouth, indeed, which is now included in the 
commonwealth of Massachusetts, was settled eight 
years before, but at this time it was a separate co 
lony, under a distinct government; and continued 
so until the second charter of Massachusetts was 
granted by William and Mary in 1691 ; by which 
Plymouth, the province of Main and Sagadahock, 
were annexed to Massachusetts. 

June 13, 1633. In the reign of Charles I. 
Lord Baltimore, a Roman Catholic, applied for, 
and obtained a grant of, a tract of land upon 
Chesapeak bay, about 140 miles long and 130 
broad. Soon after this, in consequence of the ri 
gour of the laws of England against the Roman 
Catholics, Lord Baltimore, with a number of his 
persecuted brethren, came over and settled it, and 
in honour of Queen Henrietta Maria, they called 
it Maryland. 

The first grant of Connecticut was made by 
Robert Earl of Warwick, president of the coun 
cil of Plymouth, to Lord Say and Seal, to Lord 



Brook and others, in the year 1631. (Hazard s 
Hist. Coll. p. 318.) In consequence of several 
smaller grants made after by the patentees to par 
ticular persons, Mr. Fenwick, in 1635, made a 
settlement at the mouth of Connecticut river, and 
called it Say brook. About the same time (1636) 
a number of people from Massachusetts bay came 
and began settlements at Hartford, Wethersfield, 
and W indsor, on Connecticut river. Thus com 
menced the English settlement of Connecticut. 

Rhode island was first settled in consequence of 
religious persecution. Mr. Roger Williams, who 
was among those who came early over to Massa 
chusetts, not agreeing with some of his brethren iu 
sentiment, was very unjustifiably banished the co 
lony, and went with 12 others, his adherents, and 
settled at Providence in 1635. From this beginning 
arose the colony, now state of Rhode Island. 

1664. On the 20th of March 1664, Charles 
II. granted to the Duke of York what is now 
called New Jersey, then a part of a large tract of 
country, by the name of New Netherlands. Some 
parts of New Jersey were settled by the Dutch as- 
early as about 1615. 

1669. In the year 1662, Charles II. granted 
to Edward Earl of Clarendon, and seven others, 
almost the whole territory of the three s. states, 
N. and S. Carolina and Georgia. Two years 
after he granted a second charter, enlarging their 
boundaries. The proprietors, by virtue of au 
thority vested in them by their charter, engaged 
Mr. Locke to frame a system of laws for the go 
vernment of their intended colony. Notwithstand 
ing these preparations, no effectual settlement was 
made until the year 1669, (though one was at 
tempted in 1667) when Governor Sayle came over 
with a colony and fixed on a neck of land between 
Ashley and Cooper rivers. Thus commenced the 
settlement of Carolina, which then included the 
whole territory between lat. 29 and 36 30 n. to 
gether with the Bahama islands, lying between lat. 
22 and 27 n. 

1681. The royal charter for Pennsylvania was 
granted to William Penn on the 4th of March 1681 . 
The first colony came over the next year and set 
tled under the proprietor, William Penn, who 
acted as governor from October 1682 to August 
1684. The first assembly in the province of 
Pennsylvania was held at Chester, on the 4th of 
December 1682. Thus William Penn. a Quaker, 
justly celebrated as a great and good man, had 
the honour of laying the foundation of the present 
populonsaiul very flourishing state of Pennsylvania. 

The proprietary government in Carolina was at 
tended with so many iuconvcnicncics, and occa-J 



446 



NORTH AMERICA, 



[sioned such violent dissensions among (lie settlers, 
that the parliament of Great Britain was induced 
to take the province under their immediate care. 
The proprietors (except Lord Granville) accepted 
of 22,500/. sterling from the crown for the pro 
perty and jurisdiction. This agreement was ra 
tified by act of parliament in 1729. A clause in 
this act reserved to Lord Grnnville his eighth 
share of the property and arrears of quit-rents, 
which continued legally vested in his family lill 
the revolution in 1676. Lord Granville s share 
made a part of the present state of N. Carolina. 
About the year 1729, the extensive territory 
belonging to the proprietors was divided into 
N. and S. Carolina. They remained separate 
royal governments until they became independent 
states. 

For the relief of poor indigent people of Great 
Britain and Ireland, and for the security of Caro 
lina, a project was formed for planting a colony 
between the rivers Savannah and Alatnmaha. Ac 
cordingly, application being made to King George 
II. he issued letters patent, bearing date June 9th, 
1732, for legally carrying into execution the be 
nevolent plan. In honour of the king, who greatly 
encouraged the plan, they called the new pro 
vince Georgia. Twenty-one trustees were ap 
pointed to conduct the affairs relating to the settle 
ment of the province. The November following, 
115 persons, one of whom was General Oglethorp, 
embarked for Georgia, where they arrived ; and 
landed at Yamacraw. In exploring the country, 
they found an elevated pleasant spot of ground on 
the bank of a navigable river, upon which they 
marked out a town, and from the Indian name of 
the river which passed by it, called it Savannah. 
From this period we may date the settlement of 
Georgia. 

The country now called Kentucky was well 
known to the Indian traders many years before its 
settlement. They gave a description of it to Lewis 
Evans, who published his first map of it as early 
as the year 1752. James Macbride, with some 



others, explored this country in 1754. Colonel 
Daniel Boon visited it in 1769. 

J773. Four years after, Colonel Boon and his 
family, with five other families, who were joined 
by 40 men from Powle s valley, began the settle 
ment of Kentucky, which is now one of the most 
growing colonies, perhaps, in the world, and was 
erected into an independent state, by act of con 
gress, December 6th, 1790, and received into the 
union, June 1st, 1792. The settlement of Ken 
tucky was made in violation of the treaty, in 
1768, at fort Stanwix, which expressly stipulates, 
that this tract of country should be reserved for 
the w. nations to hunt upon, until they and the 
crown of England should otherwise agree. This 
has been one great cause of the enmity of those In 
dian nations to the Virginians. 

The tract of country called Vermont, before the 
late war, was claimed both by New York and New 
Hampshire. When hostilities commenced be 
tween Great Britain and her colonies, the inha 
bitants considering themselves as in a state of 
nature, as to civil government, and not within 
any legal jurisdiction, associated and formed for 
themselves a constitution of government. Under 
this constitution, they have ever since continued 
to exercise all the powers of an independent state. 
Vermont was not admitted into union with the 
other states till March 4th, 1791 ; yet we may ven 
ture to date her political existence as a separate 
government from the year 1777, because, since 
that time, Vermont has to all intents and purposes 
been a sovereign and independent state. The first 
settlement in this state was made at Bennington as 
early as about J764. 

The extensive tract of country lying n. w. of 
the Ohio river, within the limits of the United 
States, was erected into a separate temporary go 
vernment, by an ordinance of congress passed the 
13th of July 1787. 

Thus we have given a summary view of the 
first discoveries arid progressive settlement of N 
America in a chronological order. 

;r..\Kil nifc-.tw tfc 



The following recapitulation will comprehend the whole in one view. 

By whom. 



Names of places. 

Quebec, . ,. .. .,,..,,. ^,, . . 

Virginia, . . . /,, ..,-H - June 10, 1610 

Newfoundland, . , . . , . , ,J June 1610 

CW T rk -&amp;gt;&amp;gt; ; : &amp;gt;"; ? about 1614 
JNew .Jersey, ^ 

Plymouth, . ,,_ f ...,,,.,,, 1620 

New Hampshire, ^ fl .,..,, . ,. 



When settled. 

1608 By the French, 

By Lord de la War. 
By Governor John Guy. 

By the Dutch. 



fiJ but 



By part of Mr. Robinson s congregation. 
By a small English colony near the mouth of Pis- 
cataqua river/] 



[Names of places. 

Delaware, &amp;gt; 

Pennsylvania, $ 
Massachusetts bay, 
Maryland, . . 



Connecticut, 
Rhode island, 
New Jersey, 



South Carolina, 
Pennsylvania, 
North Carolina, 



Georgia, 

Kentucky, 

Vermont, 



Territory n. w. of Ohio river, 



NORTH AMERICA. 44? 

When settled. By whom* 

Aoii^i .. 1627 By the Swedes and Finns 

By Captain John Endicot and company. 

By Lord Baltimore, with a colony of Roman Ca 
tholics. 

By Mr. Fcnwick, at Saybrook, near the mouth of 
Connecticut river. 

Ry Mr. Roger Williams and his persecuted bre 
thren. 

Granted to the Duke of York by Charles II. and 
made a distinct government, and settled some 
time before this by the English. 

By Goveroor Sayle. 

By William Penn, with a colony of Quakers. 

Erected into a separate government, settled before 
by the English. 

By General Oglethorp. 

By Colonel Daniel Boon. 

By emigrants from Connecticut and other parts of 
New England. 

By the Ohio and other companies 



1633 
1635 
1635 
1664 



: . " 1669 

1682 

about 1728 



?.i 1732 

1773 

about 1764 

1787 



The above dates are from the periods when the first permanent settlements were made. 



[NORTH CAROLINA, one of the United States, 
is bounded n. by Virginia, e. by the Atlantic 
ocean, s. by S. Carolina, and w. by the state of 
Tennessee. It lies between lat. 33 50 and 36 
30 n. and between long. 76 and 83 34 w. being 
about 386 miles in length, and 160 in breadth, 
containing about 31,000 square miles. The dis 
tricts of this state are classed in three divisions, 
viz. the e. districts, Edentori, Newbern, and 
Wilmington ; the middle districts, Fayetteville, 
Hillsborough,- and Halifax ; and the w. districts, 
Morgan and Salisbury. The e. districts are on the 
sea-coast, extending from the Virginia line s. to 
S. Carolina. The five others cover the whole 
state v}. of the maritime districts ; and the greater 
part of them extend across the slate from n. to &amp;gt;?. 
These districts are subdivided into 58 counties, 
which contained, in 1790, 393,751 inhabitants, 
of whom 100,571 were slnves; and by the census 
of 1810, the total population of the state amounted 
ty 563,526 souls. The chief rivers of N. Caro 
lina are Chowan and its branches, Rormoke, Tar, 
Neus, and Cape Fear or Clarendon. Most of these 
and the smaller rivers have bars at their mouths ; 
and the coast furnishes no good harbours except 
Cape Fear. There are two remarkable swamps in 
this state, the one in Currituck county, the other 
on the line between this state and Virginia. See 
C-unRiTucK. County and DISMAL. The most re 
markable sounds are Albcmarle, Pamlico, and 



Core sounds ; the capes, Lookout, Hatteras, awl 
Fear, which are described under their respective 
names. Newbern is the largest town in the state ; 
the other towns of note are Edenton, Wilmington, 
Halifax, Hillsborough, Salisbury, and Fayette 
ville ; each of which have been, in their turns, thd 
seat of the general assembly. Raleigh, situated 
near the centre of the state, has lately been esta 
blished as the metropolis. N. Carolina, in its 
whole width, for 60 miles from the sea, is a dead 
level. 

A great proportion of this tract lies in forest, 
and is barren. On the bunks of some of the rivers, 
particularly of the Roanoke, the land is fertile and 
good. Interspersed through the other parts are 
glades of rich swamp, and ridges of oak-land, of 
a black, fertile soil. Sixty or 80 milrs from the 
sea the country rises into hills and mountains, as 
in S. Carolina and Georgia. Wheat, rye, bar 
ley, oats, and flax, grow well in the buck hilly 
country ; Indian corn and pulse of all kinds, in 
all parts. Cotton and hemp are also considerably 
cultivated here, and might be raised in murh 
greater plenty. The cotton is planted yearly: 
the stalk dies with the frost. The labour of one 
man will produce 1000 pounds in the seeds, or 
250 fit for manufacturing. A great proportion of 
the. produce of the back country, consisting of to 
bacco, \vhcat, Indian corn, &amp;c. is carried to 
market in S. Carolina and Virginia. The s. in-] 



448 



NORTH CAROLINA. 



[terior counties carry their produce to Charlcstown, 
and the n. to Petersburg!! in Virginia. The ex 
ports from the lower parts of the state are tar, pitch, 
turpentine, rosin, Indian corn, boards, scantling, 
staves, shingles, furs, tobacco, pork, lard, tallow, 
bees-wax, myrtle- wax, and a /cw other articles, 
amounting in the year end ing September 30, 1791, 
to 524,548 dollars. Their trade is chiefly with 
the W. Indies arid the n. states. 

In the flat country near the sea-coast the inha 
bitants, during the summer and autumn, are sub 
ject to intermitting fevers, which often prove fatal, 
as bilious or nervous symptoms prevail. The zc. 
billy parts of the state are as healthy as any part 
of America. This country is fertile, full of springs 
and rivulets of pure water. Autumn is very plea 
sant, both in regard to the temperature and sere 
nity of the weather, and the richness and variety of 
the vegetable productions which the season af 
fords. The winters are so mild in some years that 
autumn may be said to continue till spring. 
Wheat harvest is in the beginning of June, and 
that of Indian corn early in September. 

The large natural growth of the plains, in the 
low country, is almost universally pitch-pine, 
which is a tall handsome tree, far superior to the 
pitch-pine of the n. states. This tree may be call 
ed the staple commodity of N. Carolina. It af 
fords pitch, tar, turpentine, and various kinds of 
lumber, which, together, constitute at least one- 
half of the exports of this state. No country pro 
duces finer white and red oak for staves. The 
swamps abound with cypress and bay trees. The 
latter is an evergreen, and is food for the cattle in 
winter. The misletoe is common in the back conn- 
try. This is a shrub which differs in kind, per 
haps, from all others. It never grows out of the 
earth, but on the tops of trees. The roots (if they 
may be so called) run under the bark of the tree, 
and incorporate with the wood. It is an ever 
green resembling the garden box-wood. 

The late war, by which N. Carolina was greatly 
injured, put a stop to several iron-works. There 
are four or five furnaces in the state that are in 
blast, and a proportionable number of forges. 

The w. parts of this state, which have been set 
tled within the last 50 years, are chiefly inhabited 
by Presbyterians from Pennsylvania, the descend 
ants of people from the n. of Ireland, and arc ex 
ceedingly attached to the doctrines, discipline, and 
usages of the church of Scotland. They arc a re 
gular industrious people. The Moravians have 
several flourishing settlements in the upper part of 
this state. The Friends or Quakers have a settle 
ment in New-garden, in Gnilford county, and se- 

2 



veral congregations at Pcquimins and Pasquotank. 
The Methodists and Baptists arc numerous and in 
creasing. The general assembly of N. Carolina, 
in December 1789, passed a law incorporating 40 
gentlemen, five from each district, as trustees of 
the universiy of N. Carolina. The state has given 
handsome donations for the endowment of this se 
minary. The general assembly, in December 
1791, loaned 5000/. to the trustees, to enable them 
to proceed immediately with their buildings. 
There is a very good academy at Warenton, an 
other at Williamsborourgh in Granvillc, and 
three or four others in the state, of considerable 
note. 

N. Carolina has had a rapid growth. In the year 
1710, it contained but about 1200 fencible men. 
In 1794, the number was estimated at about 
50,000. It is now, in point of numbers, the fourth 
state in the union. By the constitution of this 
state, which was ratified in December 1796, all 
legislative authority is vested in two distinct 
branches, both dependent on the people, viz. a 
senate and house of commons, which, when con 
vened for business, arc styled the general assembly. 
The senate is composed of representatives, one 
from each county, chosen annually by ballot. 
The house of commons consists of representatives 
chosen in the same way, two for each county, 
and one for each of the towns of Edenton, New- 
bern, Wilmington, Salisbury, Hillsborough, Ha 
lifax, and Fayetteville. 

We have in vain endeavoured to seek for more 
early and authentic information concerning the 
first settlement of this state than that given by Al- 
cedo, under the article Carolina. It should ap 
pear by that authority, that the country was dis 
covered as far back as 1512, by Ponce de Leorij 
a Spaniard. It is certain, however, that the his 
tory of N. Carolina is less known than that of any 
other of the states. From the best recent ac 
counts that history affords, the first permanent 
settlement in N. Carolina was made about the year 
1710, by a number of Palatines from Germany, 
who had been reduced to circumstances of great 
indigence by a calamitous war. The infant colony 
remained under the general government of S. Ca 
rolina, till about the year 1729, when seven of the 
proprietors, for a valuable consideration, vested 
their property and jurisdiction in the crown ; and 
the colony was erected into a separate province, by 
the name of N. Carolina, and its present limits 
established by an order of George 11.1 

[NORTH CASTLE, a township of New York, in 
W. Chester county, n. of Mount Pleasant, and 
the White plains on the borders of Connecticut. 



NOR 

In 1790, it contained 2478 inhabitants. In 1796, 
there were 173 of the inhabitants qualified electors. 
It is 10 miles from White plains, and 20 from 
Ridgefield in Connecticut."] 

[NOKTH-EAST, a small river which empties 
in at the head of Chesapeak bay, about five 
miles below Charlestown ; only noticeable for the 
quantify of herrings caught in it.] 

[NORTH-EAST Town, a township in Dutchess 
county, New York, about 90 miles n. of New 
York city, between Rhynbec and Connecticut w. 
line. In 1790, it contained 3401 inhabitants. 
In 1796, there were in it 391 qualified electors.] 

[NORTH EDISTO Inlet, on the coast of S. Caro 
lina, is II miles from Stono Inlet, and three e. n.e. 
from S. Edisto.] 

[NORTH HAMPTON, a township of New Hamp 
shire, in Rockingham county, which contains 657 
inhabitants, taken from Hampton and incorporated 
in 1742.] 

[NORTH HAVEN, a township of Connecticut, 
situated in New Haven county, on the e. side of E. 
river, eight miles n. by e. of New Haven, and 32 
s. by a?, of Hartford. It was settled in 1660 by 35 
men, principally from Saybrook. This town is 
the birth-place of that learned, pious, and excel 
lent man, Dr. Ezra Stiles, late president of Yale 
college.] 

[NORTH HEMTSTEAD, a township in Queen s 
county, Long island, New York, bounded e. by 
Oyster bay, n. by the sound, and s. by S. Hemp- 
stead. In 1790, it contained 2696 inhabitants, of 
whom 507 were slaves. In 1796, 232 of the inha 
bitants were qualified electors. The soil is but in 
different.] 

[NORTH HUNTINGTON, a township in West 
moreland county, Pennsylvania.] 

[NORTH Island, on the coast of S. Carolina, 
lies on the n. side of Winyah harbour.] 

[NORTH KINGSTOWN, a town in Washington 
county, Rhode Island, which carries on a consi 
derable trade in the fisheries, besides some to the 
W.Indies. Its harbour is called Wicktbrd, on 
the w. side of Narraganset bay, opposite the n. 
end of Connecticut island. It is about 10 miles 
n. w. of Newport, and 16 s. of Providence. The 
township contains 2 C )07 inhabitants.] 

[NORTH Mountain, one of the ridges of the A1- 
Icghany mountains, which extends through Vir-" 
ginia and Pennsylvania. There is a curious sy 
phon fountain in Virginia, near the intersection of 
Lord Fairfax s boundary with the N. mountain, 
not far from Brock s gap, on the stream of which 
is a grist-mill, which grinds two bushels of grain 
at every flood of the spring.] 

VOL. III. 



NOR 



449 



[NORTH Reef, off the island of St. Domingo, 
in the W. Indies, lies in lat. 20 33 n. and long. 
69 12 a&amp;gt;.] 

[NORTH River, in New York. Sec HUDSON S 
River.] 

[NORTH River, in Massachusetts, for its size, 
is remarkable for i(s depth of water, being in some 
places not more than 40 or 50 feet wide, yet vessels 
of 300 tons are built at Pembroke, and descend to 
Massachusetts bay, 18 miles distant, as the river 
runs. It rises in Indian Head pond in Pembroke, 
and runs a serpentine course between Scituate and 
Marshfield. The river is navigable for boats to 
the first fall, five miles from its source. Thence 
to the nearest waters w-hich run intoTaunton river, 
is only three miles. A canal to connect the waters 
of these two rivers, which communicate with Nar 
raganset and Massachusetts bays, would be of great 
utility, as it would save a long and dangerous na 
vigation round cape Cod.] 

[NORTH River, a very considerable river of 
New Mexico in N. America, which rises in the n. 
part of it, and directs its course to the s.e. and 
empties into the gulf of Mexico, at the w. end, in 
and about lat. 26 6 12 .] 

[NORTH River, a branch of Fluvanna river in 
Virginia. See Cow AND CALF Pasture.] 

[NORTH SALEM, a township in W. Chester 
county, New York, bounded s. by Salem, e. bj 
Connecticut, n. by Dutchess county, and w. by the* 
middle of Croton river. In 1790, it contained 
1058 inhabitants, including 58 slaves. In 1796, 
162 of the inhabitants were qualified electors.] 

[NORTH Sea is a name that has been given by- 
geographers to various parts of the oceans, where 
they happen to wash the n. parts of the American 
continent or islands. Thus, the gulf of Mexico, 
and the Atlantic ocean further to the e. from their 
waters washing the n. coast of Mexico or New 
Spain in N. America, and Tierra Firmein S. Ame 
rica, have been distinguished by this name. It 
has also been applied to the s. part of the gulf of 
Mexico, in particular by the Spaniards, on their 
crossing the isthmus of Darien from the n. to the 
s. coast, in opposition to the Pacific ocean, to 
which they gave the name of the S. Sea. The 
Atlantic ocean also on the e. coast of N. America 
has been sometimes called the N. Sea ; which ap 
pellation has also been given to the Frozen ocean, 
from its bounding N. America on (he n. See ar 
ticle MAR.] 

[NORTH SOUND Point is the projecting point of 
land on the n. e. side of the island of Anligua in 
the W. Indies, and is about s. s. e. from Lon 
island.] 

3 M 



450 



N O R 



[NORTH-WEST Coast of America. The coun 
try on the n. zo. part of the continent of Ame 
rica, lying on the Pacific ocean, is thus denomi 
nated. According to accounts given by voyagers 
to this coast, the vast country lying upon it, with 
very little deviation, has the appearance of one 
continued forest, being covered with pines of dif 
ferent species, and these intermixed with alder, 
birch, witch-hazel, &amp;c. besides various kinds of 
brushwood; and the valleys and low grounds 
afford wild currants, gooseberries, raspberries, and 
various flowering shrubs. On the coast are many 
islands, spacious bays, commodious harbours, and 
mouths of navigable rivers : among the former are 
Washington or Queen Charlotte s islands, extend 
ing from lat. 51 42 to 54 18 n.w. long, from 
Greenwich, 129 54 to 133 18 . Here are 
Nootka sound, Admiralty bay, and port Mul- 
grave, Prince William s sound, Cook s river, 
the peninsula of Alaska, and the islands surround 
ing it, .Bristol bay, and Norton sound; which 
last lie s. e. of Behring s straits. 

The coast is inhabited by numerous but small 
tribes of Indians; each tribe appearing to be in 
dependent, and governed by its own chief. They 
differ from each other in their language and cus 
toms, and are frequently at war. It is impossible 
to ascertain with any degree of certainty the num 
ber of inhabitants ; but they have been computed 
at 10,000, from Nootka sound to Cook s river, an 
extent of about 1000 miles. 

The natives are for the most part short in sta 
ture ; their faces, men and women, are in general 
flat and round, with high cheek bones and flat 
noses, and their teeth white and regular. Their 
complexions are lighter than the s. Indians, and 
some of their women have rosy cheeks. Both 
sexes are fond of ornamenting themselves with 
beads and trinkets, and they generally paint their 
hands and faces. They have a custom of making 
a longitudinal slit in the under lip, between the 
mouth and chin, some of them as large as the 
mouth, in which they wear a piece of bone, wood, 
or ivory, fitted with holes in it, from which they 
suspend beads as low as the chin. There ap 
pears to be a greater uniformity in the dress of the 
different tribes than in their ornaments. The 
aperture or second mouth, above the chin, seems 
confined to the men of Cook s river and Prince 
William s sound ; whilst the wooden ornament in the 
under lip is worn by the women only, in that part 
of the coast from port Mulgrave to Queen Char 
lotte s islands. The inhabitants wholly subsist by 
fishing and hunting. Their clothing is made of 
the skins of animals and birds. They live in a 

1 



NOR 

very dirty manner, and are a complete picture o* 
filth and indolence. The chief object of civilized: 
nations in navigating this coast hitherto, has been 
to traffic with the natives for furs ; which they give 
in exchange for pieces of iron, nails, beads, pen 
knives, and other trifling trinkets. These furs 
are carried to China, and disposed of to a great 
profit. The skins obtained are those of the sea- 
otter, racoon, pine-martin, land beaver, earless 
mammot, &amp;c. The other articles which might be- 
procured are ginseng, copper, oil, spars, &amp;c. with 
great quantities of salmon. From 1785 to Feb. 
1788, there had arrived at China from this coast 
nine vessels of different nations. Six of these had 
furs, which sold for 96,842 dollars ; the cargo of 
two French ships was 54,S37 dollars ; and 17,000 
skins imported by the Spaniards remained unsold. 
What furs the Russians procure is not known, as 
they never carry them to Canton. 

An inland sea has been lately discovered in this 
country. Mr. Etches, who fitted out ships from 
England, has lately discovered, that all the w. 
coast of America from lat. 48 to 57 n. is not a 
continued tract of land, but a chain of islands 
which had never been explored, and that those 
concealed the entrance to a vast inland sea, like the 
Baltic or Mediterranean in Europe, and which 
seems likewise to be full of islands. Amongst 
these Mr. Etches s ship, the Princess Royal, pene 
trated several hundred leagues in a n. e. direction, 
till they came within 200 leagues of Hudson s bay; 
but as the intention of the voyage was merely com 
mercial, they had not time fully to explore the 
archipelago just mentioned, nor did they arrive 
at the termination of this new Mediterranean sea. 
The islands, of which upwards of 50 were visited, 
were inhabited by tribes of Indians, who appeared 
very friendly, and well disposed to carry on a 
commerce. In consequence of an expedition un 
dertaken in 1787, Captain J. Kendrick, of the 
ship Columbia, while prosecuting an advantageous 
voyage with th e natives for furs, purchased of 
them, it is said, for the owners, a tract of delightful 
country, comprehending 4 of Jat. or 240 miles 
square. The deeds are said to be in China, and 
registered in the office of the American consul : 
the agents in London are authorised to treat Avith, 
any gentleman or association for the purchase of a 
tract of land no where exceeded for fertility and 
climate, and which may perhaps, by a prudent 
management of some wise constitution, become of 
the utmost importance. See Index to new matter 
respecting MEXICO, Chap. XI.] 

[NORTH-WEST River, a branch of Cape Fear 
or Clarendon river, in N. Carolina. It is formed 



NOR 

by the junction of Haw and Deep rivers ; and it is 
300 yards wide at Ashwood, 80 or 90 miles above 
the capes, even when the stream is low, and with 
in its banks. See CAPE FEAR River. On the 
v). side of this river, about 40 miles above Ash- 
Wood, in the banks of a creek, five or six feet be 
low the sandy surface, are to be seen projecting 
out many feet in length, trunks of trees entirely 
petrified.] 

[NORTH-WEST Territory. See TERRITORY.] 

[NORTH YARMOUTH, a post-town of the dis 
trict of Maine in Cumberland county, on a small 
river which falls into Casco bay. It is 11 miles w. 
by 5. of Brunswick, 10 n, by &amp;lt;?. of Portland, and 
96 n. n. e. of Boston. The township is extensive, 
was incorporated in 1713, and contains 1978 inha 
bitants. Cussen s river divides it from Frceport 
on the n. e.] 

NORTH AM, a city of the province and colony 
of New England in N. America. 

[NORTHAMPTON, a large uneven county 
of Pennsylvania ; situated in the n. e. corner of the 
state, on Delaware river, which separates it from the 
state of New Jersey and New York. It is divided 
into 27 townships, and contains 24,250 inhabi 
tants.] 

[NORTHAMPTON, a township in Buck s county, 
Pennsylvania.] 

[NORTHAMPTON, a town in Northampton coun 
ty, Pennsylvania, on the s. w. bank of Lehigh 
river, five or six miles s. w. of Bethlehem.] 

[NORTHAMPTON, a county of Halifax district, 
N. Carolina, bounded n. by the state of Virgi 
nia, containing 9981 inhabitants, including 4409 
slaves.] 

[NORTHAMPTON, a maritime county of Vir 
ginia ; situated on the point of the peninsula which 
forms the e. side of the entrance into Chesapeak 
bay. It has the ocean e. and Accomack county 
on the n. Its s. extremity is cape Charles, in lat. 
31 13 n. and long. 75 57 w. off which is the 
small island called Smith s Island. This county 
contains 6889 inhabitants, including 3244 slaves. 
The lands are low and sandy.] 

[NORTHAMPTON Court-house, in the above 
county, where a post-office is kept, is 30 miles 
s. by w, of Onancock court-house, 33 n. e. of 
Norfolk, and 164 s. of Philadelphia.] 

[NORTHAMPTON, a respectable post-town and 
capital of Hampshire county, Massachusetts ; si 
tuated within a bend of Connecticut river, on its 
w. side, 35 miles ti. of Hartford in Connecticut, 
and 76 w. of Boston. It contains a spacious Con 
gregational church, a court-house, gaol, and about 
250 1 dwelling -houses, many of which are genteel 



NOR 



451 



buildings. Its meadows are extensive and fertile ; 
and it carries on a considerable inland trade. This 
township was incorporated in 1685, and contains 
J628 inhabitants.] 

[NORTHAMPTON, a township in Burlington 
county, New Jersey, which contains about 56,000 
acres, half of which is under improvement, the 
other half is mostly pine barren. The chief place 
of the township is called Mount Holly. It con 
tains about 150 houses, an Episcopal church, a 
Friends meeting-house, and a market-house. It 
is 16 miles from Trenton, and 17 from Philadel 
phia. See MOUNT HOLLY.] 

[NORTHBOROUGH, a township in Worces 
ter county, Massachusetts, formerly the n. part of 
Westborough. It was incorporated in 1760, and 
contains 619 inhabitants. It is 10 miles e. of Wor 
cester county, Massachusetts, taken from Ux- 
bridge, which bounds it on the s. It was incor 
porated in 1772, and contains 569 inhabitants. 
Blackstonc river runs through this town. It is 12 
miles s. by e. of Worcester, and 35 s. w. of Bos 
ton.] 

NORTHERN Archipelago consists of seve 
ral groups of islands, which are situated between 
the e. coast of Kamtschatka, and the w. coast of 
the continent of America. 

Mr. Coxe observes, that " the first project for 
making discoveries in that tempestuous sea which 
lies between Kamtschatka and America, was con 
ceived and planned by Peter 1." Voyages with 
that view were accordingly undertaken at the ex- 
pence of the crown ; but when it was discovered 
that the islands in that sea abounded with valuable 
firs, private merchants immediately engaged with 
ardour in similar expeditions ; and within a period 
of 10 years, more important discoveries were made 
by these individuals, at their own private cost, 
than had hitherto been effected by all the efforts of 
the crown. The investigation of useful know 
ledge has also been greatly encouraged by the late 
empress of Russia ; and the most distant parts 
of her vast dominions, and other countries and 
islands, have been explored, at her ex pence, by 
persons of abilities and learning, in consequence of 
which several discoveries have been made. 

Some of the islands of this archipelago are only 
inhabited occasionally, and for some months in the 
year, and others are very thinly peopled ; but 
others have a great number of inhabitants, who 
constantly reside in them. The inhabitants of 
these islands are, in general, of a short stature, 
with strong and robust limbs, but free and supple. 
They have lank, black hair, and little beard, flat- 
tish faces, arid fair skins. They are for the most 
3 M 2 



452 



NOR 



part well made, and of strong constitutions, suit 
able to the boisterous climate of their isles. 

The Fox islands, one of the groups, are so 
called from the great number of black, grey, and 
red foxes, with which they abound. The dress of 
the inhabitants consists of a cap and a fur coat, 
which reaches down to the knee. Some of them 
wear common caps of a parti-coloured bird skin, 
upon which they leave part of the wings and tail. 
On the fore part of their hunting and fishing caps, 
they place a small board like a screen, adorned 
with the jaw bones of sea bears, and ornamented 
with glass beads, which they receive in barter 
from the Russians. At their festivals and dancing 
parties they use a much more shewy sort of caps. 
They feed upon the flesh of all sorts of sea ani 
mals, and generally eat it raw ; but if at any time 
they choose to dress their victuals, they make use 
of a hollow stone ; having placed the fish or flesh 
therein, they cover it with another, and close the 
interstices with lime or clay ; they then lay it ho 
rizontally upon two stones, and light a fire under 
it. The provision intended for keeping is dried 
without salt in the open air. Their weapons con 
sist of bows, arrows, and darts, and for defence 
they use wooden shields. 

The most perfect equality reigns among these 
islanders. They have neither chiefs nor superiors, 
neither laws nor punishments. They live together 
in families, and societies of several families united, 
which form what they call a race, who, in case of 
an attack or defence, mutually help and support 
each other. The inhabitants of the same island 
always pretend to be of the same race ; and every 
person looks upon his island as a possession, the 
property of which is common to all the individuals 
of the same society. Feasts are very common 
among them, and more particularly when the in 
habitants of one island are visited by those of the 
others. The men of the village meet their guests 
beating drums, and preceded by the women, who 
dance." At the conclusion of the dance, the hosts 
serve up their best provisions, and invite their 
guests to partake of the feast. They feed their 
children when very young with the coarsest flesh, 
and for the most part raw. If an infant cries, the 
mother immediately carries it to the sea-side, and, 
whether it be summer or winter, holds it naked in 
the water until it is quiet. This custom is so far 
from doing the children any harm, that it hardens 
them against the cold, and they accordingly go 
barefooted through the winter without the least in 
convenience. They seldom heat their dwellings ; 
but, when they are desirous of warming them 
selves, they light a bundle of hay, and stand over 



NOR 

it; or else they set fire to train-oil, which thej 
pour into a hollow stone. They have a good 
share of plain natural sense, but rather slow of 
understanding. They seem cold and indifferent 
in most of their actions ; but let an injury or even 
suspicion only rouse them from this phlegmatic 
state, and they become inflexible and furious, tak 
ing the most violent revenge, without any regard 
to the consequences. The least affliction prompts 
them to suicide; the apprehension of even an un 
certain evil often leads them to despair ; arid they 
put an end to their days with great apparent in 
sensibility.") 

[NORTHFIELD, a township in Orange 
county, V r ermont ; between 20 and 30 miles w 
of Newbury, in the w. part of the county. ] 

[NoRTHi iELD, a thriving township in the n. 
part of Hampshire county, Massachusetts ; situate 
on the c. side of Connecticut river, 23 miles n. of 
Northampton, 69 n. w. by iv. of Boston. It con 
tains 868 inhabitants. The town was incorporated 
in 1763, and some years after desolated by the In 
dians. The inhabitants returned again in 1685, 
but it was soon after destroyed a second time. In 
1713 it was again rebuilt, and one-third of the 
township was taken off, arid incorporated by the 
name of Hinsdale. Fort Drummer was in the vi 
cinity of this town.] 

[NORTH FIELD, a small town in Rockingham 
county, New Hampshire, taken from Canter 
bury, on the e. side of Merrimack river, and 
incorporated in 1780. It contained 606 inhabi 
tants.] 

[NORTHFIELD, a township in Richmond county, 
Staten island, New York ; containing 1021 inha 
bitants, including 133 qualified electors, and 133 
slaves.] 

[NORTH LIN ED Lake, in N. America, is 
about 160 miles s. of the head of Chesterfield inlet; 
is full of islands, and about 80 miles long, and 25 
broad.] 

[NORTH PORT, a township in Hancock 
county, district of Maine, taken from the n. 
part of Duck-trap plantation, and incorporated 
in 1796.] 

[NORTHUMBERLAND, a town in Graftori 
county, New Hampshire ; situate on the e. side of 
Connecticut river, at the mouth of the Upper 
Amonoosuck. It was incorporated in 1779, and 
contains 117 inhabitants.] 

[NORTHUMBERLAND, a county of Pennsyl 
vania ; bounded n. by Lycorning, s. and w. by 
Dauphin and Mifllin counties. It is divided into 
J6 townships, and in 1790 contained 17,16f inha 
bitants. The county of Lycoming has, since the 



NOR 

census of 1796, been taken from it, but the county is 
supposed to contain nearly as many inhabitants as 
before ; a great number of people having emi 
grated to this part of the state. Chief town, Sun- 
bury.] 

[NORTHUMBERLAND, a flourishing post-town 
in the above county ; situate on the point of land 
formed by the junction of the c. and w. branches 
of the Susquehannah. It is laid out regularly, 
and contains about 120 houses, a Presbyterian 
church, and an academy. It is two miles n. by 
w. of Snnbury, and 96 n. w. by w. of Philadel 
phia.] 

[NORTHUMBERLAND, a county of Virginia; 
bounded e. by Chesapeak bay, and w. by Rich 
mond. It contains 9163 inhabitants, including 
4460 slaves. The court-house, where a post-town 
is kept, is eight miles from Kinsale, 17 from 
Lancaster court-house, and 53 from Fredericks- 
burgh.] 

[NORTHUMBERLAND, a county of Pennsyl 
vania. There is iron ore in this county ; also a 
salt-spring.] 

[NORTH WOOD, an interior and elevated 
township in Rockingham county, New Hamp 
shire, in which, and on its borders, are a number 
of small ponds, whose waters feed Piscataqua and 
Suncook rivers. It was incorporated in 1773 ; 
contains 744 inhabitants, and is about S9 miles 
n. w. of Portsmouth. Crystals and crystalline 
spars are found here.] 

[NORTON, a township in Essex county, Ver 
mont ; situate on the Canada line, having Canaan 
e . and Holland on the w.~\ 

[NORTON, a township of Massachusetts ; situate 
in Bristol county, and 33 miles s. of Boston. It 
was incorporated in 1711, and contains 1428 in 
habitants. The annual amount of the nail manu 
facture here is not less than 300 tons. There is 
also a manufacture of ochre, which is found here, 
similar to that at Taunton.] 

[NORTON, a settlement on the n. e. coast of 
Cape Breton island.] 

[NORTON S Sound, on the n. w. coast of N. 
America, extends from cape Darby on the n. n. w. 
to cape Denbigh or cape Stephen s on the 5. or 
s. e. Lat. 6450 .] 

NORVEL, a settlement of the island Barbadocs, 
in the district of the parish of S. Luke. 

NOR VES, a canal in the straits of Magellan, at 
the n. entrance of the third narrow pass, called the 
Passage. 

[NOR WALK, a pleasant post-town in Fair- 
field county, Connecticut ; situated on the n. side 
of Long Island sound. It contains a Congrega- 



N O R 



453 



tional and Episcopal church, which are neat edi 
fices, and between 40 and 50 compact honses. It 
is 14 miles w. by s. of Fairfield, 27 s. w. by w. of 
New Haven, 40 n. e. of New York, and 108 from 
Philadelphia. Lat. 41 8 w. Long. 73 25 w. 
The township is situated in a fertile wheat coun 
try, and was settled in 1651. Here are iron 
works and a number of mills. It has a small trade 
to New York and the W. Indies.] 

[NORWAY, a township of New York, in 
Herkemer county, incorporated in J792. By the 
state census of 1796, it contained 2164 inhabitants, 
of whom 353 were electors.] 

[NORWAY, a new township in Cumberland 
county, district of Maine, incorporated 1797.] 

[NORWICH, a considerable township in 
Windsor county, Vermont, on the w. side of 
Connecticut river, opposite to Dartmouth col 
lege. It contains 1158 inhabitants.] 

[NORWICH, a township in Hampshire county, 
Massachusetts, 24 miles s. w. of Northampton, 
and 86 w. of Boston. It was incorporated in 
1773, and contains 742 inhabitants.] 

[NORWICH, a city and post-town of Connecti 
cut, and of the second rank in New London 
county ; situated at the head of navigation on 
Thames river, 10 miles n. of New London, and 
34 s. e. of Hartford. This commercial city has 
a rich and extensive back country, and avails it 
self of its happy situation on a navigable river, 
which affords a great number of convenient seats 
for mills, and water machines of all kinds. The 
inhabitants manufacture paper of all kinds, stock 
ings, clocks and watches, chaises, buttons, stone 
and earthen ware, oil, chocolate, wire, bells, an 
chors, and all kinds of forge- work. The city con 
tains about 450 dwelling houses, a court-house, 
and two churches for Congregationalists, and one 
for Episcopalians, and about 3000 inhabitants. 
The city is in three detached, compact divisions, 
viz. Chelsea, at the landing, the Town, and Bean 
hill : in the latter division is an academy, and in 
the Town is an endowed school. The courts of 
law are held alternately at New London and Nor 
wich. This town was settled in 1660, by 35 men, 
principally from Saybrook. It is 170 miles n. e. 



Lat. 41 29 n. 



Long. 72 



of Philadelphia. 
3 o&amp;gt;.] 

[NORWICH, a township in Tioga county, New 
York, taken from the towns of Jcrico and Union, 
and incorporated in 1793. It is settled principally 
by people from Connecticut ; is bounded s. by 
Oxford, and lies 50 miles w. of Cherry valley. 
By the state census of 1796, 129 of its inhabitants 
were electors.] 



454 



NOT 



NOSACO, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Pernambuco in Bra/il ; situate on 
the point of land to the n. forming the mouth of 
the river Grande de S. Francisco. 

NOTAYE, a river of the province of Guayana, 
in the part possessed by the French. 

[NOTCH, The, a pass in the w. part of the 
White mountains in Now Hampshire; the nar 
rowest part of which is but 22 feet wide, between 
two perpendicular rocks. It is 25 miles from the 
Upper Coos. From the height above it a brook 
descends, and meanders through a meadow, for 
merly a beaver pond. It is surrounded by rocks, 
which, on one side, are perpendicular, and on the 
others, rise in an angle of 45 degrees, a strikingly 
picturesque scene. This defile was known to the 
Indians, who formerly led their captives through 
it to Canada ; but it had been forgotten or ne 
glected till the year 1771, when two hunters passed 
through it. There is a road this way now to the 
Upper Coos.] 

[NOTCH, Cape, is the w. point of Goodluck 
bay, in the straits of Magellan. Lat. 53 33 *.] 

NOTOWAY, a river of the province and co 
lony of Virginia in N.America. It runs nearly 
due e. and enters the Blackwater. 

[NOTTAWAY, a small river of Virginia, 
which runs e. by s. and receives Blackwater on 
the line of N. Carolina ; thence pursuing a s. by &amp;lt;s&amp;gt;. 
course of about 10 miles, it joins the Meherrin ; 
the confluent stream then assumes the name of 
Chowan river, and empties into Albemarle sound.] 

[NOTTAWAY, a county of V irginia, bounded n. 
and n. w. by Amelia, from which it was taken in 
the year 178S. See AMELIA.] 

[NOTTINGHAM, a township in Rockingham 
county, New Hampshire, 12 miles n. of Exeter, 
and 18 n. w. of Portsmouth. It was incorporated 
in 1722, and contains 1068 inhabitants.] 

[NOTTINGHAM, WEST, a township in Hillsbo- 
r-ough county, New Hampshire ; situated on the 
e. side of Merrimack river, 40 miles distant from 
Portsmouth, was incorporated in 1746, and con 
tains 106 1 inhabitants. It has Massachusetts line 
for its s. boundary, which divides it from Dracut, 
and is about 35 miles n. n. w. of Boston.] 

[NOTTINGHAM, a township in Chester county, 
Pennsylvania.] 

[NOTTINGHAM, the most n. town of Burlington 
county, New Jersey; situate on the e. bank of 
Delaware river, between Bordentown and Trenton.] 

[NOTTINGHAM, a town in Prince George s 
county, Maryland ; situate on Patuxent river, 
nearly 1 1 miles n. e. of Piscataway, and 16 5. e. 
of the Federal city.] 



N O V 

NOTUCO, a volcano of the kingdom of Chile, 
near the river Solivinokon. 

NOU, a settlement of the missions which were 
held by the Portuguese Carmelites, in the territory 
and country of Las Amazonas ; situate on the 
banks of the river Negro. 

NOUA, a small island of the N.sea, near the 
coast of Brazil, opposite the great island of Ma- 
rajo, or Joanes, near that of Maguary. 

NOUILLO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; situate on the shore of the river 
Guazar. 

NOUITA, SAN GERONIMO DE, a city and ca 
pital of the province and government of Choco in 
the Nucvo Reyno de Granada. The greater part 
of the houses are built of wood, and roofed with 
straw, without regularity or symmetry. Nearly 
the whole of the population is of Negroes, Mulat- 
toes, Mustees, and Zambos ; for although there be 
certain families of distinction, they dwell rather in 
the neighbourhood of the gold mines, to super 
intend the slaves who are working them. It is of 
an hot, moist, and unhealthy climate; situate in a 
llanura surrounded on all sides with woods. It 
produces nothing, and is provided with food, 
clothes, and other necessaries from the province 
of Popayan, at a very dear rate. See article 
CHOCO. 

NOUVELLE, a large and abundant river of 
New France or Canada in N. America. It runs 
many leagues *. w. through the country of the 
Huron Indians, between lakes Huron and Erie, 
and enters the S. Clare. 

[NOUVELLE, LA, commonly called East Nou- 
velle, lies on the n. side of Chaleur bay. It is a 
small river, about four leagues from port Daniel.] 

[NOUVILLE, LA GRANDE, or WEST Nou- 
VILLE, on the n. side of Chaleur bay, is above 
one league from Carleton, where is also a custom 
house, and a respectable mercantile house.] 

[NOVA SCOTIA, formerly called New Scot 
land, a British province of N. America ; separated 
on the n. e. from Cape Breton island by the gut 
of Canso ; on the w. it has a part of the gulf of 
St. Lawrence, and the straits of Northumberland, 
which divide it from the island of St. John s ; on 
the w. it has New Brunswick and the bay of Fun- 
dy ; on the s. and s. e. the Alantic ocean. Its 
length is about 235 miles from cape Sable on the 
s. w. to cape Canso on the n. e. Its extreme 
breadth is 88 miles ; but between the head of Hali 
fax harbour and the town of Windsor, at the head 
of the 5. e. arm of the basin of Minas it is only 
about 22 miles broad. It contains 8,789,000 



NOVA SCOTIA. 



455 



[acres ; of which three millions have been granted, 
and two millions settled and under improvement. 

Nova Scotia is accommodated with many spa 
cious harbours, bays, and coves of shelter, equal 
to any in the world. The chief of these are Canso, 
Halifax , on Chebucto bay, Chedabucto, Frede 
rick, George, Torbay, Charlotte, King s, Barring- 
ton, Townsend, St. Mary s, Annapolis Koyal, the 
basin of Minas, the bay of Fundy ; and a vast 
number of capes, lakes, and rivers, which are de 
scribed under their respective names. 

The most remarkable mountains are the high 
land of Aspotageo;i, and the Ardois mountain. 
The s. shores present to the eye of a stranger 
rather an unfavourable appearance, being in gene 
ral broken and stony ; but the innumerable islands 
along its coasts, coves, and harbours, though ge 
nerally composed of rocky substances, appear de 
signed by nature for the drying of fish, being co 
vered with materials for fish-flakes and stages ; and 
there is land sufficient for pastures and gardens, to 
serve the purposes of fishermen. As you advance 
into the back country, it wears a more promising 
appearance ; and at Cornwallis, Windsor, Horton, 
Annapolis, Cumberland, Cobequid, Pictou, and 
along the n. shores of the province, there are 
extensive, well improved farms. The gradual 
improvement in husbandry, which has been en 
couraged by the laudable and successful experi 
ments of the agricultural society, lately establish 
ed here, afford some good ground to expect that 
Nova Scotia may become a flourishing colony. 
The lands in general, on the sea-coast, the county 
of Lunenburgh excepted, and a few hills of good 
land, are rocky, and interspersed with swamps and 
barrens. The growth in general is a mixture of 
spruce, hemlock, pine, fir, beech, and some rock- 
maple, which furnish an inexhaustible supply for 
ship-building and other purposes. 

The coast abounds with fish of various kinds, 
as cod, salmon, mackerel, herring, alewives, trout, 
&amp;c. and being near to the banks of Newfoundland, 
Quero, and Sable bank?, fisheries, under proper 
management and regulations, might be carried on 
with certainty of success. There are mines of 
coal at Cumberland, and on the E. river, which 
falls into Pictou harbour. There is plenty of bog 
and mountain ore in Annapolis township, on the 
borders of Nictau river, and a bloomery is erected 
there. Copper has been found at cape D Or, on 
the n. side of the basin of Minas. The forts in 
this province are fort Edward, Cumberland, and 
Cornwallis. Nova Scotia is divided into eight 
counties, viz. Hants, Halifax, King s, Annapolis, 
Cumberland, Suubury, Queen s, and Lunenburg. 



These are subdivided into above 40 townships. 
The whole population of Nova Scotia, New Bruns 
wick, and the islands adjoining, is estimated at 
about 50,000. The amount of imports from Great 
Britain to this country, at an average of three 
years, before the new settlements, was about 
26,5007. The articles exported in exchange are 
timber and the produce of the fishery, which at 
a large average amounts to 38,0007, Nova Scotia 
was confirmed to Great Britain in 1760. Halifax 
is the metropolis. See NEW BKUNSWICK, CA 
NADA, &amp;c. 

In concluding this article we think it necessary 
to insert the following memorials and authentic 
documents transmitted to the British government 
in 1804, as throwing a steady light on the views 
and resources of this colony, and particularly on 
the nature of its interests as contrasted with those 
of the United States. We shall give them there 
fore entire, not merely as objects of vague and ge 
neral information, but of abstruse inquiry. 
* To the J\ight Hon. Lord Hobart, one of his 

JMqjesly s principal secretaries of state, fc. Sfc. 
The petition of the merchants and other inhabi 
tants of Halifax ) in the province of Nova Scotia, 
Humbly sheweth, 

* That the trade of this province arises princi 
pally from the fish caught on its coasts, great 
quantities of which are exported annually by your 
petitioners to the W. India islands. That in the 
pursuit of this commerce, your petitioners are ri 
valled by the citizens of the American states, to 
whom the ports of those islands are ever open, and 
who are exempt from duties and other expericcs to 
which your petitioners are liable. Your petitioners 
have heard, that in the existing negociation, re 
lative to the twelfth article of the treaty with Ame 
rica, the Americans aim at a further extension of 
their trade with the British W.India islands, which, 
if obtained, would utterly ruin the already declining 
fisheries of the British colonies, whence the nation 
has long derived much wealth, and its navy a 
supply of hardy seamen. 

That the coasts of this province, as well as the 
gulph of St. Lawrence, and the islands of New 
foundland and Cape Breton, abound Avith fish of 
the most valuable sorts ; so that with encourage 
ment these colonies would satisfy, to its utmost 
extent, the demand of the W. India islands for 
dry and pickled fish. 

* Your petitioners, therefore, most humbly pray, 
that your Lordship, and his Majesty s other mi 
nisters, would take the premises, and the annex 
ed memorial, into consideration, and would protect 
the trade and fisheries of his Majesty s subjects] 



456 



NOVA SCOTIA. 



[in these colonies against the views of the Ameri 
cans, by granting to the British colonists the ex 
clusive privilege of supplying their fellow subjects 
in the W. Indies with the article of fish caught 
on the coasts of N. America. 

(Signed) WILLIAM SABATIER, 

WILLIAM SMITH, 
GEOUGF. GRASSIC, 
JAMLS FRASER, 
WILLIAM LYON, 
Committee appointed by the merchants and 

other inhabitants of Halifax, Nova Scotia. 
1 Halifax, Nova Scotia, March 23d, 1801. 

Memorial and statement of the case referred to in 
the annexed petition. 

As every British province and island in these 
n. climates is individually able to furnish the 
W. India islands with some essential article of 
consumption, which in whole, or in part, is de 
ficient in others, the petitioners, in the following 
tatement, have extended their observations be 
yond the limits of the single province in which 
they reside. 

4 The W. India islands require to be supplied 
with the undermentioned articles, viz. 
From the fisheries. Dried cod fish, barrel or 

pickled fish, viz. salmon, herring (of various 

species), and mackerel and oil. 
c Forest. Lumber, viz. squared timber, scantling, 

planks and boards, shingles, clapboards, hoops, 

and oak staves. 
* Agriculture. Biscuits and flour, Indian corn and 

meal, pork, beef, butter, cheese, potatoes, and 

onions ; live stock, viz. horses, oxen, hogs, 

sheep, and poultry. 
Mines. Coals. 

* Of these articles, the following are produced 
by the several colonies. New Brunswick pro 
duces, in the greatest abundance, lumber of every 
kind, except oak staves; it yields already many 
of the smaller articles which serve to complete a 
cargo, and its shores abound with various fish fit 
for pickling. Nova Scotia produces lumber of all 
sorts, except oak staves, but in a lesser degree 
than New Brunswick ; horses, oxen, sheep, and 
all the other productions of agriculture, except 
wheat and Indian corn ; the e. and n. parts of the 
province abound in coal, and its whole coast 
yields inexhaustible quantities of cod fish, and 
others fit for pickling. 

4 Cape Breton and Prince Edward islands ; the 
former yields coal in abundance, its fisheries are 
considerable ; but without dealing directly with 
the W. Indies, they serve to increase the ex 



ports of Nova Scotia. Both these islands supply 
Newfoundland with cattle, and with due encou 
ragement would rival some of the more opulent 
colonies in articles of agriculture ; their fisheries 
also may be greatly extended, as the whole circuit 
of these islands abounds in fish. 

* Canada can supply any quantity of oak staves, 
as well as flour and Indian corn, lor six months 
in the year. Newfoundland yields little lumber, 
but its trade in dried cod-fish has hitherto, in a 
great measure, supplied all Europe and the W. 
Indies, and it is capable of still greater extension. 

The petitioners have therefore no hesitation in 
affirming, that these mother colonies are able to 
supply the W. Indies with dried fish, and every 
species of pickled fish, for their consumption; 
and that at no very distant period they could also 
supply all the other articles herein before enume 
rated, except, perhaps, flour, Indian meal and 
corn, and oak staves. 

Having stated the foregoing facts, the peti 
tioners beg leave to request the attention of his 
Majesty s ministers to the peculiar circumstances 
of this province, the permanent establishment of 
which took place about 54 years ago ; for previous 
to the settlement of Halifax, there were few inha 
bitants in it, and but little trade. The mother 
country, sensible of the favourable situation of this 
colony for fisheries, that its harbours are seldom 
more than a few miles from each other, and that 
its extensive sea-coast teems every season with 
shoals of fish of the most useful sorts, made every 
effort to establish them. The fisheries, however, 
until the close of the American war, languished 
from one cause only the want of inhabitants. 
The influx of inhabitants at that time, and since, 
has promoted industry and domestic comfort, and 
a race of people born on the soil have become at 
tached to it. The clearing of the lands, and 
other causes, have improved the climate ; and by 
a late survey of the interior of the province, it is 
discovered that the lands are not only better than 
had been imagined, but superior to the greater 
part of the rest of N. America. 

1 The present situation of this province with re 
gard to its trade, resembles that of New England 
at the close of the 17th century ; and unless check 
ed at this crisis, it has the most reasonable expect 
ation of a more rapid increase than the latter ever 
experienced. 

Encouraged by the prospect before them, and 
conscious of the abuses that have crept into the 
fisheries, the petitioners are looking forward to the 
aid of the provincial legislature, and to other 
means, for correcting those abuses and for esta-J 



NOVA SCOTIA. 



457 



[Wishing and improving the fisheries, that great 
source of wealth to the parent state, the colonial 
husbandman, and merchant ; but they perceive, 
with regret, that their efforts will prove ineffectual, 
unles tiie citizens of the United States, according 
to the ancient policy of Great Britain towards fo 
reigners, are wholly or partially excluded from 
the islands, or a permanent equivalent is granted 
to the colonists. 

* The American legislature has rejected the 12th 
article of the late treaty : the citizens of the 
United States would have been excluded from the 
W.Indies, if the governors of those islands had 
not, under the plea of necessity, by proclamation, 
admitted them. In this trade the Americans pos 
sess the following advantages over (he colonies. 

* First, In the islands of Barbadocs, Antigua, 
Saint Kitt s, and Jamaica, a stranger s duty of 
two and a half, or more, per cent, is -imposed on 
imports, and in the island of Saint Vincent, Bri 
tish subjects exclusively are subject to a duty of 
three per cent, which must be paid in specie, and 
to procure which a forced sale is frequently made 
of part of the cargo togreat disadvantage. From 
this duty the Americans, being invited by procla 
mation, are exempt. 

* Second, During the late and present war, the 
citizens of the United States, being neutrals, have 
not been burthened with the heavy charge of in 
surance against the enemy, which to the colonists 
has increased the premium 10 per cent, to the 
smaller islands, and 12f per cent, to Jamaica. 

1 Third, The n. states have granted a bounty of 
near 20s. per ton on vessels in their fisheries. 

From those circumstances, so unable are the 
petitioners to contend with the Americans in the 
W . India markets, that they derive greater ad 
vantage by selling their fish at an inferior price in 
the United States ; whence the Americans re-ex 
port them to the W. India islands under the above- 
mentioned advantages, so as to make a profit even 
on their outward voyage. 

It is well known, and in an ample report made 
to congress in the years 1790 and 1791, by the 
now president of the United States, then their se 
cretary of state, it was set forth, that the fisheries 
of New England were on the verge of ruin, and 
he recommended, what was afterwards adopted, 
the grant of a bounty to counterbalance the disad 
vantages the trade then laboured under. At that 
period the fisheries of Nova Scotia made a rapid 
increase ; the whale fishery alone from the port of 
Halifax consisted of 28 sail of ships and brigs 
from GO to 200 tons burthen : but the succeeding 
war and other unfavourable circumstances soon 

VOL. III. 



destroyed this important branch of the fishery. By 
the aid of bounties from the state legislature, the 
American fisheries recovered their former vigour, 
and are now carried on with great spirit, increas 
ing their trade with the W. Indies to an incre 
dible extent ; considerable numbers of our best fish 
ermen have emigrated from Newfoundland and 
this province to the United States, within a few 
months, and more are daily following them : thus 
it appears evident, that a wise policy, steadily 
pursued, will preserve a sinking trade, and that 
this province is not wanting in exertion, when fa 
vourable opportunities for it are offered. 

* Should the Americans obtain by treaty an in 
dulgence of their trade in fish with the W. Indies, 
it will prove the ruin of that of the Britisli n. co 
lonies, and draw away from them their most indus 
trious inhabitants. The islands will then depend 
on foreign states for supplies of all the articles be 
fore enumerated ; and if at any time hereafter dif 
ferences should take place between Great Britain 
and the American States, from what quarter, it 
may be asked, are the islands to obtain their sup 
plies ; the ruined trade and fisheries of those colo 
nies may prove, too late, the fatal policy of throw 
ing into the hands of foreigners a trade, which, 
with a little encouragement, might have been al 
most, if not entirely, confined to British subjects. 

From these considerations the justice and policy 
of giving encouragement to the n. colonies are evi 
dent. Should the stranger s duty, imposed in the 
islands, be taken oft : should a bounty equal to 
that granted by the state legislature be allowed, 
and the present war succeeded by a peace, then 
may the \V. India islands receive from these co 
lonies supplies of all kinds of dried or pickled 
fish, on terms as advantageous as they are now 
furnished with them from a foreign state. It is 
obvious that the Americans and .the W. India 
planters have a mutual interest in the free trade to 
the islands, but the planters have no right to ex 
pect supplies from a neutral nation in time of war, 
merely because it affords them at a cheaper rate 
than the British colonies ; they should bear tho 
inconveniences of war as well as their, fellow-sub 
jects, who have been driven into these n. regions 
by their zealous loyalty in support of the happy 
constitution under which they now live. The 
supplies required by the islands cannot greatly 
increase ; while the n. colonies, from their great 
extent and growing population, will every year 
be more and more able to furnish those supplies. 
The islands arc, in a measure, limited in their 
extent : but the . colonies are almost unbounded. 

The inhabitants of those colonies have acquired^} 



458 



NOVA SCOTIA. 



[their present condition, "which, at best, is medio 
crity, by a continued exertion of industry and fru 
gality, under a climate and a soil which yield their 
blessings to persevering exertion alone. The W. 
India planters have ever been in a different situa 
tion, and can afford to wait a reasonable time for 
the accomplishment of those expectations which 
are justty entertained by the colonists ; in the in 
terim they ought to give a fair equivalent for the 
articles of which they stand in need, and not ex 
pect, at an inferior price, commodities whose va 
lue the imperious circumstances of the times have 
tended to enhance. The n. colonists have struggled 
with all the difficulties incident to a young coun 
try, and they are now arrived at a period, when, 
if duly encouraged, they may be enabled to reap 
the fruits of their honest labour ; but restricted in 
their trade to the Mediterranean by an ancient re 
gulation, which obliges them to land their car 
goes in some English European port, before they 
can proceed on homeward-bound voyages, and 
burthened also in the manner here stated in the W. 
India trade, the petitioners cannot contend with 
the Americans, but look forward with the most 
distressful prospects to means of procuring a fu 
ture subsistence, unless his Majesty, in his good 
ness, shall be pleased to afford them protection 
and relief. They, therefore, anxiously hope, 
that the observations contained in this memorial 
may not appear unworthy of the attention of his 
Majesty s ministers, but that whatever temporary 
indulgences may be granted to the American citi 
zens, the British colonists, agreeably to their former 
solicitations on that subject, may be permitted to 
return to America, without entering at any port 
in Great Britain. 

&amp;lt; My Lord, Halifax, Jan. 30, 1805. 

* We the committee of the merchants and inha 
bitants of Halifax, Nova Scotia, who presented to 
Lord Hobart, your Lordship s predecessor, a pe 
tition, pray ing that the British colonists might have 
the exclusive right of supplying his Majesty s W. 
India islands with fish, have lately seen, in print, 
a letter written to your Lordship by G. W. Jordan, 
Esq. colonial agent for Barbacloes, containing ob 
servations on our petition, and the memorial an 
nexed to it ; we think it our duty briefly to 
answer those observations, and to enforce the ob 
ject of our petition. 

* Mr. Jordan s first remark is founded on a mis 
conception or perversion of the allegation of the 
petitioners : we assert in our memorial, " that in 
the islands of Barbadoes, Antigua, Saint Kilt s, 
and Jamaica, a stranger s duty of two and a half 
per cent, is imposed on imports, and that in the 



island of Saint Vincent, British subjects exclu 
sively are subject to a duty of three per cent. :" 
no charge is therefore made that the duty is not 
general in the island of Barbadoes ; the charge is 
clearly confined to the single island of Saint 
Vincent. 

* We are not alarmed, my Lord, at the refer 
ence made by Mr. Jordan to papers which were 
not intended for his inspection, but for private in 
formation only ; since those papers contain no 
other facts than such as can be proved. The prac 
tice in the W. India islands of keeping the ports 
always open to the Americans, amounts, in our 
apprehension, to the grant of a free trade; and 
that goods of foreign manufacture are by these 
means introduced into the islands no one who is at 
all acquainted with the character and practices of 
the American traders can doubt. We lament that 
even in these colonies, into whose ports no Ameri 
can vessels are admitted, except fishing vessels, 
which by treaty are allowed to resort to our coasts, 
such quantities of foreign goods do find admit 
tance, that it is to be feared more than half the 
E. India goods consumed in this province is sup 
plied from the neighbouring states of America. 

( We do not, as Mr. Jordan is pleased to as 
sert, claim a right of selling our own commodities 
at our own prices in time of war ; but we contend 
that, when the article of fish is furnished from the 
n. colonies in abundance, although increased in 
price by the war expences, the \V. India colonists 
ought not, on that account, to require or permit 
the introduction of it from foreign states, and in 
foreign bottoms ; especially as the fish is generally 
paid for in the produce of the islands, of which the 
planters take care to raise the price in proportion. 
That these n. colonies can supply the islands with 
their whole consumption of fish, and at reason 
able prices, can be easily proved, and that they 
are, therefore, entitled to do so, exclusively, Mr. 
Jordan himself admits. 

4 The right of the W. India colonists to obtain 
from the American States all articles of the first 
necessity, which they cannot adequately obtain 
from the dominions of Great Britain, is not dis 
puted by us ; but we assert that the article of fish 
can be adequately obtained from the British colo 
nies. That the allowing supplies to be imported 
in American bottoms has been destructive to the 
British carrying trade, has been lately demon 
strated by a very able writer on the subject ; and 
that the indulgences granted to the Americans have 
injured the fisheries, and greatly reduced the ton 
nage and seamen employed in these colonies, we 
can assert from our own sad experience. An in-] 



NOVA SCOTIA. 



459 



[spection into the imports and exports of the island 
of Jamaica for one year, as laid before their house 
of assembly, and published in the Jamaica alma 
nack for the last year, will shew how large a por 
tion of the W. India carrying trade is engrossed 
by the Americans. 

1 If, my Lord, we have stated in our memorial, 
that it is, now, more advantageous for the mer 
chants of this colony to dispose of their fish in the 
United States, than to send it to the W. India 
islands ; we have made it a subject of complaint ; 
and at the same time have set forth the reasons 
why the Americans rival us in that trade. Were 
our commerce with the islands placed on a fair 
foundation, the same British ships would convey 
our fish thither, which now carry it to the Ameri 
can markets. But burthened as that trade is with 
insurance against the enemy, and confined as it is, 
and ought to be, to a fair dealing in legitimate 
merchandise, we contend in those ports with the 
Americans at every disadvantage. 

* Had Mr. Jordan fairly observed on our peti 
tion and memorial, he would not have asserted that 
the positive affirmation in the former, " that these 
provinces can supply the W. Indies with fish," 
was shaken by a subsequent observation, " that, 
under certain circumstances, the trade and fish 
eries of these colonies would be ruined, which, 
with encouragement, might be almost, if not en 
tirely, confined to British subjects." The obser 
vation refers expressly to the trade in all the ar 
ticles enumerated in the memorial; the affir 
mation is confined to the single article offish. 
One reading of the paragraph referred to will en 
tirely refute Mr. Jordan s remark. 

1 Having already, my Lord, observed, that the 
increase of the price of fish, occasioned by war, 
is no just ground for the introduction of that ar 
ticle, from foreign ports, and in foreign vessels, 
we shall not follow Mr. Jordan in the curious in 
ference he undertakes to draw from our admission, 
that, in war time, the Americans can undersell us 
in fish.. So little are we disposed to require an ex 
travagant price for our fish, that we most rea 
dily would accede to Mr. Jordan s proposal, of 
fixing the maximum price of cod-fish at eight 
dollars, in time of war ; and, indeed, could we 
obtain even three-fourths of that price, generally, 
during the war, the fisheries would soon flourish 
again, and the islands be at ail times amply sup 
plied with fish. 

1 On the two facts with which Mr. Jordan closes 
his observations, we shall only remark, that the 
former is conceded by us as to the flour and grain 
imported into Nova Scotia from the United States ; 



and it is perfectly consistent with our memorial, in 
which we confess that this province is deficient in 
the articles of wheat and corn. The other fact 
we must dispute ; and although we are not pro 
vided with documents to ascertain the tonnage 
employed between the British N. American pro 
vinces and the W. India islands, for the particular 
year 1791, yet we are furnished with returns of 
the tonnage employed in the trade to and from the 
W. India islands for the year 1792, and entered 
at the custom-house in Halifax, being for one only 
of the two districts into which this province is di 
vided, and which we beg leave to insert, as fol 
lows : 

1792. Outwards. Inwards. 

Spring quarter, .886 . . 719 
Midsummer ditto, 1436-* . . 3605 
2397 385 



Michaelmas ditto, 
Christmas ditto, 



1770 



1862| 



f It is therefore incredible, that, in theyear 1791, 
only 4837 tons were employed in the trade be 
tween all the British n. provinces and the W. In 
dia islands, when, in the subsequent year, it ap 
pears by an authentic return, that in one district, 
of one province, upwards of COOO tons were ac 
tually engaged in that commerce. 

Here, my Lord, we conclude our observations 
on Mr. Jordan s letter ; nor shall we presume to 
intrude on your Lordship s patience further than to 
state one fact, which must demonstrate the effi 
ciency of the British colonies, or at least of Bri 
tish shipping, to supply the demands of the W. 
India markets. From the year 1785 to the year 
179i, American ships were excluded from the W- 
India islands, yet they were, during that period, 
so well provided with articles of the first neces 
sity, that ships from these colonies were frequently 
unable to find a sale for their cargoes in our own 
islands, and were obliged to resort to foreign 
islands for a market. By returns collected from 
the merchants of this province, engaged in the 
W. India trade, we find that the prices obtained 
by them for cod-fish, from the year 1785 to the 
year 1792 inclusive, never exceeded five dollars 
per quintal, and sometimes fell short of half that 
sum. In theyear 1793, we meet with a single in 
stance of cod-fish selling for six dollars ; but the 
common price, even in that first year of the war, 
was not more than three dollars and a half per 
quintal. The cheapness, therefore, of this article, 
clearly proves the abundance of it in the W. In 
dia islands, and consequently, that the allowing"! 
3N2 




460 



the Americans to import fish in American ships 
was not a measure of necessity. 

We have the honour to be, with the greatest 
respect, jour Lordship s most obedient and 
most humble servants, 

(Signed), WILLIAM SABATIER, 
WILLIAM SMITH, 
GEORGE GRASSIC, 
JAMES FRASER, and 
WILLIAM LYON. 
The Right Hon. Lord Camden^ 8?c. Sfc. $c. 

[NOVOYA, a parish of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos A yres; situate on a river of 
the same name, about 40 miles s. e. of Sta. Fe, 
in lat. 32 17 43" s. Long. 60 4 34".] 

[NOXAN, or NOXONTON, or Nox Town, a 
town of Newcastle county, Delaware, 21 miles w. 
of Dover, and nine 5. by s. w. of St. George s 
town.] 

NOXTEPEC, a settlement and head settlement 
of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Tasco in 
Nueva Espaua. It contains 65 families of Indians, 
and in its boundaries are various cultivated estates 
and breeding farms, in which dwell 60 other fami 
lies of Spaniards, Muslccs, and Mulattoes. Five 
leagues n. n. w. of its capital. 

NUBE, or NUBLE, a large and abundant river 
of the kingdom of Chile, flowing down from the 
Cordillera of the Andes. It runs w. washing the 
environs of the ancient city of San Bartolome de 
Chilian, and united afterwards with that of Itala, 
runs to empty itself into the Pacific ocean, in lat. 
36 s. 

[NUBLADA, an island in the Pacific ocean, 
with three small ones n. of it and near to it, w. by 
5. of cape Corientes,on the coast of Mexico, and e. 
of Roca Portida. Lat, 16 40 n. Long. 122 30 
w.-] 

NUCARAY, or NUCUUAY, a rapid river of 
the province and country of Las Amazonas. It runs 
from n. to s. near the source of the river Amazo 
nas. In the woods on its borders dwell the May- 
nas, Zimarrones, and other barbarians of the na 
tion of the Umuranas. It enters the Maranon by 
its n. shore, in lat. 4 18 s. 

[NUCIIVUNK, a place in New Britain, the 
resort of walrusses in winter; with the teeth of 
these animals the Indians head their darts. Lat. 
60 .] 

NUE, a small river of N. Carolina, which runs 
e. and enters the Hughes. 

NUECES, an abundant river of the province 
and government of Texas in N. America. After 
running many leagues, it enters the sea in the gulf 
of Mexico. 

1 



NUE 

NUESTRA SENORA, Los CEROS DE, a 
of the coast of Peru, in the province and corregi- 
inienlo of Atacama. 

[NUESTRA SENORA DE LA PAZ, an episcopal 
see and town of Peru ; situate on a large plain 
about 20 miles to the e. of the cordillcra of 
Acama, 33 miles s. e. of Laguna Titicaca, 86 
n. w. of Cochabamba, and 233 to. of the city of 
Sta. Cruz dc la Sierra. Lat. 17 30 s. Long-. 
68 26 w. ] 

[NUESTRA SENORA DE LA VITTORIA, a town 
of Mexico. Lat. 18 n. Long. 92 35 a?.] 

NUEVA ANDALUCIA. See ANDALUCIA. 

NUEVA GALICIA. SeeGALiciA. 

NUEVA VIZCAYA. SeeVizcAYA. 

NUE VAS, a port of the island of Cuba. 

NUEVILLA, a settlement of the island of 
Cuba; situate on the n. coast. 

[NUEVO BAXO, a bank called by the British 
the New Bear, being about 150 miles .&amp;lt;;. of the w. 
end of the island of Jamaica, in lat. 1549 w. It has 
a key, two cables length long and one and one-third 
broad ; stretching e. by n, and w. by s. The Bri 
tish find this a good station in a Spanish war, as 
most ships come this way from the Spanish main, 
going to the Havannah.] 

[NUETO SANTANDER, capital of the province 
of the same name, docs not admit the entry of 
vessels drawing more than from eight to ten pa/mas 
of water. The village of Sotto la Marina, to the 
e. of Santander, might become of great conse 
quence to the trade of this coast, could the port be 
remedied. At present the province of Santander 
is so desert, that fertile districts of 10 or 12 square 
leagues were sold there in 1802 for 10 or 12 
francs.] 

NUEVO PUEBLO, a settlement in the province 
and captainship of Rey in Brazil ; situate on the 
coast of the Rincon de Turotetama. 

NUEVO PUEBLO, another settlement, in the pro 
vince and government of Veragua and kingdom of 
Tierra Firme. 

NUEVO PUEBLO, a river of the n. coast of the 
straits of Magellan, which runs e. and enters the 
bay of Abrigada. 

NUEVO PUEBLO, another, of the province and 
government of Tucumnn in Peru. It runs n. and 
enters the Parapiti. 

NUEVO PUEBLO, another, of the island of Ja 
maica, which enters the sea between ports New aud 
Dry. 

NUEVO PUEBLO, a rocky shoal near the coast 
of the province and government of Cartagena in 
the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, near that city and 
n. of Salmedina. 



O A H 

NUEVO PUEBLO, .another, near the coast of the 
province and government of Yucatan. 

NURVO PUEBLO, another, of the N. sea, near 
that of La Vivora, to thes. 

NUEVO REYNO DE GRANADA. See GRANA 
DA. 

NUEVO REYNO DE LEON. Sec LEON. 

NURVO MEXICO. Sec MEXICO. 

NUGALAPA, SAN JUAN DE, a settlement of 
the head settlement of the district of the province 
and alcaldia mayor of Suchitepeques in the king 
dom of Guatemela. It contains 80 families of In 
dians, who speak the Satuhil idiom, and is annex 
ed to the curacy of its head settlement. 

NUISI, a river of the province and country of 
Las Amazonas, in the part possessed by the Por 
tuguese. It rises between the Caquita and Uru- 
becchi, runs e. for many leagues, and enters the 
Negro. 

NUITO, SANTA MARIA DE, a settlement of 
the head settlement of the district of Pinotepa, and 
alcaldia mayor of Xicayan, in Nueva Espaiia. It 
is of a mild temperature, contains 18 families of 
Indians, who cultivate cochineal, tobacco, and 
seeds, and is six leagues n. of its head settle 
ment. 

NULPE, or NULPI, a river of the province 
nnd government of Esmeraldas in the kingdom of 
Quito. It rises in the mountains of the province 
of Pasto, to the n. of Mayasquier, runs from s. w. 
to n. w. and from the settlement of Caiquier be 
gins to be navigable for canoes or small barks, and 
enters the Mira, in lat. 1 21 w. 

NUMARAN, SANTIAGO DE, a settlement of 
the head settlement of the district of Puruandiro, 
and alcaldia mayor of Valladolid, in the province 
and bishopric of Mechoacan ; situate on a llanura 
on the shore of the river Patiquato. It is annexed 
to the curacy of Penxarno in the jurisdiction of the 



O A I 



461 



town of Leon, contains 10 families of Spaniards 
and 90 of Indians, and is 28 leagues from Pas- 
qnaro. 

NUMBALLE, or NAMBALLE, a river of the 
province and government of Jaen dc Brucamoros 
in the kingdom of Quito. It receives the waters 
of the river Canche, and runs from w. to e. to 
enter by the w. part into the Chinchipe, opposite 
the settlement of Pamaca, in lat. 5 16 s. On its 
s. shore is a small settlement to which it gives its 
name, and which is inhabited solely by Indians. 

NUNOA, a settlement of the province and 
correghniento of Santiago in the kingdom of Chile, 
in the district of which are four chapels of ease. 

NUNTIALl, a settlement of Indians of N. Ca 
rolina, in the territory of the Moyens Chero- 
kees. 

NUNUALCO, SANTIAGO DE, a settlement and 
head settlement of the district of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of San Vicente de Austria, in the 
kingdom of Guatemala. It contains 1700 In 
dians, counting those of the small settlements an 
nexed to its curacy, all speaking the Mexican 
language. 

NUNLJIU. See NONURA. 
NURE, or NURI, a settlement of the province 
ofOstimuri in N. America; situate on the shore 
and at the source of the river Iliaqui. 

NURES, a nation of Indians, reduced to the 
Catholic faith, in the province of Cinaloa of N. 
America. It dwells near the nation of the Re- 
bomcs, whose example it followed, when con 
verted, seeking or their own accord that the Jesuits 
should come amongst them. They were formed 
into a settlement, which now contains only 200 in 
habitants, though it was formerly much larger. 

NURST, a settlement of the island of Bar- 
badoes, in ihe district of the parish of Todos 
Santos. 



O 



Harbour, near the s. point of 
Ulietea, one of the Society islands, in the S. Pacific 
ocean, n. w. of Otaheite. Lat. 16 55 s. Long. 
151 24 a&amp;gt;.] 

[OAHAHA, a river of Louisiana, which emp 
ties into the Mississippi from the w. w. in lat. 38 
48 n. and seven miles n. of Riviere au Beuf.] 



[OAIIOONA,oneof the Ingraham isles, which 
is said to be the northernmost of all this cluster. 
It lies about 10 leagues n. e. of Nooheeva. To 
this island Captain Roberts gave the name of Mas 
sachusetts. Captain Ingraham had before called 
it Washington.] 

OA1T1P1HA or AITEPEIIA Bay, situate near 



462 



O A X 



llir n. e. end of the lesser peninsula of the island 
ofOtaheite, has good anchorage in 12 fathoms. 
Lat. 17 46 s. Long. 149 14 a&amp;gt;.] 

[OAK Bay, or the DEVIL S Head, in the hay of 
Fnndy, is nine leagues s. s. c. of Moose island. 
It is very high land, and may be seen at 10 or 12 
leagues distance.] 

[OAK Island, a long narrow island on the coast 
of N. Carolina, which with Smith s island forms 
the s. z. channel of Cape Fear river. See BALD 
Head, and Cape FEAR.! 

[OAKFUSKEE. See TALLAPOOSE River.] 

[OAKFUSK1ES, an Indian tribe in the w. 
part of Georgia. The warrior Mico, called the 
White Lieutenant, has the sole influence over 1000 
gun-rnen.] 

[OAKHAM, a township in Worcester county, 
Massachusetts, 15 miles n. w. of Worcester, and 
45 w. of Boston. It was incorporated in 1762, and 
contains 772 inhabitants.] 

[OAKMULGEE River is the s. great branch of 
the beautiful Alatamaha in Georgia. At the Oak- 
mulgee fields it is about 300 or 400 yards wide. 
These rich and fertile fields are on the e. side of 
the river, above the confluence of the Oconee with 
this river ; these two branches are here about 40 
miles apart. Mere are wonderful remains of the 
power and grandeur of the ancients of this part of 
America, consisting of the ruins of a capital town 
and settlement, vast artificial hills, terraces, &amp;c. 
See ALATAMAHA River.] 

OAPAN, a settlement and head settlement of 
the district of the alcaldia runt/or ofTixtlan in 
Nueva Espana ; situate in a mild temperature, and 
inhabited by 212 families. 

OAS, SANTA ROSA DE, a settlement of the mis 
sions which are held by the regulars of the Jesuits 
in the province and government of Mainas, of the 
kingdom of Quito ; founded in 1665, on the shore 
of a river which enters the Napo. 

OAS, a nation of Indians of the province and 
country of Las Arnazorias, one of the missions 
which were held by the Jesuits ; discovered and re 
duced to the faith by the Father Ramon de Santa 
Cruz, who founded a settlement on the shore of the 
river which empties itself into the Napo, in 1666. 

[OATARA, a small woody island on the s. e. of 
Ulictea island, in the S. Pacific ocean ; between 
three and four miles from which, to the n. w. are 
two other small islands in the same direction as the 
reef, of which they are a part.] 

OAXACA, a province and alcaldia mayor of 

Nueva Espana ; situate on the narrowest part of 

Ihe continent, bounded n. and s. by the N. and 

S. seas, e. by the province and bishopric of 

2 



O A X 

Chiapa, n. e. by the province of Tabasco, s. e. 
by that of Soconusco, in an oblique line from this 
port in the S. sea to the former port in the N. sea, 
and in the opposite rhumbs, by the province of 
Tlaxcala and bishopric of La Puebla de los An 
geles, its line of division from one sea to the other 
forming a figure of S. Its length from e. to o&amp;gt;. by 
the coast of the S. sea is 96 leagues, namely, from 
the river Taquelamama to the port Soconusco, and 
50 leagues by the n. coast, from the river Alva- 
rado to that of Goazacoalco ; its width is also 
about 50 leagues, that is to say, from the isthmus of 
the aforesaid river Alvarado to the port Aguatulco 
in the S. sea. 

It is of a mild climate and fertile territory, and 
abounding particularly in mulberry-trees, which 
are finer here than in any other province of Ame 
rica. The greater part of it is mountainous, with 
the exception of the valley of its name, although it 
has nevertheless large breeds of cattle. It pro 
duces sugar, cotton, wheat, cacao, plantains, and 
other vegetable productions, and has rich mines of 
gold, silver, and lead ; gold being also found in 
the sands of its rivers. It produces likewise a 
quantity of cochineal, cinnamon, and crystal ; and 
were its inhabitants industrious, it would be one of 
the richest provinces in America; but they lead 
an idle life, neither do the Indians in any degree 
cultivate the soil, owing to the ease with which 
they pick up the gold, which, however, is generally 
the employment of the women. 

At the commencement of the conquest of the 
kingdom of Nueva Espana it was very populous, 
but its inhabitants have much fallen off. A great 
part of this province belongs to the estates of the 
house of Hernan Cortes, being granted to him by 
the Emperor Charles V". with the the title of Mar 
ques del Valle de Oaxaca. In the mountain of 
Cocola, dividing this province from Tlaxcala, are 
found mines of gold, silver, crystal, and vitriol, as 
also various kinds of precious stones. 

This province was conquered by Juan Nunez 
dc Mercado, who was page to Hernan Cortes in 
1521, and it was peopled in 1528 by Juan Sedcilo 
and Hernando de Badajos. Its bishopric com 
prehends 21 alcaldias mayores and jurisdictions, 
which are, 

Antequera, Atlatlauca, 

Quatro Villas Miahuatlan, 

Chichicapa, Nexapa, 

Guejolotitlan, Xicayan, 

Ixtcpexi, Teutitlan, 

Tepozcoluca, Nochiztlan, 

Cuicatlan, Yanguitlan, 

Ixquintepec, Teosaqualco, 



O AX AC A. 



463 



Tecoquilco, Teutila, 

Huameluca, Villalta. 

Tchuantepec, 

The above province was organised in 1535. 
The capital is the city of ANTEQUERA, to which is 
also given the name of the province, [both of 
which see.] 

[The name of the province of Oaxaca, which 
other geographers less correctly call Guaxaca, is 
derived from a Mexican name of the city and val 
ley of lluaxyacac, one of the principal places of 
the Zapotec country, which was almost as con 
siderable as Teotzapotlan, their capital. The in- 
tendancy of Oaxaca is one of the most delightful 
countries in this part of the globe. The beauty 
and salubrity of the climate, the fertility of the 
soil, and the richness and variety of its produc 
tions, all minister to the prosperity of the inhabi 
tants; and this province has accordingly from the 
remotest periods been the centre of an advanced 
civilization. 

To give its description according to flnmboldt, 
it is bounded on the n. by the intendancy of Vera 
Cruz, on the e. by the kingdom of Guatemala, on 
the w. by the province ofPuebla, and on the*, 
for a length of coast of 11 leagues, by the Great 
ocean. Its extent exceeds that of Bohemia and 
Moravia together; and its absolute population is 
nine times less ; consequently its relative popula 
tion is equal to that of European Russia. 

The mountainous soil of the intendancy of 
Oaxaca forms a singular contrast with that of the 
provinces ofPuebla, Mexico, and Valladolid. In 
place of the strata of basaltcs, amygdaloid, and 
porphyry with griinstein base, which cover the 
ground of Anahuac from the 18 to the 22 of lat. 
we find only granite and gneiss in the mountains 
of Mixteca and Zapoteca. The chain of moun 
tains of trap formation only recommences to the 
s. e. on the w. coast of the kingdom of Guatemala. 
We know the height of none of these granitical 
summits of the intendancy of Oaxaca. The in 
habitants of this fine country consider the Cerro de 
Senpualtepec, near Villalta, from which both seas 
are visible, as one of the most elevated of these 
summits. However, this extent of horizon would 
only indicate a height of 2350 metres. The visual 
horizon of a mountain of 2350 metres (7709 feet) 
of elevation has a diameter of 3 20 . The ques 
tion has been discussed, if the two seas could be 
visible from the summit of the Nevadode Tolca ? 
The visual horizon of this has 2 21 or 58 leagues 
of radius, supposing only an ordinary refraction. 
The two coasts of Mexico nearest to the Nevado, 



those of Coyuca and Tuspan, are at a distance of 
54 and 64 leagues from it. It is said that (lie same 
spectacle of the two seas may be enjoyed at La 
Ginetta, on the limits of the bishoprics of Oaxaca 
and Chiapa, at 12 leagues distance from the port 
of Tehnantepec, on the great road from Guatemala 
to Mexico. 

The vegetation is beautiful and vigorous through 
out the whole province of Oaxaca, and especially 
half way down the declivity in the temperate re 
gion, in which the rains are very copious from the 
month of May to the month of October. At the 
village of Santa Maria del Tule, three leagues e. 
from the capital, between Santa Lucia and Tlaco- 
chiguaya, there is an enormous trunk of cupressns 
disticha (sabino) of 36 metres, or 118 feet, in cir 
cumference. This ancient tree is consequently 
larger than the cypress of Atlixco, the dragonnier 
of the Canary islands, and all the boababs (Adan- 
soniac) of Africa. But on examining it narrowly, 
M. Anza observes, that what excites the admiration 
of travellers is not a single individual, and that 
three united trunks form the famous sabino of Santa 
Maria del Tule. 

The intendancy of Oaxaca comprehends two 
mountainous countries, which from the remotest 
times went under the names of Mixteta and Tza- 
poteca. These denominations, which remain to 
this day, indicate a great diversity of origin among 
the natives. The old Mextecapan is now divided 
into Upper and Lower Mixteca (Mixteca Alta y 
Baxa). The e. limit of the former, which adjoins 
the intendancy ofPuebla, runs in a direction from 
Ticomabacca, by Quaxiniquilapa, towards the S. 
sea. It passes between Colotopeque and Tarnasu- 
lapa. The Indians of Mixteca are an active, in 
telligent, arid industrious people. 

If the province of Oaxaca contains no monu 
ments of ancient Aztec architecture equally asto 
nishing from their dimensions as the houses of the 
gods (teocallis) of Cholula, Papantla, and Teoti- 
huacan, it contains the ruins of edifices more re 
markable for their symmetry and the elegance of 
their ornaments. The walls of the palace of Mitla 
arc decorated with grecques, and labyrinths in 
mosaic of small porphyry stones. We perceive 
in them the same design which we admire in the 
vases falsely called Tuscan, or in the frieze of the 
old temple of Deus Redicolus, near the grotto of 
the nymph Egeria at Rome, llumboldt caused 
part of these American ruins to be engraved, which 
were very carefully drawn by Colonel Don Pedro 
de la Laguna, and by an able architect, Don Luis 
Martin. If we are justly struck with the great] 



464 



O A X A C A. 



[analogy between the ornaments of the palace of 
Mitla and those employed by the Greeks and 
Romans, we are not on that account to give our 
selves lightly up to historical hypotheses, on the 
possibility of the existence of ancient communica 
tions between the two continents. We must not 
forget, that under almost every zone, mankind take 
a pleasure in a rythmical repetition of the same 
forms which constitute the principal character of 
all that we call grecques, meanders, labyrinths, 
and arabesques. 

The village of Mitla was formerly called Mi- 
guitlan, a word which means in the Mexican lan 
guage, a place of sadness. The Tzapotec Indians 
call it Leoba, which signifies tomb. In fact, the 
palace of Mitla, the antiquity of which is un 
known, was, according to the tradition of the na 
tives, as is also manifest from the distribution of 
its parts, a palace constructed over the tombs of 
the kings, it was an edifice to which the sove 
reign retired for some time on the death of a son, 
a wife, or a mother. Comparing the magnitude 
of these tombs with the smallness of the houses 
which served for abodes to the living, we feel in 
clined to say with Diodorus Siculus, (lib. i. c. 51) 
that there arc nations who erect sumptuous monu 
ments for the dead, because, looking on this life 
as short and passing, they think it unworthy the 
trouble of constructing them for the living. 

The palace, or rather the tombs of Mitla, form 
three edifices symmetrically placed in an ex 
tremely romantic situation. The principal edifice 
is in best preservation, and is nearly 40 metres, 
or 131 feet, in length. A stair formed in a pit 
leads to a subterraneous apartment of 27 metres 
in length and eight in breadth, viz. 88 feet by 26. 
This gloomy apartment is covered with the same 
grecques which ornament the exterior walls of the 
edifice. 

But what distinguishes the ruins of Mitla from 
all the other remains of Mexican architecture, is 
six porphyry columns, which are placed in the 
midst of a vast hall and support the cieling. 
These columns, almost the only ones found in the 
new, continent, bear strong marks of the infancy of 
the art. They have neither base nor capitals. 
A simple contraction of the upper part is only to 
be remarked. Their total height is five metres, 
or 16.4 feet ; but their-shaft is of one piece of am 
phibolous porphyry. Broken down fragments, for 
ages heaped together,, conceal more than a third of 
the height of these columns. On uncovering them, 
M. Martin found their height equal to six din- 
metres, or 12 modules. Hence the. symmetry 



would be still lighter than that of the Tuscan 
order, if the inferior diameter of the column s of 
Mitla were not in the proportion of 3 : 2 to their 
upper diameter. 

The distribution of the apartments in the inte 
rior of this singular edifice, bears a striking ana 
logy to what has been remarked in the monuments 
of Upper Egypt, drawn by M. Denon and the 
savans who compose the institute of Cairo. M. 
de Laguna found in the ruins of Mitla curious 
paintings representing warlike trophies and sacri 
fices. 

The intendancy of Oaxaca Iras alone preserved 
the cultivation of cochineal (coccus cacti), a 
branch of industry which it formerly shared with 
the provinces of Puebla arid New Galicia. M. 
Humboldt asserts, that all the vai/nilla consumed 
in Europe comes from this province and Vera 
Cruz. Oaxaca, he adds, furnishes annually 
32,000 arrobas of cochineal, which, at 75 dollars, 
are worth 2,400,000 dollars. 

The family of Ilcrnan Cortes (as Alcedo has 
observed) bears the title of Marquis of the Valley 
of Oaxaca. The property is composed of the four 
Villas del Marqucsado, and 49 villages, which 
contain 17,700 inhabitants. 

The population of the intendancy of Oaxaca 
amounted, in 1803, to 534,800 souls ; the extent 
of surface in square leagues is 4447, giving 120 
inhabitants to the square league. 

The most remarkable places of this province 
are, OAXACA, or ANTEQUERA, (which see), Te* 
huantepec, San Antonio de los Cues. 

The mines of this intendancy worked with the 
greatest care are, Villalt;v,.Zolago, Yxtepexi, and 
Totomostla.] 

Bishops who have presided in Oaxaca. 

1. Don Juan Lopez de Zarate, canon of the 
holy church of Oviedo, licentiate in theologj T , and 
of great knowledge in both kinds of law : he left 
the reputation of having been a good preacher, 
made the visitation of the bishoprics, and regu 
lated the parishes, bringing as curates some mouks 
of the province of Mexico, there not being suffi 
cient clergy ; in the which undertaking he suffered 
great hardships, not only from an anxiety of mind, 
but the heat of the climate and difficulties of the 
roads : he passed over to Mexico to assist at the 
first council, where he died in 1554. 

2. Don Fr. Bernardo de Alburquerque, of the 
order of S. Domingo, native of the town of this 
name : he studied in the university of Alcala, 
where he made equal progress in science as in 
virtue : he sought the habit of lay-brother iii the 



O A X A C A. 



465 



convent of Salamanca, but his eloquence having 
been overheard in a certain dispute, he was com 
manded by the prior to begin his noviciate as a 
priest : he was one of the first religious men that 
passed over to America, and here he learnt the 
Zapotecan tongue : lie obtained various prelacies, 
until he became provincial, and the Emperor 
Charles V. presented him to the bishopric of this 
diocese in 1555 ; but he regularly observed the 
rules of his order, was extremely charitable, and 
gave his episcopal palace to be converted into a 
monastery for nuns, which was called De Santa 
Catalina de Sena ; he died, as it is supposed, a 
saint, in 1579. 

3. Don Fr. Bartolome de Ledesma, a monk of 
the same order as the former, native of Niera in 
the bishopric of Salamanca : he passed over to 
Peru as confessor to the viceroy Don Martin En- 
rriquez,and from thence to Mexico; was first pro 
fessor of theology in his university, presented to 
the bishopric of Oaxaca in 1581: he founded a 
college dedicated to the apostle S. Bartolome : he 
was charitable, and carried his disinterestedness to 
a great pitch, so much so that it was with the 
most repeated persuasions that the Indians could 
prevail upon him on a certain occasion to accept 
of a small pot of balsam ; ami although he did 
accept it, he made them, in return, a present of a 
cup for their altar : he assisted at the third Mexi 
can council, and it was in his time that occurred 
the prodigy of the cross of Guatulco ; he died in 
1604. 

4. Don Fr. Baltasar de Covarrubias, of the 
order of San Agustin, native of Mexico, where he 
distinguished himself for his virtue and literature ; 
presented by Philip III. to the mitre of Nuestra 
Senora de la Asuncion of the river La Plata, in 
1601 ; promoted from thence to the mitre of Ca- 
zeres in the Philippine i^les, and afterwards to this 
in 1605, from whence he passed to that of Mecho- 
acan in 1608. 

5. Don Juan de Cervantes, native of Mexico: 
he began his studies in that university, and fol 
lowed them up in the university of Salamanca, 
where he graduated as doctor in theology, was 
treasurer of the church of La Puebla, canonical 
lecturer and archdeacon of the church of his na 
tive place, professor of writing in its university, 
governor of the archbishopric, judge in ordinary, 
calificador of the holy oflice, and elected bishop of 
this church in 1603; he preached to his parishion 
ers with great effect, and was very charitable, built 
a chapel in the church, where he might place the 
miraculous image of Guatulco, sending a bit of it, 
about the size of u hand, richly adorned, to the 

VOL, III. 



pontiff Paul V. ; he died on the eve of the exalta 
tion of the cross in 1614. 

6. Don Jr. Juan Bartolome dc Bohorques, of 
the order of S. Domingo, native of Mexico: he 
was lecturer of philosophy and theology, master in 
his religion, rector of the college of S. Luis de la 
Puebla, prior of the convent of Izucar and pro 
vincial : he graduated as doctor in the university 
of Mexico, passed over to Spain, where he was 
elected bishop of Venezuela, and promoted to this 
church in J617. In his time occurred the mira 
culous appearance of the Virgin de la Soledad at 
Oaxaca : he died in 1633. 

7. Don Leonel de Cervantes, also native of 
Mexico : he pissed over to Spain to study in the 
university of Salamanca, where he obtained the 
degree of doctor in sacred canons, wns maestre- 
escuda and archdeacon of the holy church of Santa 
Fe, provisor and vicar-general of the archbishop 
rics of Don Bartolorru; Lobo and Don Fernando 
Arias de Ugarte; presented to the bishopric of 
Santa Marta in 1620, where he remained five years, 
and from thence promoted to Guadalaxara in 1615, 
and afterwards to this ; but before he could enter 
it he died at Mexico in 1637. 

8. Don Bartolome de Benavente y Benavides, 
native of Madrid : he studied in the university of 
Siguenza, and graduated as licentiate in canons 
and doctor in theology; was made canon of tho 
church of Lima, as also maeslre-escuela,, arch 
deacon, commissary of crusade, visitor-general of 
its archbishopric, and professor of that university; 
presented to this bishopric, where he entered in 
J639; he visited the whole diocese, and died in 
1652. 

9. Don Fr. Diego de Evia y Valdes, of the 
order of San Benito, native of the principality of 
Asturias ; presented to the bishopric of the church 
of Durango in Nueva Vizcaya, and promoted to 
this church of" Antequera, of which he took posses 
sion in 1654 ; he died two years after, in 1656. 

10. Don Alonso de las Cuevas Davalos, native 
of Mexico, a man distinguished by his birth and 
virtues, and who by his literature had attained to 
the first prizes in the universities : he was magis 
terial canon, treasurer, and archdeacon of La 
Puebla, and the same in the metropolitan church 
of Mexico, which he left to become prelate of this 
church : he was charitable in the extreme, and 
considered a model for bishops, promoted to the 
archbishopric of Mexico in 1664; he died before, 
he could take possession. 

11. Don Fr. Tomas de Montcrroso, of the order 
of S. Domingo, master in the same order, a man 
who had obtained great fame in the piofcssorships 

3 o 



466 



O A X A C A. 



and in the pulpits at Madrid, and the king having 
here heard him preach a sermon, immediately ap 
pointed him to this bishopric, or* which lie took 
possession in 1665 ; lie founded the seminary col 
lege, and died in 1678. 

12. Don Nicholas del Puerto, native of the town 
of Santa Catalina de las Minas, in the archbishop 
ric of Mexico, collegiate of the college of San lldc- 
fonso of this city, doctor of sacred canons in its 
university, and advocate of the royal audience,- 
where he was admitted, through his eloquence, 
canonical doctor of the metropolitan church, com 
missary-general of crusade in that kingdom. The 
steps which he took at the time of the expiration 
of the bull, not only brought down upon him the 
approbation of the court, but induced the king to 
present him to this bishopric, of which he took 
possession in 1679 : he founded the professorship 
of grammar and philosophy, and two of theology, 
in the seminary college, ami left to the same his 
grand library ; he died in 1681. 

13. Don Isidro Sarinana, native of the city of 
Mexico, doctor in sacred theology, professor of 
sacred writings in its university. To the study of 
letters he added the exercise of the virtues, as well 
in the parish of Santa Cruz as of Sagrario : he was 
then canonical lecturer, chanter, and archdeacon 
of that church, calificador of the holy office, and 
synod ical examiner of the archbishopric, and bi 
shop of Oaxaca, where he acquired great esteem 
for his fine discernment : he was an eloquent 
preacher, prudent, humble, affable, benign, pa 
cific, charitable, and zealous for the public weal ; 
he died in 1696. 

14. Don Fr. Angel Maldonado, of the order of 
San Bernardo, native of Ocafuv, doctor and pro 
fessor of theology in the university of Alcala, mas 
ter in his religion : he was presented to the bishop 
ric of Honduras, and promoted to this church in 
1702: he affected a love of great poverty, rebuilt 
the cathedral, which entirely ruined him, refused 
the promotions to the bishoprics of Mechoacan 
and Orihuela in Spain, to which he was pro 
moted, frequently visited his diocese, and died to 
the universal regret in 1728. 

15. Don FT. Francisco de Santiago y Calderon, 
of the order of La Merced, native of Torralva in the 
bishopric of Cuenca, lecturer of arts in the con- 
vent of Huete, and of sacred theology in the col 
leges of Salamanca and Alcala, rector and comen- 
dudor of the college of Madrid, provincial of Cas- 
tilla, visitor of the convents of Galicia and Astu- 
rias, thcologist of La Nunciatura, decreed by the 
council of the Indies to be bishop of Guatemala in 
1728, and afterwards promoted to this bishopric, of 



which he took possession in 1730 : he consecrated 
its cathedral, added to it two fine towers and a 
clock, and, having paid the visitation, given great 
alms, and nicely fulfilled the duties of his station, 
he died in 1736. 

16. Don Tomas Montaiio, native of Mexico, 
collegiate of the royal college of San lldefonso, 
prebendary and sy nodical examiner of the bishop 
ric of Mechoacan, medio-raciotiero, canon, trea 
surer, chanter, archdeacon, and dean, of the me 
tropolitan of his native place, in the university of 
which he was professor of theology, and thrice 
rector; elected bishop of this church of Oaxaca 
in 1737; he made his entry the following year, 
and governed only three years, in which short 
period he completely gained the affection of his 
flock by his kind treatment and disinterestedness: he 
shewed his zeal both in the pulpit as in confer- 
rences, which he was accustomed to hold with the 
clergy one day in every week : he endowed a fel 
lowship in the college of San lldefonso for some 
poor nobleman, and also established a mass of 
grace for the last day in the j r ear in the college of 
the abolished order of Jesuits ; he died in 1742. 

17. Don Diego Felipe Gomez de Angulo, native 
of Burgos, advocate ot the royal audiences of Gua 
temala and Mexico : he obtained through his me 
rits a curacy in the first of these two cities, where 
he was also provisor, afterwards dean of the holy 
cathedral of Puebla, and for a long time governor 
of the bishopric. Being presented to the bishop 
ric of Antequera in 1745, he began his mission by 
redressing grievances and succouring the needy : 
he also etablished an holy jubilee : his affability, 
kindness, and general virtue, caused him to be 
esteemed by all, and he died in 1752. 

18. Don Buenaventura Blanco y Helguero, na 
tive of Valladolid, collegiate in the mayor collegia 
of San lldefonso de Alcala, canonical doctor of the 
holy church of Calahorra, visitor, provisor, and 
vicar-general of that bishopric, and elected to this 
of Antequera in 1754: he was a most charitable 
prelate, and left behind him evident marks of his 
zealousness and ability, and died full of virtues 
in 1764. 

19. Don Miguel Anselmo Alvarez de Abreu y 
Valdes, native of Teneriffe, one of the Canaries, 
doctor in sacred canons in the university of Se- 
villa, secretary of the chamber and government of 
the most illustrious Senor Don Domingo Guerra, 
bishop of Segovia and confessor of the Queen 
Dowager, ran onero, confessor, and prior of the 
holy cathedral church of Canarias, judge of the 
reverend apostolical chamber, and of the holy tri 
bunal of crusade, judge, examiner, and visitor of 



O B 1 

the aforesaid bishopric, auxiliary to that of the 
Puehla de k&amp;gt;s Angeles ; elected to that of Cornaya- 
gua r nd to this of Antequera in 1765 ; he died in 
1774. 

20. Don Joseph Gregorio de Ortigosa, native of 
Viguera in the diocesse of Calahorra ; nominated 
bishop of Oaxaca in 1775. 

[OAXACA, or GUAXACA, a principal town of 
the intendancy of this name, the ancient Hu- 
axyacac, called Antequera at the beginning or the 
conquest. Thiery de Menonville only assigns 6000 
inhabitants to it ; but by 1he enumeration in 1792 it 
was found to contain 24,000. See ANTEQUERA.] 

OBACATIARAS, a barbarous nation of In 
dians of Brazil, who live in some islands at the 
entrance of the mouth of the river San Francisco. 
They are at present far from numerous ; their 
anus are bows and arrows, and they live by 
fishing and the chase. 

[OBED S River, in Tennessee, runs s. w. into 
Cumberland river, 290 miles from its mouth, by 
the course of the stream. Thus far Cumberland 
river is navigable for large vessels.] 

OBE1TA, or UBEYTA, a country, anciently 
very populous and rich, in the old province of 
Tcnsa in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, in the e. 
part, and below thedominion of the king of Tunja. 
This country was entered by Ximinez de Quesada 
in 1537, who made a great booty. It is at pre 
sent much reduced, consisting of nothing but a 
poor settlement of Indians. 

OBERABA, a l?ke of the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay, near the shore of this river. 

[OBlONj a navigable river of Tennessee, which 
runs s. w. into the Mississippi, 14 miles s. of Reels- 
foot rivers. It is 70 yards broad, 17 miles from its 
mouth.] 

OB1RABASI, a river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas. It rises in the territory 
of the Anamaris Indians, runs n. and enters the 
Madera. 

OB1SPO, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento ot Copiapo in the kingdom of Chile; 
situate near the coast, between the ports of Hu- 
asco and Totoral. 

OBISPO, another settlement, in the province 
and government of Maracaibo and Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada; situate on the shore of the river S. 
Domingo, n. n. e. of the city of Barinas Nueva. 

OBISPO, a shoal of the sound of Campeche and 
government of Yucatan, near the coast. 

OBISPO, afarallon or isle on the coast of the 
province and corregimiento of Quillota in the 
kingdom of Chile, between the point of CaramilUi 
and the port of Castello Viejo. 



OCA 



467 



[OBITEREA, an island 100 leagues s. of the 
Society islands. Lat. 22 40 s. Long. 150 50 w. 
It contains no good anchorage, and the inhabitants 
are averse to the intrusion of strangers.] 

OBRAG1LLO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Canta in Peru, annexed to 
the curacy of its capitol. 

OBRAND1UE, a settlement of the province 
and captainship of Rio Grande in Brazil ; situate 
on the coast, between the shoal of Las Salinas and 
the point of Piedras. 

OBSCURO, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Veraguay, and kingdom of Tierra 
Firme. It rises in the mountains close to the 
11. coast, runs w. and enters the sea not far from the 
mouths of the Toro. 

OCABAMBA, a large, fertile, and beautiful 
valley of the province and corregimiento of Calca 
and Lares in Peru, of the district of the second ; 
bounded by the infidel Chuncos Indians. It has no 
formal town or settlement in it, but is full of sugar 
and cocoa estates, inhabited by very many fami 
lies. It is irrigated by the river Pilcomayo, 
which abounds in fine fish, such as shad, dories, 
and pejerreyes, or king-fish. In spiritual con 
cerns it is under the bishop of Cuzco, who nomi 
nates two priests with the titles of beneficiados, 
who administer the sacraments in the chapels of 
the said estates. At some distance are some ran- 
chos, or temporary habitations, of the Chunehos 
Indians, who were beginning to be reduced to the 
faith by the religious order of San Francisco ; but 
just as there was every ground for hoping that 
they would do well, they burst out into an insur 
rection, and relapsed into their pristine gentilism, 
in 1744, putting to death many of the Neofitos, 
and causing others to fly. 

OCABA i A, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Sicacica in Peru, annexed to the 
curacy of Pasca. 

OCAB1TA, a province, large and rich in the 
time of the Indian gentilism, of the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada, to the e. of the city of Santa Fe. It 
is named from a cacique or chief who was then its 
governor, and was taken possession of in 1537 by 
Juan de San Martin, but the natives rose up in 
1541, fortifying themselves on the top of a great 
rock, wlure they held out for a long time against 
the attacks of different Spanish captains, until 
that, persuaded by the eloquence of Alonso Ma- 
rin, they capitulated and made a peace, which 
they never after broke. This nation is, at the 
present day, nearly extinct, and nothing remains 
of it but a miserable village bearing its name. 

OCACOCK, a small island of the N. sea, near 
3 o 2 



468 



o c c 



o c o 



the coast of the province of S. Carolina, between 
the islands of Hatteros and cape Core. This 
island forms the e. side of the entrance into Pam- 
lico sound, which entrance or inlet bears the same 
name. 

[OCAMARE, SeeOcuMARR.] 
OCASTA, a city of the province and govern 
ment of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada ; situate in the llunura of Hacari, from 
whence it is also called Santa Ana dc Hacari ; 
founded by Francis Hernandez in 1572, and 
translated to the spot where it now stands in 1576, 
in the province of the Carates Indians. It is 
small, but cheerful and beautiful ; its territory is 
very fertile and pleasant, and the wheat and sugar 
arc of excellent quality. It has a very good 
parish church, a convent of San Francisco, and 
another of San Agustin. In it dwell different fami 
lies of rank and distinction, and the women are in 
general of nice appearance. It lies about 60 miles 
s. s. e. of Laguna Zapatosa, to the e. of the 
Grajide de la Magdalena, on the n. shore of the 
river Oro, and having a good embarking place in 
the river Lebrija, near where this communicates 
with the Magdalena. This city is 218 miles n. 
with a slight inclination to the e. Lat. 8 2 n. 
Long. 73 80* so. 

OCASTA, a settlement of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Lucanas in Peru, annexed to the cu 
racy of Laramate. 

OCASTA, a river of the province of Mexico and 
kingdom of Nueva Espaua. It runs into the sea 
at the bay of Mexico, between the river Alvarado 
and the sierras of San Martin. 

OCATLAN, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district and akaldia mayor of Barca in the 
kingdom of Nueva Galicia, close to its capital on 
the w. 

OCAY, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayres in Peru. It runs w. 
and enters the Uruguay, between the rivers Gua- 
ting and De Aguas. 

[OCCOA, or OCOA, a bay on the .?. side of the 
island of St. Domingo, into which fall the small 
rivers Si picepy and Ocoa. It lies c. of Neybe or 
Julienne bay, and is bounded s. e. by point Sali 
nas, and w. by the e. point at the mouth of Bya 
river. Spanish ships of war anchor in this bay. 
Point Salinas is 22 leagues w. of (he city of St. 
Domingo.] 

[OccoA, a bay near the e. end of the island of 
Cuba, in the windward passage, about 20 miles e. 
of Guantanamobay.] 

[OCCOCHAPPO, or BEAVER Creek, in the 
Georgia w. territory, empties through the s. w. 



bank of Tennessee river, just below the muscle 
shoals. There is a portage of only about 50 miles 
from this creek to the navigable waters of Mobile 
river. The mouth of tiiis creek is in the centre 
of a piece of ground, the diameter of which is five 
miles, ceded by the s. Indians to the United States 
for the establishment of trading posts.] 

[OCCONEACHEY Islands, two long narrow 
islands at the head of Roanoke river in Virginia, 
just below where the Staunton and Dan unite and 
form that river.] 

OCCOQUAN, a small river of the province of 
Virginia in N. America. It runs e. and enters 
the Patowmack. 

OCHANACHE, JESUS nu, a settlement of the 
conversion and missions held there by the religious 
order of San Francisco, in the province of Caxa- 
marquilla or Pataz, and kingdom of Peru ; situate 
on the shore of the river Gibitas, near its entrance 
into the Maranon. 

[OCHILLA Island, more properly ORCHIL- 
LA, which see.] 

OCHOA, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Quillota, and kingdom of Chile ; 
situate on the shore of the river Quillota. 

OCHOA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Honduras, which runs n. arid enters the 
sea between those of Cangrcjo and Pico dc Gata. 

OCKA, a settlement of Indians of S. Carolina ; 
situate on the shore of the river Albania, where 
the English have an establishment and fort for its 
defence. 

OCLAYAS, a small river of the province and 
government of Tucuman in Peru, which runs w. and 
enters the Bermejo. On its shores the fathers and 
missionaries Caspar Ossario and Antonio Ripario, 
of the Jesuits, were murdered by the infidel Indians. 
OCxMULGI, a river of the province of Georgia 
in N. Americ:i. It runs in a very abundant 
stream to s. e. and enters the Alatahama, close to 
the settlement of Fourche. 

OCOA, a small river of S. Domingo, which 
runs into the sea seven leagues from Nizao, and 
nine from the town of Azua. 

OCO13AMBA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Aridahuailas in Peru, annexed to 
the curacy of Ongoy. 

OCOIJAMBA, another settlement, of the province 
and eorreginticnto of Castro- Virreyna, annexed to 
the curacy of Cordoba. 

OCOCO, a settlement of the same province and 
kingdom as the former, and also annexed to that 
curacy. 

OCO1, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay in Peru, which runs w. and 



o c o 

enters the Pararaa between the Piracaby and the 
Cay. 

OCOLCO, a settlement of the province of 
Mexico in Nneva Espana. In the time of the 
Indians it was the place where the workmen used 
to be, who undertook to adorn with feathers and 
precious metals the palace of the emperor ; it was 
near the city of Tezcuco, but now no longer exists. 

OCONA, a settlement of the province and cor- 
rea-imicnto of Cumana in Peru, situate near the 
sea, having a creek in which much fish is caught. 

OCONA, a river of the province and correginti- 
ento of Chumbivilcas iii the same kingdom ; it 
rises in the cordtllera here, runs to that of Condc- 
suyos de Arequipa, where, swollen with the waters 
it receives from various other streams, it changes 
its name, and enters, with a large body, into the 
sea at the former port. 

OCONAHUA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Izatlan 
in Nneva Espana. 

OCONGATE, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Quispicanchi in Peru, annexed 
to the curacy of the settlement of Cerca in the 
province of Paucartambo. 

OCONI, a settlement of Indians in the province 
of Georgia, and N. America ; situate on the shore 
and at the source of the river of its name, where 
the English have an establishment for their com 
merce with the Indians, and a fort for their de 
fence. 

OCOKI. The aforesaid river runs s. e. and enters 
the Alatahama or Georgia. On its shores were 
formerly many small settlements of Indians: but 
in the war waged against them by the English in 
1715, they were forced to retire to the river Cha- 
tahotchi. 

[The Oconi is the n. main branch of Alatamaha 
river, Georgia. It is in many places 250 yards 
wide. Its banks abound with oak, ash, mulberry, 
hickory, black walnut, elm, sassafras, &amp;c.] 

OCONORI, a settlement of the missions which 
were held by the Jesuits in the province and go 
vernment of Cinaloa. 

OCOPA, SANTA MARIA DE, a college of the 
missionaries of the order of San Francisco, in the 
province and corregimiento of Jauja in Peru ; 
situate in a desert spot at the foot of some lofty and 
dry mountains ; its temperature is dry, and al 
though the hoar frosts arc frequent in June and 
July, yet is it not so cold here as in Europe; but 
at this time the strong winds are very disagreeable, 
and in November, December, January, and Fe 
bruary, there are constantly great tempests with 
much rain. This college was founded by the Fr. 



O C O 



469 



Francisco de San Joseph, in 1724, for the pur 
pose of establishing missions for the many infi 
del Indians who have been reduced since 1709. 
Here, having obtained a grant of the site, he 
built a college capable of containing 40 monks ; 
also a church, entirely of stone, with Jl altars, 
and adorned with rich ornaments and precious 
jewels, all of which were procured by the alms of 
the devout, and the great zeal of the missionaries. 

This college enjoys the title of Rclicario del 
Peru ; it has by it two houses of entertainment for 
the numerous people who flock to it, they having 
sometimes, in holy week, amounted to upwards of 
1000. From this college the missionaries issue 
forth amongst the mountains to reduce to the faith 
the infidels, and great has been the fruit of their 
labours, even to the present day. Convinced of 
the use of this institution, the pious King 
Charles III. afforded to it much assistance ; and in 
1578, it was erected by his Holiness Clement X11I. 
into the college De Propaganda Fide. 

It is about 1 1C miles to the e. of Lima, 33 s. e. 
of the city of Tarma, and five to the e. of the river 
Jauja ; bounded n. by the province of Tarma, e. 
by the scrranias of the settlements of Comas uml 
Andamarca, and by the mountains of the infidels, 
w. by the province of Yauyos, and s. by that of 
Huanta, in the bishopric of Guamanga. Lat. 
12 2 s. Long. 75 2 w. 

OCOP1, SANTA ROSA DF, a settlement of the 
province and government of La Guayana or 
Nueva Andalucia, intheNuevo Reyno de Gra- 
cada ; one t&amp;gt;f the missions held there by the order 
of San Francisco; founded in 1723 by the Fr. 
Joseph de Vega, who assembled together a certain 
number of Chaymas Indians, to whom were added, 
in 1732, by the Fr. Matias Garcia, 20 families of 
the Guaraunos, the whole, at the present day, 
amounting to 650 persons. The situation is beau 
tiful, the territory level, at a small distance from 
the river of its name. It abounds in palms of 
moriche, and in the fruits of the country, as also in 
cattle, having excellent pastures. The natives are 
very devout and fond of their religion. 

OCORO, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimicnto of Guanta in Peru ; annexed to the cu 
racy of Colcabamba. 

OCOSCON1, a settlement of the missions of, 
and a reduction of Indians made by, the Jesuits in 
the province and government of Cinaloa. 

OCOTELULCO, a settlement and head settle 
ment of the district of the province of Tlaxcala, 
in the time of the republic of the Indians, and 
one of the settlements which assisted Hcrnau Cor 
tes iii the chastisement of the city of Cholula. 



470 



o c o 



OCOTENANGO, a settlement of the province 
nnd alcaldia mayor of Zedales in the kingdom of 
Guatemala. 

OCOTEPEC, SANTO TOM AS DE, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia 
mayor of Tepozcolula, in the province and bishop 
ric of Oaxaca and kingdom of Nueva Espana ; of 
a mild temperature. It contains 216 families of 
Indians, including those of the wards of its district. 
Its precincts are extremely fertile in seeds and ve 
getable productions, and especially in cochineal, 
in which consists its principal commerce. Ten 
leagues w. of its capital. 

OCOTEPEC, SAN SALVADOR DE, a settlement 
in the head settlement of the district and alcaldia 
mayor of Cuernavaca in the same kingdom. 

OCOTEPEC, SAN PEDHO DE, another settlement 
of the head settlement of Xicula, and alcaldia 
mayor of Nexapa, in the same kingdom ; of a 
cold temperature. It contains 150 families of 
Indians, and is five leagues n. e. of its head set 
tlement. 

OCOTEPEC, another, of the alcaldia mayor of 
Villalta in the same kingdom. It is of a cold 
temperature, contains 41 families of Indians, and 
is nine leagues e. of its capital. 

OCOTEPEC, another, of the province and alcal 
dia mayor of Los Zoqucs in the kingdom of 
Guatemala. 

OCOTEQU1LA, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district of Acantepec, and alcaldia 
mayor of Tlapa, in Nueva Espana. It contains 
25 families of Indians, and is two leagues to the 
za. of Clasivilungo. 

OCOT1C, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district and alcaldia mayor of Cuquio in 
Nueva Espana. Three leagues w. of its head 
settlement. 

OCOTITLAN, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa 
in Nueva Espana. It contains 48 families of In 
dians, and is 12 leagues w. n. w, of its capital. 

OCOTLAN, S. DOMINGO DE, a settlement 
and head settlement of the district of the alcaldia 
mayor of Antequera, in the province and bishop 
ric of Oaxaca and kingdom of Nueva Espana ; 
of a mild temperature. It contains 1130 families 
of Indians, including those of two wards in its 
district. These Indians are particularly devoted 
to the culture of cochineal and the land, having 
most abundant harvests. Six leagues s. of its 
capital. 

OCOTLAN, another settlement, in the head settle 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Zapo- 
nan in the same kingdom. It is inhabited by some 

2 



O C T 

Mustees, Mulattoes, and Indians, who are given 
to agriculture. 

OCOTLAN, another, with the dedicatory title of 
San Francisco, in the head settlement of the dis 
trict of Coronango, and alcaldia mayor of Cho- 
lula, in the same kingdom. It contains 87 fami 
lies of Indians, and is a league and a half n. of its 
capital. 

OCOUICA, SANTA CLARA DE, a settlement of 
the head settlement of the district of S. Andres de 
Cholula, and alcaldia mayor of this name, .in 
Nueva Espana. It contains 76 families of In 
dians, and is a league and a half s. of its capital. 

OCOZINGO, a town and capital of the pro 
vince and alcaldia mayor of Los Zedales in the 
kingdom of Guatemala ; situate in a beautiful val 
ley, which is watered by several streams, and thus 
rendered fertile in maize, honey, cattle, birds, 
some cacao, and achote ; and it would be much 
more productive were the natives at all industrious. 
It serves as a boundary or frontier against the in 
fidel Indians. Some of the inhabitants have sown 
wheat and sugar-canes, and they have yielded 
beyond all expectation. 

OCRA MANE, a point of land on the coast of 
the river S. Lawrence, n. e. of the city of Ta- 
dousac. 

[OCRECOCK Inlet, on the coast of N. Caro 
lina, leads into Pamlico sound, and out of it into 
Albemarle sound, through which all vessels must 
pass that are bound to Edenton, Washington, 
Bath, or Newbern. It lies in lat. 34 55 n. A 
bar of hard sand crosses the inlet, on which is 14 
feet water at low tide. The land on the n. is call 
ed Ocrecock, that on the s. Portsmouth. Six miles 
within the bar there is a hard sand shoal, which 
crosses the channel called the Swnsh. On each 
side of the channel are dangerous shoals, some 
times dry. Few mariners, however well acquainted 
with the inlet, choose to go in without a pilot ; as 
the bar often shifts during their absence on a voy 
age. It is about 1\ leagues s. to. half to. of cape 
Hatteras.] 

OCROS, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Vilcas-Huaman in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Vizchongo. 

OCROS, another, in the province and corregi- 
miento of Caxatambo in the same kingdom. 

OCSABAMBA, a river of the province and 
corregimiento of Chumbivilcas in Peru. It rises 
in the cordillera of the Andes, s. of the settlement 
of Cocha, and enters the Apurimac. 

OCTAGROS, a settlement of Canada in N. 
America, in the country of the Renards or Foxes, 
on the shore of the river Maskoutens. 



o c u 

OCT1BEA, a settlement of the Indians of S. 
Corolina ; situate at the source of the river Sori- 
laliue. 

OCTLATLAN, an ancient province of the 
kingdom of Guatemala, in the time of the In 
dians, but now confounded with other provinces. 

OCTOHATCHI, a small river of the province 
of Georgia in N. America. It runs s. e. and 
enters the Ocmulgi between the Echecouna and 
the Togosa. 

OCTORARA, a small river of the province 
and colony of Maryland. It runs s. w. and enters 
the Susquehanna. 

OCTOYAS, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Tucnman in Peru, of the district of 
the city of Jujui. It runs e. and enters the 
Bermejo. 

OCTUPA, a settlement of the province of 
Tlaxcala in Nueva Espaiia, near the city of La 
Puebla de los Angeles. 

OCUAPA, SAN FRANCISCO DE, a settlement 
and head settlement of the district of the alcaldia 
mayor of Acayuca in Nueva Espana. It is the 
head settlement of the district of the Ahualulcos 
Indians, contains four families of Spaniards, 20 
of Mulattoes, and as many of Indians. Forty- 
three leagues s. of its capital. 

OCUBIR1, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Lam pa in Peru. 

OCUILA, with the surname of Santiago de, a 
liead settlement of the district of the ale aldia mayor 
of Marinalco in Nueva Espana. It is situate on 
the shore of a mountain, at the top of which is 
a convent of the religious order of S. Agustin, 
and six settlements subject to its jurisdiction. Its 
population thus collectively consists of 424 fami 
lies of Indians, and six of Spaniards and Mustees. 
Its temperature is hot and moist, and its commerce 
consists in wheat, maize, French beans, and other 
seeds ; also in very many fruits peculiar to the 
country ; likewise in coal and wood, which are 
carried for sale to Mexico. Three leagues n. of 
its capital. 

OCUITECOS, a nation of Indians of the king 
dom of Nueva Espana, in the jurisdiction at pre 
sent under the name of Tasco, conquered and 
united to the empire of Mexico by the Emperor 
Itzcohuatl. 

OCU1TUCO, a very considerable settlement 
of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Coautla in 
Nueva Espana. It contains 60 families of Spa 
niards, 12 of Mustees, and 110 of Mexican In 
dians, with a good convent of the religious order 
of San Agustin, the first founded in that kingdom, 
and as such, one of the first houses of that order. 



O F O 



471 



This district was formerly a separate alcaldia 
mayor, and was afterwards united to that with 
which it is at present incorporated. The settle 
ment is five leagues e. n. e. of the capital. 

OCUMARE,or OCAMARF, SABANA DE, a set 
tlement of the province and government of Vene 
zuela in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; situate 
on the coast, about 28 miles . s. e. of the city of 
Caracas, and about 22 n. n. w. of the settlement of 
Alta Gracia, between the mountains of Alta Gra- 
cia and the river Tuy. 

[This port lies five leagues e. of Puerto Cabello. 
It affords good anchorage, and is sheltered from 
the n. wind. On the e. point of the bay is a fort 
of eight 12 and 8-pounders. Also a village of 
the same name, which lies a league from the bay. 
This village is watered by a river named Ocumare, 
which falls into the bay at the foot of the fort.] 

OCUMARE, Monito DE, a mountain of the same 
province and government, on an island close upon 
the coast, between point Barburata and port 
Choroni. 

OCLJMUCHO, a settlement of the head settle- 
mant of the district and alcaldia mayor of Peribau 
in Nueva Espana ; of a cold and moist tempera 
ture, and containing 190 families of Indians. 
Three leagues e. of the settlement of Patamba. 

OCUR1, a settlement and asiento of silver 
mines of the province and correghniento of Chay- 
anta or Charcas in Peru ; annexed to the curacy 
of Pitantora. 

OCUYOACAQUE, SAN MARTIN DE, a prin 
cipal and head settlement of the district of the 
alcaldia mayor of Metepec in Nueva Espana. It 
contains 334 families of Indians, and is the head 
of the curacy, to which various others are annexed. 
Two leagues e. of the capital. 

ODUCHAPA, a river of the province and tor- 
regimiento of Loxa in the kingdom of Quito. It 
runs w. on the confines of the province of Cuenca, 
and enters the river Leon, in lat. 3 26 s. 



ODUCHAPA, a small settlement of this province; 
situate on the n. shore of the former river. 

[OENEMACK, the s. point of Bistol bay, on the 
n. w. coast of N. America. Lat. 54 30 n. 
Long. 160 30 a&amp;gt;.] 

OESTE Point, a w. extremity of the island of 
Tortuga, near the island S. Domingo. 

OESTE, another, in the island called Caicope- 
queno, of the islands denominated Caicos. 

OEUFS, or EGGS, an island in the river S. 
Lawrence, in the province of New France or Ca 
nada in N. America. It is small, and lies at the 
mouth or entrance of the river Trinidad. 

OFOGOULAS, a settlement of Indians of the 



472 



OKI 



nation thus called, in the province and govern 
ment of Louisiana in N. America, on the shore of 
the Mississippi. 

OGECH1, a settlement *of Indians of S.Caro 
lina ; situate at the source of the river of this name, 
where the English have a fort and establishment 
for their commerce. 

[OGECHEE, a river of Georgia, 18 miles s. of 
Savannah river, and whose courses are nearly pa 
rallel with each other. It empties into the sea op 
posite the n. end of Ossabaw island, 18 miles s. 
of Savannah. Louisville, Lexington, and George 
town, are on the upper part of this river.] 

OGERON, PRISION DE L , a settlement of the 
French, on the n. coast of this part of the island S. 
Domingo, between the river Tuerto and port 
Marge. 

[OGLETHORPE, a new county on the n. 
side of Alatamaha river, w. of Liberty county. 
Fort Telfair is in the s. e. corner of this county, 
on the Alatamaha,] 

[OHAMANENO, a small but good harbour, 
on the w. side of Ulietea, one of the Society islands, 
in the S. Pacific ocean. Lat. 16 45 s. Long. 
151 38 w. The variation of the compass in 1777 
was 6 19 e.] 

[OHAMENE Harbour, a fine bay on the e. 
side of Otaha, one of the Society islands. It pas 
ses in by a channel between the two small islands 
Toahouta and Whennuaia. Within the reef it 1 
forms a good harbour, from 25 to 16 fathoms 
water, and clear ground.] 

[OHERURUA, a large bay on the s. zv. part 
of the island of Otaha, one of the Society islands, 
and the next harbour to the n. from Apotopoto 
bay. There is anchorage from 20 to 25 fathoms, 
and has the advantage of fresh water. The breach 
in the reef which opens a passage into this harbour 



s a quarter of a mile broad, in lat. 16 38 s. 
Long. 15J 30 a&amp;gt;.] 

[OHETEROA, one of the Society islands, 
which is about 12 miles long and six broad, inha 
bited by a people of very large stature, who are ra 
ther browner than those of the neighbouring islands. 
It has no good harbour nor anchorage. Lat. 
2227 .y. Long. J50 47 .] 

[OHETUNA, a harbour on the s. e. side of 
Ulietea, one of the Society islands.] 

[OHEVAHOA, an island in the S. Pacific 
ocean. Lat. 9 41 s. Long. 139 2 w.~] 

[OHIO, a most beautiful river, separates the 
N. W. territory from Kentucky on the s. and 
Virginia on the*, e. Its current gentle, waters 
clear, and bosom smooth and unbroken by rocks 
and rapids, a single instance only excepted. It is 



one quarter of a mile wide at fort Pitt, 500 yards 
at the mouth of the Great Kanhaway, 1200 yards 
at Louisville, and at the rapids half a mile, but its 
general breadth does not exceed 600 yards. In 
some places its width is not 400, and in one place 
particularly, far below the rapids, it is less than 
300. Its breadth, in no one place, exceeds 1200 
yards; and at its junction with the Mississippi, 
neither river is more than 900 yards wide. Its 
length, as measured according to its meanders by 
Captain Hutch ins, is as follows : From fort Pitt 
to 

Log s town .... 18{ 
Big Beaver creek . . 10! 
Little Beaver creek . 13| 
Yellow creek . - . . 11! 
Two creeks . . . . 21! 
Long reach .... 53! 
End of Long reach . 16 
Muskingum .... 26y 
Little Kanhaway . . 12| 
Hockhocking ... 16 
Great Lanhaway . . 82| 

Guiandot 43! 

Sandy creek . . . 

Sioto, or Scioto . . 

Little Miami . . 

Licking creek . . 

Great Miami . . 

Big Bones 

Kentucky , . . 

Rapids . . . . 

Low country . . . 155! 

Buffalo river V . . 64| 

Wabash - ; i (v . . . , . 97| 

Big cave 421 

ot_ 

Snawanee river . . . 52| 

Cherokee river ... 13 

Massac . , *. N Y . 11 

Mississippi . V". ". 46 



48! 

126| 

8 

26! 

44| 

77! 



1188 

In common winter and spring floods, it affords 
30 or 40 feet water to Louisville, 25 or 30 feet to 
La Tarte s rapids, 40 above the mouth of the 
Great Kanhaway, and a sufficiency at all times 
for light battcaux and canoes to fort Pitt. The ra 
pids are in lat. 38 6 . 

The inundations of this river begin about the last 
of March, and subside in July, although they, 
frequently happen in other months; so that boats 
which carry 300 barrels of flour from the Monon- 
gahela, or Youhiogany, above Pittsburgh, have 
seldom long to wait for water. During these floods, 
a first-rate man of war may be carried from Louis-] 



OKI 

ville to New Orleans, if the sudden turns of the 
river and the strength of its current will admit a 
safe steerage. It is the opinion of some well in 
formed gentlemen, that a vessel properly built for 
the sea, to draw 12 feet water, when loaded, and 
carrying from 12 to 1600 barrels of How, may be 
more easily, cheaply, and safely navigated from 
Pittsburgh to the sea, than thoee now in use ; and that 
this matter only requires one man of capacity and 
enterprise to ascertain it. A vessel intended to be 
rigged as a brigantine, snow, or ship, should be 
double-decked, take her masts on deck, and be 
rowed to the Ibbervillc, below which are no islands, 
or to New Orleans, with 20 men, so as to afford 
reliefs of 10 and 10 in the night. Such a vessel, 
Ayithout the use of oars, it is supposed, would float 
to New Orleans from Pittsburgh in 20 days. If 
this be so, what agreeable prospects are presented 
to the citizens in the w. country ! The rapids at 
Louisville descend about 10 feet in the distance of 
a mile and a half. 

The bed of the river is a solid rock, and is di 
vided by an island into two branches, the s. of 
which is about 200 yards wide, but impassable in 
dry seasons. The bed of the n. branch is worn 
into channels by the constant course of the water, 
and attrition of the pebble-stones carried on with 
that, so as to be passable for batteaux through the 
greater part of the year. Yet it is thought that 
the s. arm may be most easily opened for constant 
navigation. The rise of the waters in these rapids 
does not exceed 20 or 25 feet. There is a fort 
situated at the head of the falls. The ground on 
the s. side rises very gradually. At fort Pitt the 
river Ohio loses its name, branching into the Mo 
nongahela and Alleghany.] 

[Omo Rapids lie in lat. 38 6 n. 705 miles be 
low Piltslaurg to the s. a;, including the windings, 
but only 290 in a direct line, and 482 miles in 
cluding the windings, and 180 in a direct line, 
from the confluence of the Ohio with the Missis 
sippi. They are occasioned by a lodge of rocks 
that stretch across the bed of the river Ohio.. The 
situation of the rapids is truly delightful. The 
river is full a mile wide, and the fall of the water, 
which is a constant cascade, appears as if nature 
had designed it to shew how inimitable and stu 
pendous are her works. The town of Louisville 
commands a grand view of the rapids.] 

[Omo, the w. westernmost county of the state 
of Virginia, bounded e. by Washington county in 
Pennsylvania, and n. w. by the river Ohio, which 
divides it from the N. W. territory* It contains 
5212 inhabitants, including 281 slaves. Chief 
town, Liberty.] 

VOL. III. 



O I 



473 



[OHIO COMPANY S Purchase, in the N. W. 
territory, is a tract of excellent land, situated on 
the n. bank of the Ohio, e. of Colonel Syme s pur 
chase. 

At Cincinnati there is an office for the sale of 
lands, and in 1806 no less than 17^000 contracts, 
at the rate of two dollars per acre, were entered 
there, bearing the names of persons from all quar 
ters of Europe as well as America., 

In this tract there were about 250p inhabitants 
in 1792; but it proved not more pre-eminent iu 
fertility, than in industry and morals. It was ad 
mitted, as a state, into the union in 1803. Mr. 
A she does not mention the amount of its popula 
tion, but we find Dr. Holmes states it to have 
been in that year upwards of 76,000 : and it appears 
by llio census of J 8 10, that its inhabitants amountod 
to 250,760 souls. J 

[Omo, Territory N. W. of the. See TERRI 
TORY.] 

[Oin&amp;lt;&amp;gt;, Territory S. of the. See TENNESSEE.] 

[OHIOPE, a small n. tributary stream of Ala- 
tamaha river in Oglethorpe county, Georgia.] 

[OllIOPlOMiNGO, a tract of land so called 
in the state of Kentucky, situated in Nelson 
county, on Ohio river, and s. w. of Salt river.] 

[OHIOPYLE Falls, in Youghiogany river, 
are about 20 feet perpendicular height, where the 
river is 80 yards wide. They aro 50 or 40 miles 
from the mouth of this river, where it mingles its 
waters with the Monongahela.] 

[OH1TAHOO, an island in the S. Pacific 
ocean. Lat. 9 55 s. Long. 139 6 o&amp;gt;.] 

OII&amp;gt;A,SAN MIGUEL DE, a settlement orthe juris 
diction ofthetownofSanGil, in the province and ror- 
rcgimienlo ofTunja, and NuevoReynodeGranada. 
It is of an hot temperature, but healthy, though 
badly situate, as lying in an hollow. Jt was en 
tirely of Indians, but an intercourse with the 
whites had produced a considerable race of Mm- 
tees, and the few Indians that remained afterwards 
attached themselves to the settlement of Chitaraque. 
The inhabitants of this should amount, at the pre 
sent day, to 900. They are a proud and haughty 
set, and put one another to death with great barba 
rity. Its territory produces much sugar-cane, 
maize, i/ucas, plantains, and other fruits. It is 
19 miles s. s. w of San Gil, somewhat less from 
Socorro, and about half as much from Tirano, 
Charala, and Zimacota, its district being bounded 
by the four last mentioned settlements. 

OICATA, a settlement of the same province 
and kingdom as the former. It is of a very cold 
temperature and subject to much wind, but abound 
ing in wheat, maize, barley, papas , and other pro- 
3 i 



474 



O I S 



dnctions of a cold climate. Its natives bseed cattle, 
and rn;ike a tolerable number of woven manufac 
tures of their wool. It contains 50 housekeepers 
and 140 Indians, arid is one league/?, of the capital, 
close to the settlements of Chibata, Combita, and 
Tuta. 

[OIL Creek, in Alleghany county, Pennsylva 
nia, issues from a spring, on the top of which 
floats an oil, similar to that called Barbadoes tar, 
and empties into Alleghany river. It is found in 
such quantities, that a man may gather several 
gallons in a day. The troops sent to guard the 
w. posts halted at this spring and collected some 
of the oil, and bathed their joints with it. This 
gave them great relief from the rheumatic com 
plaints, with which they were afflicted. The 
waters, of which the troops drank freely, operated 
s a gentle cathartic.] 

O1NARE, a large and rapid river of the pro 
vince and government of Venezuela in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. It runs from s. to n. and 
runs into the sea, opposite the island Orchilla, in 
lat. 10 5 n. 

OINGSTOWN, or OISTTNTOWN, a city of 
the island of Barbadoes, one of the Smaller An 
tilles, in the district and parish of Christ-church. 
It took its name from a Mr. Oistin, a person of 
large landed estate there, and one of its first set 
tlers. 

This town is small and consists only of a large 
street, at the extremity of which there is celebrated 
at the end of every week a considerable fair or 
market. In the e. part is the church, which is a 
very good one, and the town stands on a large 
bay, which facilitates its commerce, and although 
the room for anchorage is small, owing to the num 
ber of rocky shoals, there is 18 fathom of water to 
the n. and 5. of the city, at two or three cables 
length from shore. 

The town is defended by forts well furnished 
with artillery, and along the whole length of its 
coast an intrenchment is thrown up to prevent an 
enemy s landing. The vessels lie safe in the above 
port from the n. o&amp;gt;., n. e., and s. e. winds, but are 
much exposed to the w. and s. Haifa league to 
v). of the city is fort Maxwel, and at a league s 
distance, on point Nedhans, is Charles fort. 

OISEAUX, or BIRDS, Isles of, in the gulf of S. 
Lawrence in N. America, one of those called 
Magdalena, to the e. of the isle of Brion. 

[OISTINS Bay is near the s. extremity of the 
island of Barbadoes, in the W. Indies. It is 
formed to the s. e. by Kendal s point. The bay 
is well defended by forts. The town of Oistins 
stands on this bay.] 



OLD 

OJATATAS, or OJATAES, a nation of Indians? 
of theprovinceand government ofTucuman in Pern, 
discovered by the Colonel Don Antonio Tixera, 
in 1710, at an entrance he made to reduce the pro 
vince of Chaco, when this nation manifested such 
a liking for the Spaniards, that they almost all, with 
one consent, became reduced to the Catholic faith. 
They used to dwell near the river San Francisco, 
and were afterwards removed to under the govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres, to hinder them from re 
turning to their idolatry, as has been the case with 
other nations of their district. These have thus 
been always constant to the faith. 

O.IIBAR, a settlement of the district of Baba- 
hoyo in the province and government of Guaya 
quil, and kingdom of Quito. It is 28 leagues 
from the capital, and in it ordinarily reside during 
the winter the curate and lieutenant of the dis 
trict, 

OJ1TOS, TUES, a settlement of the province 
and government of Sonora in N. America; situate 
on the shore of the gulf of California or Mar Roxo 
de Cortes. 

OJO-CAL1ENTE, a settlement, of the head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Sierra de Pinos in Nueva Espnna. Twelve leagues 
w. s. w. of its capital. 

OJO-CAMKNTE, another settlement, of the pro 
vince of Taraumara, and kingdom of Nueva Viz- 
caya. 

OJO-CALIENTE, another, of the missions which 
were held by the religious order of San Francisco, 
in the kingdom of Nuevo Mexico. 

OKELOUSA, a settlement of Indians of S. 
Carolina ; situate at the head of Buffalo river. 

OLA, a settlement of the jurisdiction and 
alcaldia mayor of Nata in the province and king 
dom of Tierra Firme; situate two leagues n. e. of 
the above town. 

OLAGA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Maracaibo in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada, which rises in a llanura between the lakes 
Zapatqsaand Maracaibo, runs e. and enters the 
Atole. ~ 

OLANCHO, SAN JORGR DK, a town of the 
province and government of Honduras. It is very- 
poor and scantily peopled. Forty leagues from 
Comayagua. 

OJLANDA. See HOLLAND. 
OLAYA, SANTA, a settlement of the province 
and correghnicnto of Guarochiri in Peru. 

[OLD Cape FRANCOIS forms the . point 
of Ecossoise or Cosbeck bay, on the.w. e. part of 
the island of St. Domingo. All the French ships 
coming from Europe or the Windward islands, 



O L I 

and bound to the n. or w. part of SL Domingo 
island, arc obliged to come in sight of the cape 
Samana, (near 27 leagues s. e. by e. of this cape), 
or at least of Old cape Francois, on account of the 
dangers of shoals to the e. It is about five leagues 
e. of cape De la Roche. J 

[Oi,n FORT Bay is situated at the s. end of the 
island of St. Lucia in the W. Indies, having St. 
Mary s island and bay to the e.j 

[OLD FORT Islands, in Esquimaux bay, on 
the coast of Labrador in N. America. Lat. 51 
24 n. Long. 57 48 a?.] 

[OLD Harbour, on the s. eoast of the island of 
Jamaica in the W. Indies, is to the w. of port 
Royal. There are a number of shoals and islands 
in the entrance to it. Under some of them there is 
safe riding, in from six to eight fathoms.] 

[OLD MAN S Creek, in New Jersey, empties 
into Delaware river, about four miles below Penn s 
neck, and separates the counties of Salem and 
Gloucester.] 

[OLD MEN S Port lies n. of Lima river in Peru, 
eight or nine miles n. of Cadavayllo river.] 

[OLD ROAD, a town and harbour in the island 
of Antigua in the W. Indies.] 

[OLD ROAD Bay, on the s. w. coast of the 
island of St. Christopher s in the W. Indies, be 
tween Church gut w. and Bloody point e. There 
is from five to 15 fathoms near the shore, and the 
least towards the fort.] 

[OLD ROAD Town, on this bay, lies between 
E. and Black rivers, and is a port of entry.] 

[OLD Town, or FRANK S OLD Town, on Ju- 
niatti river. See FUA.NKSTOWN.] 

[OLD Town, in the state of New York, is si 
tuated on Staten island, three miles s.w. of New 
town, and 12 s. w. of New York city.] 

[OLD Town, a small post-town of Maryland, 
situated in Alleghany county, in lat. 39 36 , on 
the n. bank of Patowmack river, and w. side of 
Saw Mill run, 10 miles s. e. of Cumberland, 89 
w. by n. of Baltimore, and 161 fforn Philadel 
phia.] 

[OLD Town, in N. Carolina, near Brunswick.] 
[OLD Town, a small town of Georgia, lying on 
the Ogeechee river, 85 miles n. w. by w. of Sa 
vannah.] 

[OLLOUT, a small creek, which empties into 
the e. branch of Susquehannah, five miles n. e. of 
the mouth of Unadilla river.] 

OL1NALA, a settlement and head settlement 
of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Tlapa in 
NuevaEspana. It contains 10 families of Spa 
niards, 200 of Mustees and Mulaltocs, and 162 of 
of Tlapanocos Indians. 



O L I 



475 



OL1NDA, a city, the capital of the province 
and captainship of Pernambuco in Brazil ; situate 
on a lofty spot near the sea, surrounded with forts 
and wells or drains, which render the territory 
fertile, pleasant, and delightful. It stands upon 
four hills, the declivity of which forms an amphi 
theatre extremely pleasing to the sight. 

It has very sumptuous buildings, and such is 
the grand church which belonged to the Jesuits, 
and which cost 120,000/. French, being one of 
the finest buildings in all America, and having 
every thing to render it perfect. Here are the fol 
lowing convents, namely, of the barefooted Car 
melites, ol San Benito of the Recogimiento de Nu- 
estra Senora de la Concepcion, for Ladies ; also the 
parish of San Pedro Marti r, the churches of Nu- 
estra Senora del Rosario, De Guadalupe, De San 
Sebastian, De San Juan, which is a regular con- 
fratornily, and De Nuestra Senora de Monserrat; 
also a magnificent hospital and a sumptuous pa 
lace of the governor of the province, not to men 
tion many superior and elegant private houses. It 
is garrisoned by two regiments of regular infantry, 
and has 3000 housekeepers. 

This town was extremely opulent at the time 
that it was taken and destroyed by the Dutch in 
1630, and the ruins which now remain speak what 
must have been its ancient splendour. 

On one side of the city runs the large river Ber- 
beribe, of a rich and crystalline water, forming close 
to it a port called Baradcro, where the sea runs in 
for upwards of half a league ; and to take advan 
tage of the river water, there is a large bridge con 
structed, over which runs an aqueduct. Here, also, 
on the bridge, there is a beautiful house of refresh 
ment, where the populace frequently go in large 
societies to amuse themselves ; and at the end of 
the bridge to the s. is a convent of the Carmelites 
in a retired and pretty spot. At a league s dis 
tance from the port of Baradero, along a strait 
isthmus, is the town of San Antonio de Arecife, 
which is the port of this capital, the intermediate 
space between the one and the other town being de 
fended with many castles and batteries. The city 
is 76 miles s. of the city of Paraiba, in lat. 8* 12 
30" s. and long. 35 5 w. 

OLINTEPEC, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Tutepec, and alcaldia mayor 
of Xicayan, in the province and bishopric of 
Oaxaca, and kingdom of Nueva Esparia. It 
contains 14 families of Indians, who live by the 
cultivation of cochineal, cotton, seeds, and tobacco. 
Fourteen leagues n. of the capital. 

OLINTEPEC, another settlement, with the dedi 
catory title of San Juan, in the province and alcal- 
3 r 2 



476 



O L L 



dia mayor of Gueguetenango in the kingdom of 
Guatemala ; annexed to the curacy of Totonicapa, 
of Indians of the Quiche nation. It is of the doc 
trinal establishments of the order of San Fran 



cisco. 

OLINTLA, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district of Teutalpan, and a/caldia mayor 
of Zacatlan, in the same kingdom as the former. 

OL1TA, a settlement of the head settlement of 
the district and alcaldia mayor of Acaponeta, in 
the same kingdom as the former ; situate on the 
shore of the river Canas, nine leagues s. w. of its 
capital. 

OLIVAR, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Truxillo in Peru, founded in the 
valley of Virii, near a chasm or quebrada^ six 
leagues from the settlement of S. Pedro. 

OLIVARES, an island of the S. sea, near the 
coast lying between the river La Plata and the 
straits of Magellan, within the port Deseado. It 
is large, of an oral fignre, and very near the coast. 
It was named by the naval captain Don Joaquin de 
Olivares, who discovered it in 1746, whilst re 
connoitring that coast by the king s order, ac 
companied by Father Joseph Cardiel of the Je 
suits. 

OLLACACIII, a settlement of ihe corregimiento 
of the district of Las Cinco Leguas, of the city of 
Quito. 

OLLACHEA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Carabaya in Peru, in the vicinity 
of which is a mountain called Ucuntaya, where, 
in 1709, was discovered a silver mine, so rich as at 
first to yield 4700 marks each caxon. These riches 
were the leaders to great animosities, tumults, and 
deaths ; and whilst the archbishop and viceroy 
Don Ft\ Diego Morcillowas endeavouring to sup 
press the same, the top of the mine fell in one 
night, and was so completely covered up that there 
was no one of sufficient fortune to undertake work 
ing it anew. 

OLLANTAI, a settlement of the province and 
forregimienlo of Calca and Lares in Peru. 

OLLEROS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento ofGuailas, in the same kingdom as 
the former ; annexed to the curacy of Reguay. 

OLLEUOS, another settlement, with the dedi 
catory title of San Miguel, in the province and 
corregimiento of Chachapoyas in the same king 
dom. 

OLLEROS, another, of the province and cor 
regimiento of Guarochiri in the same kingdom. 

OLLUCOS, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Popayan in the Nuevo Hey no de Gra 
nada, to the #. It rises from the lake Guanacas in 
2 



O M A 

the n. part, and, after collecting in its course the 
waters of several others, enters the Magdalcna by 
the w. shore. Its waters are always cold, dark- 
coloured, and very unwholesome. 

OLMECAS, an ancient nation of infidel In 
dians, who passed over from the province of Mex 
ico to establish themselves in that of Guatemala, 
conquering this country and driving its natives 
from out it, according to the tradition there, and 
also the account by the Fi\ Jrtan clc Torquemada, 
in his book called the Indian Monarchy. 

OLMOS, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimienfo of Pinra in Peru. 

OLTO, a settlement of the province and corrc- 
gimiento of Luya and Chillaos in Peru. 

OLTOCUITLA, SAN JUAN UE, a settlement 
and liead settlement of the district of the province 
and alcaldia may or of San Salvador in the kingdom 
of Guatemala. Its population is composed of 
1500 Mexican Indians, including those of two 
other settlements of its district. 

OLUTLA, SAN JUAN DE, a town of the head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Acayauca in Nueva Espana, of an hot ami moist 
temperature ; its commerce being wheat, maize, 
and French beans, its productions, and more par 
ticularly thread of pita, which is sold to the other 
jurisdictions. It contains 97 families of Indians, 
and is one league 3. e. of its capital or head settle 
ment. 

OMACHA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chilques and Masques in Peru. 

OMAGUA, SAX JOAQUIN DE LA GHANOE, a 
settlement of the missions which w6re held by the 
Jesuits in the province and government of Mainas, 
and kingdom of Quito. It contains more than COO 
Indians ; situate to the n. of the river Maranon or 
Amazonas, in lat. 4 9 17" s. 

OMAGUACAS, a nation of Indians of t he pro 
vince and government of Paraguay, who having 
been reduced to the Catholic faith by the Jesuits, 
returned to their apostacy, putting to death the 
missionaries and Spaniards, and twice destroying 
the city of Xuxuy in the province of Tucuman, 
and so continued their hostilities for a period of 
30 years, until that a commission to subjugate them 
was given to Don Francisco Arganaez, who re 
duced them to request anew some missionaries ; 
and there were, accordingly, appointed Father 
Gaspar de Monrroy, and the brother Juan de To 
ledo, who in a very short space of time converted 
600, and finally the whole of them, with the ex 
ception of Cacique Piltipicon, who, although bap 
tized in his youth, was, as a man, possessed of the 
most abominable and vicious dispositions. He 



O M A 

never failed to have a severe enmity against the 
Spaniards, and was constantly endeavouring to put 
to death the missionaries and the priests, aud burn 
the churches, until that the Father Monrroy, zeal 
ous in the cause of religion, and armed only with 
his confidence, marched to find him, and having 
met with him, addressed him in the following 
words : " The interest I have taken in your hap 
piness has made me offer myself naked before you 
to an almost certain death: you cannot gain much 
honour in killing me, a disarmed man. If, per 
suaded by my solicitations, you spare me, the fruit 
of our conversation will be yours, but if 1 die, an 
immortal crown in heaven awaits me." It pleased 
God to touch the heart of the barbarian, he laid 
down his arms, silently followed his adviser, and 
became a steady and devout Catholic. In 1696 
all the new converts near this nation were conveyed 
to Tucuman, where they remained steady to the 
faith. The ex-jesuit Coleti confounds these Oma- 
guacas with the Omaguas of the Maranon. 

OMAGUAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, the 
most numerous and extensive of any known in 
America, with different names according to the 
places it inhabits. There are some who live in the 
province of Venezuela, between the rivers Napo, 
Curaray, Negro, and Putumayo, and who lived 
formerly in the islands of the river Maranon. 
They are warlike, strong, faithful, courteous, and 
of docile disposition ; are at continual war with 
the other nations, and have always been the con 
querors. They were reduced to the Catholic re 
ligion in 1686, by Father Samuel Fritz, a German, 
of the order of the Jesuits, an extraordinary 
missionary and great mathematician. He found 
amongst these Indians some degree of civilization : 
they covered their nakedness, and lived in society, 
(a circumstance which materially assisted their 
conversion), and were convinced by the light of na 
ture of the propriety and truth of the doctrine 
preached to them, and of the evils which must 
be consequent upon their existing state of life. 
Amongst their customs, the most singular was that 
of compressing the head of the new-born infant 
between two boards, so as to bring it to the shape 
of a mitre: this being a mark which distinguished 
them from all other nations. The settlement of 
San Joaquin is the principal, and contains more 
than 600 inhabitants. 

OMAGUASIETE, a barbarous nation of In 
dians, of the province and country of Las Amazo- 
nas in S.America. They are of the Omaguas, 
and in their language the name means true 
Omaguas. 

OMARA, a small river of the province and 



O M A 



477 



country of Las Amazonas, in the Portuguese pos 
sessions. It rises between the rivers Yurbay and 
Utay, runs . n. to. and enters the right arm of the 
second, a little before it runs into the Maranon or 
Amazon. 

OMAR A, another river of this name, of the pro 
vince and captains/lip of Seara and kingdom of 
Brazil, distinct from the former. It runs n. and 
unites itself nearly at its mouth, where it enters the 
sea with the Hiperugh. 

OMAS, a settlement of the province and corre- 
gimicnto of Yauyos in Peru. 

OMASUYOSj, a province and corregimienfo 
of the kingdom of Peru ; bounded n. and n. w. 
by the province of Asangaro, n. c. and e. by that 
of Larecaja, the heights and Cordilleras called De 
Acarna running between, s. by the city of La Paz 
and province of Pacajas, and extending s.w. by 
the lake Umamarca, a large arm of the principal 
lake of Titacaca, since they communicate by the 
strait of Tiquina; bounded also w. by the Great 
lake, there being in this part a long strip of land. 
It is 40 leagues long from n. to s. and from 16 to 
20 wide; its temperature is cold, although the set 
tlement on either side of the Great lake, which runs 
the whole length of this province, is somewhat 
mild. Here breed all kinds of cattle and some 
wild animals, horses, sheep, swine, fwanacos, vi 
cunas, foxes, vizcachas, and of the wools of the 
sheep the Indians make baizos, cloths, &amp;c. and 
from the wool of the native sheep, or huanacos, 
various woven stuffs for clothing. 

This provttice has different rivers, which flow 
down from the cordil/era, and enter the Great lake, 
and which swell amazingly in the rainy seasons. 
The productions are papas, ocas^ bark, canahuctf 
and barley, and in some parts more temperate are 
cultivated cabbages and flowers. Near Tanahucas 
are seen the vestiges of a large castle and fortress 
of the times of the gentilism. It is of stone, and 
looks upon the Great lake. The lake abounds in 
fish, and water-fowl which breed in the rushes 
which abound on the shores, islands, and bays. 
Between the settlement of Iluaico and that of 
Carabuco is a ruined chapel, which was dedicated 
to San Bartolome, and where, according to ancient 
tradition, this holy apostle appeared to preach to 
the gentiles ; and on the grand altar of the chapel 
of the last of the above-mentioned settlements is a 
large cross of very strong wood, splinters of which 
are sought by the faithful as relics and preserva 
tives against many dangers: this cross, it is thought, 
was left by the said apostle to one of his disciples. 
Between the settlements of Huarina and Puca- 
rani is a field, called La Batalla, a name which i6 



478 



O M A 



O M O 



has retained ever since the conflicts there of Gon- 
zalo Pizzarro with the king s army, which was 
commanded by Diego Centeno, in 1547. In the 
settlement of Copacavana, situate on the long strip 
of land on the other side of the lake, is venerated 
a most miraculous image of Nuestra Seilora de la 
Candelaria, placod there in 1583. It has a sump 
tuous and magnificent temple of beautiful archi 
tecture, and richly adorned, the same being the 
sanctuary of the greatest worship and devotion in 
Peru. 

In the settlement of Huarina is a crucifix, with 
the dedicatory title of Seiior de las Batallas, which 
was sent by the Emperor Charles V. and the mi 
raculous influence of which attracts the devotion of 
many people of all those provinces. 

In this province are gold mines, but they are 
not worked ; and in former times there were some 
of silver which yielded abundantly. To this pro 
vince belongs the island of Titacaca, the most cele 
brated and notable in the lake. This is four leagues 
from Copacavana, 3f leagues long, and having in 
it 13 clefts or ravines, in which spring the most 
delicious waters, also some well cultivated estates, 
where, from the more mild state of the tempera 
ture, are produced some seeds, flowers, and fruits, 
as well as some cattle, wild rabbits, and doves. 
By what can be seen in this island, which was an 
ciently held sacred, the account of the grandeur 
and sumptuousness of the temple of the sun, and 
the palace of the Inca, also of the fabulous origin 
of the founder of the empire, likewise the assertion 
that on the arrival of the Spaniards these build 
ings were destroyed, and that with their riches 
they were thrown into the lake ; such account and 
assertion, we repeat, are not warranted, there not 
appearing the least vestige whatever to support 
them. This, however, is by no means the case with 
regard to Cuzco, Tiahuanaco,and other parts ; the 
ruins of such ancient and splendid edifices still re 
maining there, clearly proving that they once ex 
isted. This lake may be navigated by vessels of any 
size, however large ; and some years since a corre- 
gidor built a bark, in which he crossed over to visit 
the neighbouring provinces. 

The inhabitants of this province should amount 
to 45,000, divided into eight settlements, the capi 
tal of the curacy, and tfith 10 settlements annexed. 
The rcpartimicnlo made by the corregidor was 
96.605 dollars, and it used to pay an alcabala or 
centage of goods for sale of 772 dollars annually. 
The capital is the settlement of Achacache ; and 
the other settlements are, 

Huascho, Ancoraimes, 

Carabuco, Santa Catalina, 



Belen, 

Tiquina, 

Huarina, 

Santiago, 

Llocllo, 

Tajara, 

Santa Lucia, 



Icacachi, 
Pucaranij 
JLasca, 
Copacavana, 
Ancomaya, 

Nuestra Seilora de las 
Pefias. 



CM ATE, a very lofty mountain of the province 
of Moquehua in Peru, on the top of winch is a 
volcano, which exploded in 1600, inundating with 
its lava near the whole of the province, and leav 
ing barren many pieces of territory which were be 
fore cultivated : indeed the devastation reached as 
far as Arequipa, a distance of 20 leagues ; nor was 
the mischief there inconsiderable, since it lost 
many of its settlements, which were completely 
destroyed. 

OMATE, a settlement in the province aforesaid ; 
annexed to the curacy of Puquina. 

[OMEE, a corrupt name for the MIAMI OF 
THE LAKE ; which see. The iVliami towns on its 
banks are called the Omee towns, or Au-Mi, by 
the French Americans, as a contraction of Au 
Miami.] 

[ChiEE Town, one of the Miami towns ; situate 
on a pleasant point formed by the junction of the 
rivers Miami and St. Joseph. This town stood on 
the bank of the latter, opposite the mouth of St. 
Mary s river, and was destroyed in General liar- 
mar s expedition, in 1790.] 

OMEREQUE, a settlement of the province and 
government of Mizque in Peru. 

OMETEPEC, a small island, situate on the 
lake of Nicaragua. 

OMETEPETL, an island of the lake of Mara- 
caibo, the largest in this lake. Its name in the 
language of the country signifies two sierras, from 
two lofty mountains found in it ; and making the 
same it is necessary to pass two leagues by water. 
Here are abuudance of cotton, centli, agi, French 
beans, pumpkins, and many other fruits of a 
warm climate ; also small cattle and little monkeys 
with white heads. 

OM1LTECAS, an ancient nation of Indians of 
Nueva Espaua, not now existing, as being con 
founded with other nations. It was conquered and 
united to the Mexican empire by the Emperor 
Axayacatl. 

OMOA, SAN FERNANDO DE, a settlement of 
the province of Yucatan, in the government and 
by the gulf of Honduras ; situate on the shore of a 
large convenient bay, with good soundings, and 
with a river of excellent fresh water, which is con 
stantly taken in by vessels which come here to 
load with indigo, and other productions of the 



O N A 

province. The climate is so sickly that it is, 
generally speaking, reputed the worst in America. 
It is of a hot and moist temperature, and if much 
infested -with mosquitoes and other insects. Not 
withstanding these disadvantages, the importance 
of this bay, as lying between the gulf of Honduras 
and that of Triunfo de la Cruz, induced the go 
vernment to build on it a castle. This work was 
undertaken by Lieutenant-general Don Joseph 
Vazquez Priego in 1752, but he died in a few days 
after his arrival, and his example was followed by 
most of those who had attended him ; but in 1775, 
during the presidency of Don Martin de Mayorga, 
it was at last finished by the engineer Don Joseph 
Firrninor, and for its garrison a battalion of eight 
companies of infantry was formed in Europe in 
1777, four companies of which were to be on duty 
at the castle, whilst the other was, alternately, at 
rest in the city of San Pedro Lula. The com 
mander of these troops was the Lieutenant-colonel 
Don Joseph dc Estacheria ; but he, fearful of his 
health, so arranged matters that during the war 
the castle was defended by some dragoons instead 
of his own men. 

OMOBAMBA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimieuto of Larecaja in Peru j annexed to the 
curacy of Charazani. 

OMONESES, Rio DE LOS, a river of the pro 
vince and captainship of Seara in Brazil. It enters 
the sea between the sierra Salada and the port of 
Mello. 

JOMPOMPANOOSUCK, a short, furious river 
of Vermont, which empties into the Connecticut 
at Norwich, opposite to Dartmouth college. Its 
course is s. e. ; its breadth not more than 40 or 50 
yards.] 

ON A, a settlement of the province and corregi- 
miento of Loxa in the kingdom of Quito ; situate 
on the great road from Loxa to Popayan. Thirty- 
six miles n. by e. of the city of Loxa, and 34 s. 
by w. of Cuenca. 

ONABAS, a settlement of the province of Osti- 
muri in Nueva Espaiia, on the shore and at the 
source of the river Hiaqui, between the settlements 
of Tonichi and Nure. 

ONAKANNA, a river of the county of Hudson 
in N. America. It runs . and enters the sea in 
the bay of its name. 

ONAPA, a settlement of the province of Osti- 
muri. Ten leagues n. of the river Chico. 

[ON AT I A YO, or ONEATOYO, an island in the 
S. Pacific ocean. Lat. 9 5&amp; s. Long. 138 51 a&amp;gt;.] 

ONAUAS, a barbarous nation or Indians of the 
province and government of Cinaloa in N. Ame- 



O N E 



479 



rica ; they dwell in the sierras of the Ncbomas 
Altos. 

ONCAR1, a river of the province and country 
of Las Amazonas, in the territory or part occupied 
by the Portuguese. It becomes an arm of the 
Madcra, and then flows into one of the main large 
pools or lakes of this province. 

[ONDA. See VINCENT DE LA PAZES.] 

ONDORES, a large settlement of the province 
and corregiinicnto of Tarrna in Peru ; situate on the 
shore of the lake Chinchaycocha, between this 
and the river Pari ; near it is another small settle 
ment annexed to its curacy, called Ullumayo, 
where there is a fort and garrison to restrain the 
Chunchos Indians, who border close upon this 
part. This settlement is 19 miles n. zv. of the city 
of Tarma. 

[ONEEHOW, one of the Sandwich islands in 
the N. Pacific ocean, called also Neeheeheow, about 
five or six leagues to the w. of Atooi. There 
is anchorage all along the coast of the island. 
It produces plenty of yams, and a sweet root 
called tee. Lat. 21 50 n. Lon-. 160 15 a&amp;gt;.] 

ON El DA Lake is about 16 miles w. of old fort 
Stanwix, now called Rome, state of New York, 
and is 20 miles long, and narrow. It is connected 
with lake Ontario on the a . by Oswego river, and 
with fort Stanwix by Wood creek.] 

ONEIDAS, a barbarous nation of Indians of 
Canada in N. America. They are worthy of 
note for the answer which they made to the depu 
ties of the United States, when these solicited their 
alliance to sustain the war against the English ; 
and the sum of it was to say, that a war between 
brothers was a thing entirely new and strange to 
them, as by their traditions no such thing was ever 
related ; that parties in sucli a situation should 
pray to heaven to remove from them the clouds of 
darkness which shadowed their eyes, a reasoning, 
forsooth, not unworthy of more enlightened na 
tions. 

[Their principal village, Kahnonwolohale, is 
about 20 miles s. zo. of Whiteslown. These In 
dians, for a number of years past, have been under 
the pastoral care of the Rev. Mr. Kirk-land, who, 
with the Rev. Mr. Sarjeant, have been chiefly sup- 
porfed in their mission by the society established 
in Scotland for promoting Christian knowledge. 

This nation receives an annuity from the state 
of New York of 3552 dollars for lands purchased 
of them in 1795, and an annuity of about 628 dol 
lars from the United States. With these annui 
ties, (which operate as a discouragement to indus 
try) together with the corn, beans and potatoes 



480 



ONI 



raised by the squaws, and the fish and game 
caught by the men, afford them a barely tolerable 
subsistence. They are a proud nation, and affect 
to despise their neighbours, the Stockbridge and 
Brotherton Indians, for their attention to agricul 
ture; but they already begin to feel their depend 
ence on them, and are under a necessity of pur 
chasing provisions of them. The nation is di 
vided into three tribes or clans, by the names of 
Uie Wolf, the Bear, and the Turtle. They liave 
their name from their pagan deity, which some few 
of the nation still worship, and which is nothing 
more than a misshapen, rude, cylindrical stone, of 
about 120 pounds weight, in their language called 
Oneida, which signifies the upright stone. For 
merly this stone was placed in the crotch of a 
free, and then the nation supposed themselves in 
vincible. These Indian* are fill of mixed blood ; 
there has not been a pure Oneida for several years 
past.] 

[ONEMACK Point is the s.w. point of the con- 
tinent of N. America, on the n. w. coast, and the 
s. limit of Bristol bay. It is 82 leagues s. s. w. 
of cape Newenhara, or the n. point of that exten 
sive bay ; and in lat. 54 30 .] 

ONEOCHQUAGE, a settlement of the pro 
vince of Pennsylvania, situate on the shpre of the 
.- arm of the river Susquehanna. 

ONGOI, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Andahuallas in Peru. 

ONGOL, a pleasant and fertile llnnura of the 
kingdom of Chile, on which is situate the city of 
Los Confines, called also Ongol or Angol : it is 
washed on the n. by the rivers Claro and Pu- 
changi, and on the s. by the Vcrgara. It is of a 
very benign and delightful climate, but little cul 
tivated for want of inhabitants. 

ONGOLMO, an extensive, fertile, and beauti 
ful valley of the kingdom of Chile, in the territory 
of the infidel Araucanos Indians, celebrated for 
the assembly made in it by Caupolican and the 
other caciques, to treat on points of war against 
the Spaniards. 

ONGONOSAQUI, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Caxaniarquiila in Peru. 
ONGOS, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimictito of Castro Virreyna, in the same king 
dom as the former, annexed to the curacy of Vi- 
nac in the province of Yauyos. 

ONGUISIA, a small river of the province and 
government &amp;lt;}f Mainas in the kingdom of Quito. 
It runs w. and enters the Putumayo. 

[O-NIMAMOU, a habour on the s. e. coast of 
Ultetea, oneof the Society islands, in tht S. Paci- 



O N N 

fie ocean. It is n. e. of Ohetuna harbour, on the 
same coast.] 

ONINGO, a settlement of Indians of the pro 
vince and country of the Iroquecs, in N. America, 
and in the district of the nation of the Mesagues. 

[ONION, Cape, on the s. w. side of Newfound 
land island, is about four leagues w. of Quirpou 
island, or the . point of that extensive island.] 

[OxioN lliver, in the state of Vermont, formerly 
called French River, and by the Indians Winoski, 
rises in Cabot, about nine miles to the zo. of Con 
necticut River, and is navigable for small vessels 
five miles from its month, in lake Champlain, be 
tween the towns of Burlington and Colchester, 
and for boats between its several falls. It is one of 
the finest streams in Vermont, and runs through a 
most fertile country, the produce of which for se 
veral miles on each side of the river is brought 
down to the lake at Burlington. It is from 20 to 
30 rods wide 40 miles from its mouth, and its de 
scent in that distance is 172 feet, which is about 
four feet to the mile. Between Burlington and 
Colchester this river has worn through a solid 
rock of lime-stone, which in some time of remote 
antiquity must have formed at this place a prodi 
gious cataract. Tho chasm is between 70 and SO 
feet in depth at low water, and in one place 70 feet 
from rock to rock, where a wooden bridge is 
thrown across. At Bolton thera is a chasm of the 
same kind, but somewhat wider, and the rock is at 
least ISO feet in height. From one side several 
rocks have fallen across the river, in such a man 
ner as to form a natural bridge at low water, but in 
a situation to be an object of curiosity only. It 
was along this river that the Indians formerly tra 
velled from Canada, when they made their attacks 
on the frontier settlements on Connecticut river.] 

ONNE YOUTHS, a canton of Indians, or tribe 
of the nation of the 1 roquecs, in Canada. The French 
were at war with them for a long time, and these, 
being tired out with their great losses, sent some 
deputies to the French to make terms of peace, and 
to request that they would send amongst tlwm 
some missionaries to instruct them in religion ; and 
to this end were destined the Fathers Brugas, Fran- 
cisi and Gamier, in 1668. Their conversion lasted 
but a short time, for they soon returned to their 
idolatry, and again waged war with the French, 
and were sadly worsted by the Marquis de Vau- 
drevil in 1696, and were, in short, obliged to renew 
the peace. 

ONNONTAGUES, a canton of Iroquces In 
dians, or tribe of this nation, in Canada; who 
became voluntarily reduced to the faith, request- 



O N O 

ing missionaries in J655. To them were sent 
by the French the Fathers Chaumont and Dab- 
Ion, Jesuits ; and in the following year an es 
tablishment was formed to trade with them for 
skins, which was furnished by 50 men nnderMon- 
sieur Dupies, an officer of the garrison of Quebec, 
and appointed by the governor of iliis place. 

ONOCUTURE, a settlement of the llanos of 
Cazanare and Meta in the Nuevo Hey no de Gra 
nada; composed of Indians of the Agms nation, 
but who abandoned it in 1666, removing their 
abode to a spot between, the rivers Meta, Atanari, 
and Cnsiriacuti. 

ONOHUALCO, an ancient province of Nueva 
Espaiia in the time of the Indian gentil ism, an 
ciently peopled by Quetzaicohuutl, chief of the 
Tulteoas. It was very extensive, and compre 
hended the provinces at present called Campeche, 
Yucatan, and Tabasco. 

[ONONDAGO Castle, on the Onondngo Re 
servation lands in the state of New York, is 25 
miles zo. s. zo. of Oneida castle.] 

[ONONDAGO or SALT Lake, in the state of 
New York, is about five miles long and a mile 
broad, and sends its waters to Seneca river. The 
wafers of the salt springs here are capable of pro 
ducing immense quantities of salt. One person 
near the lake boiled clown at the rate of 50 bushels 
a week, in the year 1792, which he sold for 5.?. a 
bushel ; but any quantity may be made, and at a 
less price. These springs are in the state reserva 
tion, and are a great benefit to the country, every 
part of which is so united by lakes and rivers 
as to render the supply of this bulky and necessary 
article very easy.] 

[ONOXDAGO, or OSWEGO, a river of New 
York, which rises in the Oneida lake, and runs 
w. into lake Ontario at Oswego. It is boat a We 
from its mouth to the head of the lake, 74 miles, 
except a fall which occasions a portage of 20 
yards, thence batteaux go up to Wood creek, 
almost to fort Stanwix, or Rome, whence there is 
a portage of a mile to Mohawk river. Toward 
the head of this river salmon are caught in great 
numbers.] 

[ONO.VUAGO, a county of New York state; 
consisting of military lands divided into 11 town 
ships, viz. Homer, Pompey, Manlius, Lysandcr, 
Marcellus, Ulysses, Milton, Scipio, Aurelius, 
Ovid, and Romulns. Some of these compre 
hend other towns, as will be noticed under their 
respective names. The country is bounded w. 
by Ontario county, and n. by lake Ontario, 
the Onondago river, and Oneida lake. The county 

VOL. III. 



O N T 



481 



courts are held in the village of Aurora, in the 
township of Scipio. This county is admirably 
situated for inland navigation, being intersected by 
the t\vo navigable rivers Seneca arid Oswego, hav 
ing besides five lakes and a number of creeks. 
For an account of the reserved lands, see MILI- 
TARy Townships. There were 1323 of the inha 
bitants qualified to be electors in 1796, as appears 
by the state census.] 

[ONONDAGO, formerly the chief town of the 
Six Nations ; situated in a very pleasant and fruit 
ful country, and consisted of five small towns or 
villages, about 30 miles s. w. of Whitestown.] 

[ONONDAGOES, a tribe of Indians who live 
near Onondago lake. About 20 years since they 
could furnii h 260 warriors. In 1779, a regiment 
of men was sent from Albany, by Gen. 1. Clinton, 
who surprised the town of this tribe, took 33 pri 
soners, killed 12 or 14, and returned without the 
loss of a man. A part of the Indians were then 
ravaging the American frontiers. Tins nation, 
which now consists of 450 souls, receives annually 
from the state of New York 2000 dollars; and 
from the United States about 450 dollars.] 

[ONSLOW, a maritime county of Wilming 
ton district, N. Carolina, w. of cape Lookout. 
It contains 5387 inhabitants, including 1748 slaves. 
Chief town Swansborongh.] 

[ONSLOW, a township ot Nova Scotia, Halifax 
county, at the head of the basin of Minas, 35 
miles n. e. of Windsor, and 46 n. by w. of Halifax. 
It was settled by emigrants from New England.] 

[ONTARIO, one of that grand chain of lakes 
which divide the United States from Upper Ca 
nada. It is situated between lat. 43 9 and 44 
W n. and long. 76 20 and 80 &amp;. Its form is 
nearly elliptical ; its greatest length is from s. zo. 
to n. e. and its circumference about 600 miles. 
The division line between the state of New York 
and Canada, on the n. passes through this lake 
and leaves within the United States 2,390,000 
acres of the water of lake Ontario, according to 
the calculation of Mr. llutchins. It abounds with 
fish of an excellent flavour, among which are the 
Oswego bass, weighing three or four pounds. 
Its banks in many places are steep, and the s. 
shore is covered principally with beech-trees, and 
the hinds appear good. It communicates with 
lake Erie by the river Niagara. It receives the 
waters of Genessee river from the 5. and of Onan- 
dago or Oswego at fort OswegOj from the.?, e. by 
which it communicates through Oneida lake, and 
Wood creek, with the Mohawk river. On the n. e. 
the lake discharges itself into the river Cataraqui, 
3 Q 



O P A 



(which at Montreal takes the name of St. Law 
rence) into the Atlantic ocean. It is asserted that 
these lakes fill once in seven years ! but the fact is 
doubted. The islands are all at the e. end, the 
chief of which are Wolf, Amherst, Gage, and 
Howe islands.] 

[ONTARIO, a large, fertile county of New 
York, comprehending the Genessee country, and 
bounded n. by the lake of its name. It is well 
watered by Genessec river, its tributaries, and a 
number of small lakes. Here are eight townships, 
viz. Genessee, Erwine, Jerusalem, Williamsburg, 
Toulon, Seneca, Bloomfield, and Canadaqua, or 
Kanandaigua, which is the last chief town, situated 
at the n. w. corner of Canandarqua lake, 15 miles 
w. of Geneva, and 23 n. e. of Williamsburg. 
This county was taken from Montgomery in 1789, 
and in 1790 contained 1075 inhabitants, including 
11 slaves. Such has been the emigration to this 
country, that there were, in 1796, 1258 of the 
inhabitants who were qualified to be electors.] 

ONTUEROS. See CIUDAD REAL. 

ONZAGA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. Its district enjoys various tempera* 
tures, and it accordingly produces all the different 
fruits peculiar to its climates, such as maize, plan 
tains, sugar-canes, arracachas t &amp;c. It is situate 
in the high road leading to San Gil, Socorro, 
Jiron, and Ocana, is very reduced and poor, con 
taining 50 housekeepers and 30 Indians, and is 
24 leagues from its capital. 

[ONZAN, a cape or point on the n. coast of 
Brazil, opposite to cape St. Lawrence, forming 
together the points of Laguariba river ; the latter 
cape being on the w. side of the river. The river 
is 10 leagues s. e. by e. of Bahia Baxa.] 

ONZOLES, a large and abundant river of the 
province and government of Esmeraldas in the 
kingdom of Quito. It runs from s. to n. and 
enters the San Miguel where this runs into the S. 
sea, in lat. 58 n. 

[OONALASHKA, one of the islands of the n. 
archipelago, on the n. w, coast of America, the 
natives of which have the appearance of being a 
very peaceable people, being much polished by 
the Russians, who also keep them in subjection. 
There is a channel between this and the land to 
the n. about a mile broad, in which are sound 
ings from 40 to 27 fathoms. Lat. 53 40 n. 
Long. 16720 K&amp;gt;.] 

OPAHUACHO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Parinacochas in Peru, an 
nexed to the curacy of Pacca. 

2 



O P O 

OPAN, a settlement of the province and corrr- 
gimiento of Cuenca in the kingdom of Quito ; an 
nexed to the curacy of Ozogues. In its district is 
a large estate, called Chuquipata. 

OPANO. See UPAAO. 

OPECKON, a river of the province and colony 
of Virginia in N. Carolina. It runs n. n. e. and 
enters the Patowmack. 

OP1CO, SAN JUAN DE, a settlement and head 
settlement of the district of the alcaldia mat/or of 
Santa Ana in the kingdom of Guatemala. It has 
three settlements annexed to its curacy. 

OPITAMA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Antioquia in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, near the source of the river Gauca. 

OPLOCA, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Chichas and Tarija in Peru ; of 
the district of the former, and annexed to the cu 
racy of Tupisa. 

OPOPEO, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor 
of Valladolid in the province and bishopric of 
Mechoaciin, and kingdom of Nueva Espaiia ; an 
nexed to the curacy of Cobrc. It contains 34 In 
dian families, and is half a league distant from 
Cobre. 

OPPON, some very lofty mountains wliich 
run from the province and government of Popayan 
to that of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, being a branch of the grand cordi/lera 
of the Andes. They are inhabited by some bar 
barous nations of the Panches Indians, and the 
first who passed over them was fllonzalo Ximenez 
de Quesada, in 1536. They are rugged and full 
of thick woods ; and from them descend to the w. 
many slreams, which form the source of the grand 
river Magdalena. Some confound these moun 
tains of Oppon with those of Bogota, which di 
vide the Nuevo Reyno de Granada from the llanos 
or plains of the Orinoco, and run in a direction 
from s. w. to n. e. 

OPPON, a river of the same province and king 
dom as are the above mountains. It rises in the 
valley of Alferez, runs . and, forming a lake, 
follows a short course to enter the Magdalena. 

OPPON, another, a small river, in the province 
and government of Mainas of the same kingdom, 
in the sierras of Perija. It runs e. and enters the 
great lake of Maracaibo by the w. side. 

[OPPS, a village in Northampton county, Penn 
sylvania, six miles s. e. of Bethlehem, and about 
seven #, by e. of Quaker s town.] 

OPOSTURA, a settlement of the province of 
Ostimuri in Nueva Espana ; situate 40 leagues to 
tho n. of the real of mines of the Rio Chico. 



O R A 

OPTOQUE. See OTOQUE. 

OPLJTU, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Ostimuri in Nueva Espafia. Forty- 
two leagues n. n. e. of the real of mines of the 
Rio Chico. 

[OR^ Cape D , in NoVa Scotia, is situate on the 
n. side of the basin of Minas. Some small pieces 
of copper have been found here.] 

[ORA CAHECA Bay, on the n. side of the island 
of Jamaica in the W. Indies, has a strong fort 
on the e. side, and Salt gut w. ; at both these places 
is good anchorage for large vessels.] 

ORACHICIIE, a settlement of the province 
and government of Venezuela, and kingdom of 
Granada, e. of the city of Barquisimeto. 

ORADADA, a point of the coast in the pro 
vince and government of Cartagena, and Nuevo 
Reynode Granada ; one of those which form the 
bay of Zipato. 

[ORANA1, or RANAT, one of. the Sandwich 
islands in the N. Pacific ocean, nine miles from 
Mowee and Morotoi. The s. point is in lat. 
20 51 n. and long. 157 1 zo.\ 

ORANAYA, a fall of the river Madera, in the 
province and country of Las Amazonas. It lies 
between the rivers Erena and Guiaparana on the s. 
and the Chamari and Mamoroni on the n. 

[ORANG S Key, one of the Bahama islands, 
in the W. Indies. Lat. 24 36 n. Long. 
79 12 w."] 

ORANGE, a cape or point of land of the coast 
of the N. sea, in the province and government of 
Guaynna, in the part which was possessed by the 
French ; it forms the e. side of the river Oyapok 
or Vincent Pincon s bay. Lat. 4 18 30" n. 
Long. 51 13 zs). 

ORANGE, another point of the s. coast of the 
straits of Magellan, close to the point Anegada, 
which is one of those forming the great bay of 
Lorn as. 

ORANGE, a small port on the coast of the island 
of Newfoundland, in the Blanche bay. 

ORANGE, a shoal or isle of the N. sea, near the 
coast of S. Domingo, in the part possessed by the 
French between the point Pasqual and the island 
of Jaquin. 

ORANGE, a settlement of the Dutch, in their 
possessions in Guayana, and in the colony of Su 
rinam ; situate on the coast between the rivers Su 
rinam and Marowine. 

[ORANGE, a bay on the n. e. coast of the island 
of Jamaica, e. n. e. of the high mountain, a little 
within land, under which is Crawford s town. 
Also a bay at the n. w. end of the same island, be- 



O R A 



483 



tween Green island n. and N. Negril harbour s. 
or s. w.~\ 

[ORANGE Key, or Cay, a small island of 
Orange bay, at the n. w. end of the island of Ja 
maica.] 

[ORANGE, a county of Vermont, which in. 
1790 contained 10,529 inhabitants. Since that 
time several other counties have been erected out 
of it. Jt is bounded w. by part of Addison and 
Chittenden counties, and e. by Connecticut river. 
It now contains 20 townships. The county town, 
Newbury, and the townships s. of it, viz. Brad 
ford, Fairlee, and Thetfordj front Connecticut 
river. It is high land, and sends numerous streams 
in opposite directions, both to Connecticut river 
and to lake Champlain.] 

[ORANGE, a township on the n. line of the 
above county, in the n. c. corner of which is 
Knox s mountain.] 

[ORANGE, formerly Cardigan, a township in 
Grafton county, New Hampshire, which gives 
rise to an e. branch of Mascomy river. It w r as in 
corporated in 1796, contains 131 inhabitants, and 
is 20 miles e. of Dartmouth college.] 

[ORANGE, a township of Massachusetts; situated 
on the e. line of Hampshire county, on Miller s 
river, 94 miles n. w. by w. of Boston. It was in 
corporated in 1783, and contains 784 inhabitants.] 

[ORANGE, a mountainous and hilly county of 
New York, which contains all that part of the 
state bounded s. by the state of New Jersey, w. 
by the state of Pennsylvania, e. by the middle of 
Hudson s river, and n. by an e. and w. line from 
the middle of Murderer s creek. It is divided 
into eight townships, of which Goshen is the chief, 
and contains 18,492 inhabitants, of whom 2098 are 
electors, and 966 slaves. In this county are raised 
large quantities of excellent butter, which is col 
lected at.Newburgh and New Windsor, and thence 
transported to New York. On the n. side of the 
mountains in this county is a very valuable tract 
called the Drowned Lands, containing about 40 or 
50,000 acres. The waters which descend from 
the surrounding hills, being but slowly discharged 
by the river issuing from it, cover these vast mea 
dows every winter, and render them extremely fer 
tile ; but they expose the inhabitants of the vici 
nity to intermittents. Walkill river, which pas 
ses through this tract and empties into Hudson s 
river, is, in the spring, stored with very large 
eels in great plenty. The bottom of this river is a 
broken rock ; and it is supposed that for 2000/. 
the channel might be deepened so as to drain oif 
the waters, and thereby redeem from the floods a 
3 Q 2 



481 



O R A 



large tract of rich land for grass, hemp, and In 
dian corn.] 

[ORANGE, called also ORANGEDALE, a town 
in Essex county, New Jersey, containing about 80 
houses, a Presbyterian church, and a flourishing 
academy, and lies n. w. of Newark, adjoining.] 

[ORANGE, a county of ilitlsborough district, 
N. Carolina; bounded . by Caswell county, and 
s. by Chatham. The rivers Maw and Enoe in this 
county have rich lands on their borders. It con 
tains 12,216 inhabitants, of whom 2060 are slaves. 
Chief town, Hillsborough.] 

[ORANGE, a county of 8. Carolina, in Orange- 
burg district.] 

[ORANGE, a county of Virginia, bounded n. 
by Culpepper, and s. by Albemarle. It contains 
9921 inhabitants, including 4421 slaves. The 
court-house is situated 17 miles from Culpepper 
court-house, and 30 from Clmrlottevill&amp;lt;\] 

[ORANGEHURG, a district of S. Carolina, 
bounded s. w. by Savanna river ; e. by the river 
Santee, and n. e. by the Conga rce, which divide it 
from Camden district; s. by Beaufort, and s.e. 
by Charleston district. It contains 18,513 inha 
bitants ; of whom 5931 are slaves. Sends to the 
state legislature 10 representatives and three sena 
tors ; and with the district of Beaufort, one mem 
ber to congress. It is divided into four coun 
ties, viz. Lcwisburg, Orange, Lexington, and 
Winton.] 

[ORANGEBURG, a post town of S. Carolina, 
and capital of the above district, is on the e. side 
of the n. branch of Edisto river. It has a court 
house, gaol, and about 50 houses ; distant 60 
miles n. n. w. of Charlestown, and 33 s. of Co 
lumbia.] 

[ORANGETOWN, or GREENLAND, a plant 
ation in Cumberland county, Maine, n. w. of 
Water ford. One branch of Songo river rises in 
the n. part of this plantation, within about three 
miles of Amariscoggin river, where there is a 
pond two miles long, called Songo Pond, from 
thence the stream runs s. It is very difficult to 
effect roads through this mountainous country ; 
some of the mountains affording precipices 200 
feet perpendicular. The sides of the mountains 
and vrdleys are fertile, produce good crops, and in 
some instances afford wild onions, which resemble 
those that are cultivated. Winter rye, which 
is the chief produce, has amounted to 20 bushels 
an acre. The country in the neighbourhood 
formerly abounded with variety of game, viz. 
moose, deer, bears, beaver, racoon, sable, &amp;c. ; 
but since it has been inhabited game has become 



O R C 

scarce; deer arc extirpated from the vicinity; 
some moose remain among the mountains, and a 
few beaver, that are too sagacious to be taken by 
the most crafty hunter. Since the deer have been 
destroyed, the wolves have wholly left this part of 
the country.] 

[OIJANGETOWN, in Orange county, New York, 
is situated on the z. side of the Tappan sea, op 
posite Philipsburgh, and about 27 miles n. of 
New York city. The township is bounded e. by 
Hudson s river, and s. by the state of New Jersey. 
It contains 1175 inhabitants, of whom 162 are 
electors, and 203 are slaves.] 

[OriANGETowN,in Washington county, Maine, 
is 19 miles distant from Machias.] 

ORANO, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, of the division and district of the Rio 
del Hacha; situate on the coast. 

ORAPE, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Venezuela, in the same kingdom as the 
former settlement. It rises 5. of the city of Niriia, 
and shortly after unites itself with the Coronel to 
enter the Tinaco. 

ORAPU, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Guyana, in the French possessions. 

ORATORIO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tucuman in Peru; situate on the 
shore of the river Dulce. 

ORAUIA, a settlement of the missions which 
were held by the Jesuits, in the province and go 
vernment of Mainas, and kingdom of Quito ; si 
tuate on the s. shore of the river Napo, about 100 
miles before this river enters Maranon or Amazon, 
in the country and territory of the Abijiras Indians. 

ORCII1LLA, or URCHILLA, a small island of 
the N. sea, situate near the coast of the province 
and government of Venezuela in the Nuevo Rey 
no de Granada, opposite the mouth of the river 
Unare. It is of a low territory and semicircular 
figure, desert and uncultivated, the soil being bar 
ren, although it has some good pastures as well on 
the e. as the w. side, where there are two hills 
forming points or promontories, and having a few 
goats browsing on their sides. 

In the part lookiog s. w. the shore is very bold, 
running down as though it were a wall, so much 
sothat ships may come up almost close to the land. 
In the n. w. part it is nothing but a barren wild, not 
only destitute of trees but of every kind of plant 
and herbage. . It is very scant of water, and the 
only animals it produces arc goats and lizards. 
Around this island are several small isles or rocks, 
the largest of which are Tortuga and Roxa. 



O R D 

[The navigation about these islands is very dif 
ficult and dangerous. As they stretch from e. to 
&amp;gt;. and consequently lie all very nearly in the same 
latitude, the mariner, \vilhout local knowledge, 
Avhen once entangled among them, cannot, from 
his solar observations alone, determine exactly 
one from another. The currents likewise in this sea 
are not only very variable, but violent also. Jn the 
course of a few dark hours a vessel is swept down 
upon a danger which journals and observations had 
concurred in placing still far distant ; and, besides 
this, vessels have been known to have drifted upon 
Orchilla in a dead calm, notwithstanding all the 
efforts of the crew in their boats to keep her off. 
It is therefore thought that it would be far prefer 
able for vessels bound to Cur.ac.oa to keep well 
to the 11. until near Buenayre ; or otherwise at 
once to penetrate and keep to leeward of the whole 
chain, even should they see the mainland of Ame 
rica. After making cape Codera, or the high 
mountains above La Guayra, the course is simple, 
and the prevailing winds favourable, for Curagoa. 
The same observations will apply to vessels bound 
to La Guayra : they should endeavour, as soon as 
possible, to get a sight of the continent of America, 
to the e. of the island of Margarita, the passage 
between this island and the main being full of 
danger, without an experienced pilot on board.] 
Orchilla is in lonsr. 66 9 w. Lat. 1 1 52 n. 

ORC1IOCOCHA, a lake of the province and 
corregimienio of Yauyos in Peru, from whence 
rises the river Pisco. 

ORCO-PAMPA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Condesuyos in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of Andahua. 

ORCOS, a llanura of the province and corregi- 
miento of Cuzco in Peru, from whence it is distant 
six leagues. Towards the s. it has a lake cele 
brated on account of a tradition, that into it was 
thrown the wonderful gold chain, called in -the 
Inca tongue curi-huatCj which was made by com 
mand of the Emperor Huayana-Capac to grace 
the festivities of his first-born, and who was from 
this circumstance called Huascar-Inca, whereas 
his name would otherwise have been Cusi-Huallpa. 
Many Spaniards have endeavoured to make canals 
whereby to empty this lake and to find the above 
treasure, but always without effect, on account of 
its great depth, this being more than 25 fathoms. 
Froin this lake the river Pisco rises. 

[ORDADO Rock, near the coast of Peru, is 

four miles s. by e. of port Calioa. Near it are 

some smaller ones, and round them from nine to 

1C fathoms water.] 

ORDONEZ, a settlement of the province and 



O R G 



485 



government of Cartagena in the Nuevo Reyno dc 

Granada ; situate on the sea-coast in Tolu bay. 

It belongs tothedistrictandjurisdictionofthis town. 

[OREAHOU, or OREKHOU, a small elevated 

island, close to the n. side of Oneeheow, one of 

the Sandwich islands; with which it is connected 

by a reef of coral rocks. It contains about 4000 

inhabitants. Lat. 22 2 n. Long. 160 8 w.~\ 

[OIIEGAN River. See RIVER OF THE WEST.] 

OREGUATUS, a barbarous nation of Indians 

of &amp;lt;he province and country of Las Arnazonas, 

who dwell on the shore of the river Madera. 

OREJONES, a barbarous nation of Indians of 
the province and government of Paraguay in 
Peru, called also Yaraces, this being the name of 
a large island inhabited by them in ihe lake of 
Los Xarayes, the said lake being more than nine 
leagues from n. to s. These Indians are called 
Orejones from their having ears extremely large, 
and drawn flown by weighiy ornaments suspended 
to them. They are very numerous, dwell in the 
islands about here, and also on the continent to 
the n. w. 

ORELLANA. See MARANON. 
ORELLUDOS, a river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas, which rises in the ter 
ritory of the Indians of &amp;lt; his name, runs s. s. c. and 
turning to the .9. enters at the end of its course into 
the Yupuraor Caqueta. 

ORELLUDOS, a river of the island of Guadalupe, 
one of the Antilles, which rises in the mountains to 
thee. runs to this rhumb, and enters the sea between 
the rivers Grand Carbet and Grand Bananiers. 

ORFELEINS, Bank of, in the gulf of St. Law 
rence. See ORPHANS, 

[ORFORD, a township in Grafton county, 
New Hampshire ; situated on the e. bank of Con 
necticut river, about 11 miles n. of Hanover, and 
opposite to Fairlee in Vermont. It was incorpo 
rated in 1761, and contains 540 inhabitants. Tho 
soap-rock, which has the property of fuller s eartli 
in cleansing cloth, is found here; also alum ore, 
frce-slone fit for building, and a grey-stone, in 
great demand for mill-stones, reckoned equal in 
quality to the imported burr stones.] 

[OKFORD Cape, in the n. westernmost point of 
the large island to the w. of Falkland s sound in 
the Falkland s islands, in the S. Atlantic ocean, 
and ,v. e. of cape Percival.] 

[ORFouD,a cape on the n. w. coast of N. Ame 
rica; situate between cape Mendocirio and cape 
Flattery, in lat. 42 54 n. and long. 124 31 a&amp;gt;.] 
ORGANOS, some rocky shoals of the N. sea, 
on then, coast of the island of Cuba, close to the 
shoals of S. Isabel. 



O R I 



ORGAOS, SIERRA DOS, some mountains of 
Hie province and captainship of Rio Janeiro in 
Brazil, which run from n. n. e. to s. s. w. follow 
ing the course of the river Paraiba del Stir, near 
the coast and cape Trio. 

ORI r a river of the province and government 
ofGuayanaor Nueva Andalucia, which rises in 
the country of the Arnmcotos Indians, runs n. e. 
and enters the Paraguay. 

ORI, another, a small river in the same pro 
vince and government, which rises in the territory 
of the Caribes Indians, at a great distance from the 
former river, and enters theArivi. 

ORIA, a river of the province and government 
of Veragua in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. It rises 
in the mountains to the.v. and running to this rhumb, 
enters the sea in a bay a little before point Mala. 

OR1BANTES, or SIERRA, a river of the pro 
vince and government of Maracaibo in the Nuevo 
Key no de Granada. It rises at the foot of the 
sierra Nevada, to the s. of the city of Merida, 
runs in a serpentine course for many leagues, and 
changing ils name to Apure, enters much swollen 
into the.Orinoco. 

[ORI CARD, SEBASTIAN DE, more properly 
called OCUMAB.E; which see.] 

ORIGINAL, a small river of Canada in N. 
America, which runs n. and enters the lake Supe 
rior, between the point Carbet and the river Ton- 
nagane. 

OR1GUECA, a large and rich settlement of the 
province and government of Santa Marta in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; situate in an extensive 
Uamtra. It was peopled with Taironas Indians, 
but their numbers have been so much diminished 
that it is now a very mean place. 

OR1NO, an ancient settlement of the same pro 
vince and kingdom as the former, in a pleasant and 
fertile spot ; once a large town of Guajiros Indians, 
but now consisting of a few straggling houses of 
some wretched inhabitants. 

ORINOCA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimienlo of Carangas in Peru, and of the 
archbishopric of Charcas ; annexed to the curacy 
of Andamarca. 

ORINOCO, a large, navigable, and most abun 
dant river of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, and S. 
America, one of the four largest rivers on the con 
tinent. It rises in the trierras Nevadas to the n. 
of the lake Parime, in the province of Giiayana, 
according to the discovery made by order of the 
court by Admiral Don Joseph de Ituniaga, and 
by the informations received from the Caribes In 
dians, proving erroneous the origin given to it by 
the Father Joseph Gumilla, the Jesuit, in his 



ORI 

book entitled cc Orinoco Illustrado," as also the 
origin given it by the ex-jesuit Coleti, namely, in 
the province of Mocoa, in lat. 1 21 n. [The fact 
is, that according to the more recent and best ac 
counts, it should appear to rise in the sierra Ibcr- 
moqueso, from a small lake called Ipava, which is, 
agreeably with the account of our author, in the 
province of Guayana.J 

This river runs more than COO leagues, receiv 
ing in its extended course an exceeding number of 
other rivers, which swell it to an amazing size, 
and it proceeds to empty itself into the sea oppo 
site the island of Trinidad, by seven different 
mouths, forming various isles, namely, the Oroto- 
mecas or Palornas, so called from a barbarous na 
tion of Indians of this name inhabiting them. 

The Orinoco bears the nnme of Iscaute until it 
passes through the country of the Tames Indians, 
where it receives by the w. side the rivers Papa- 
mene and Plasencia, and acquires then the name of 
that district, which it changes at passing through 
the settlement of San Juan de Yeirna into that of 
Guayare, and then to that of Barragan, just below 
where it is entered by the abundant stream of the 
Meta, and before it is joined by the Cazanare, of 
equal size. It receives on the n. side the rivers 
Pan, Guaricu, Apure, Cabiari, Sinaruco, Gua- 
biaris, Irricha, San Carlos, and others; and by 
the s. those of Benituari, Amariguaca, Cuchivero, 
Caura, Aroi, Caroni, Aquiri, Piedras, Vermejo 
or Colorado, and others of less note ; and being 
rendered thus formidable with all the above, it at 
last becomes the Orinoco. 

Its shores and islands are inhabited by many 
barbarous nations of Indians, some of whom have 
been reduced to the Catholic faith by the Jesutis, 
who had founded some flourishing missions, until 
the year 1767 ; when, through (heir expulsion 
from the Spanish dominions, these Indians passed 
to the charge of the Capuchin lathers. 

The Orinoco is navigable for more than 200 
leagues for vessels of any size, and for canoes and 
small craft from its mouth as far as Tunja or San 
Juan de los Llanos. It abounds exceedingly in 
all kinds offish; and on its shores, which are with 
in the ecclesiastical government of the bishop of 
Puerto Rico, are forests covered with a great 
variety of trees and woods, and inhabited by 
strange animals and rare birds ; the plants, fruits, 
and insects being the same as those on the shores 
of the Maranon. This last mentioned river com 
municates with the Orinoco by tho river Negro, 
although this was a problem much disputed until 
acknowledged by the discovery made by the Fa 
ther Ramuel Roman, the Jesuit, in 



ORINOCO. 



487 



The principal mouth of the Orinoco was dis 
covered by Admiral Christopher Columbus in 
1498, and Diego de Ordaz was the first who en 
tered it, he having sailed up it in 1531. The 
sounding between fort San Francisco de la Guayana 
and the channel of Limon is 65 fathoms, measured 
in 1734 by the engineer Don Pablo Dias Faxarclo, 
and at the narrowest part it is more than 80 fathoms 
deep ; in addition to which, in the months of Au 
gust and September, the river is accustomed to 
rise 20 fathoms at the time of its swelling or over 
flow, which lasts for five months : and the natives 
Lave observed that it rises a yard higher every 5 
years. 

The flux and reflux of the sea is clearly distin 
guishable in this river for ICO leagues. In the 
part where it is narrowest stands a formidable rock 
in the middle of the water, of 40 yards high, and 
upon its top is a great tree, the head of which 
alone is never covered by the waters, and is very 
ufeful to mariners as a mark to guard against the 
rock. Such is the rapidity and force with which 
the waters of this river rush into the sea, that they 
remain pure and unconnected Avith the waters of 
the ocean for more than 20 leagues distance. Its 
principal mouth, called De Navios, is in lat. 
8 9 n. 

[The Orinoco is remarkable for its rising and 
falling once a year only; for it gradually rises dur 
ing the space of five months, and then remains 
one month stationary, after which it falls for five 
months, and in that state continues for one month 
also. These alternate changes are regular, and 
even invariable. Perhaps the rising of the waters 
of the river may depend on the rains which con 
stantly fall in the mountains of the Andes every 
year about the month of April ; and though the 
height of the flood depends much upon the breadth 
or extent of the bed of the river, yet in one part 
where it is narrowest, it rises (as Alcedo has cor 
rectly observed) to the astonishing height of 120 
feet. The mouth of the river is s. by e. of the 
gulf of Paria, in lat. 8 50 n. and long. GO w. 
and opposite to the island of Trinidad. It is large 
and navigable, and has many good towns on its 
banks, that are chiefly inhabited by the Spanish, 
and is joined also on the e. side by the lake Ca- 
sipa. There are two oilier islands at its mouth, 
the entrance to which is also somewhat dangerous, 
as there is frequently a dreadful conflict between 
the tide of the ocean and the current of the river, 
that must, tor the reasons assigned, sometimes run 
very rapidly. It is true that the river, including 
its windings, takes a course of about 1380 miles. 
It may be considered as having many mouths, 



which are formed by the islands that He before its 
opening towards the ocean ; yet there are only two 
that are considered as of any use for the purposes 
of navigation. These are the channel;; of Saba- 
rima and Corobana, otherwise called Caribbiana. 
The latter lies in a s. by w. direction, and is also 
divided into two distinct channels that afterwards 
meet again at the island of Trinidad in the mouth 
of the grand river. But pilots pretend to say, 
that themouth of this great river begins from the 
river Amugora, reaching from thence to the river 
Sabarima, and from thence about to the river Ca- 
ribbiana ; and some accounts state its mouths to 
be upwards of 40 in number, as if it were a collec 
tion of many rivers, all uniting at the mouth of 
the great rivor, and assisting to convey the main 
stream of that river into the ocean. 

The w. passage or channel of the river Orinoco, 
called by the Spaniards the Gulf of Paria, lies be 
tween cape Salinas on the main, and the n. w. point 
of the island of Trinidad. It contains several 
islands, which divide the stream of the river into 
several branches, particularly the Boco Grande, 
or Great mouth, which is the easternmost, being 
about gun-shot wide, but having no soundings, 
with 300 fathoms, and the Boco Pequeno, or 
Little mouth, which is the westernmost, being al 
most as wide as the other, and having ground at 
from 50 to 60 fathoms. At New cape Araya, on 
the n. side of the month of this river, are salt-pits, 
which yield the finest salt in the world. In some 
maps the head-waters are called Inirchia. 

A more diffuse and particular account of this 
mighty river will be found under the following 
heads, which we have translated and selected from 
the work of Depons, and other writers, viz. 
The seven principal mouths of the Orinoco. The 
navigation of the Orinoco up to St. Thomas. 
Enchanting variety of its banks. Import 
ance of this river. Further account of its wa 
ters, and its annual swell. Its tides, and pe 
culiar animals inhabiting it. Table of latitudes 
and longitudes of these parts. 
It is presumed that the course of this river, for 
the first 100 leagues, is n. e. and s. In this part 
it leaves the imaginary lake of Parima 60 leagues 
from its left bank. The rivers which flow "into 
the Orinoco give it, before it has run these 100 
leagues from its source, as rapid a current and as 
great a body of water as any of the most consider 
able rivers. From the Esmeraldas to San Fer 
nando dc Atabapa, its course is from e. to n. e. 
Between these places is the canal of Casiquiari, 
which forms the communication between it and 
the Araazonas, by the river Negro.] 



488 



ORINOCO. 



[At about 100 miles from the sea, the Orinoco, 
like the Nile, forms a sort of fan, scattered with 
a number of little islands, which divide it into se 
veral branches and channels, ami oblige it to dis 
charge itself through this labyrinth into the sea by 
an infinite number of mouths, lying n. e. and s. iff. 
and extending more than 170 miles. These islands 
increase so on the coast that the mouths of the 
Orinoco are very numerous, but very few of them 
are navigable. It is computed that these openings 
amount to near 50, and only seven of them admit 
the entrance of vessels, and these must not be of a 
large burden. An idea of the prudence and skill 
requisite for the navigation of these mouths may 
be formed by what daily happens amongst the 
Guayanos Indians, who, although born on the 
islands, and from subsisting solely on fish, are so 
accustomed to the intricacies of the different chan 
nels, yet frequently lose themselves, and are obliged 
to allow the current to carry them out to sea, and 
then to re-enter, not without the most minute ob 
servations and endeavours to ascertain the proper 
passage, it even requires a considerable skill to 
find the current ; for the numerous channels have 
such different directions that in the greater part of 
them no current at all is perceptible, and in the 
others the eddies or the winds give the currents a 
direction up the river instead of down. The com 
pass is frequently of no use, and when a person is 
once lost, he is often obliged to wander several 
days among the Guayanos islands, conceiving he 
is ascending the river when he is descending, or 
that he is descending when he is ascending ; and 
at length, he probably finds himself at the very 
point from which he set out. 

The first of the mouths which are navigable is 
25 miles s. e, of the entrance of the Guarapiche 
river, in the province of Cumana. It is one of 
those which empty their water in the gulf of Paria. 
It is called the Great Manamo, in contradistinction 
to the Little Manamo, which runs in the same 
channel with it, nearly to the sea, and is navigable 
for shallops. 

The second mouth is 20 miles n. e. of the first, 
and is called the Pedernales. It runs from the e. 
of the island of Guarisipa, and falls into the sea 
three leagues s. w. of Soldiers island, which is si 
tuated at the s. entry of the gulf of Paria. It 
is only navigable for canoes, or at the most for 
shallops. 

The third mouth is called Capuro; it is an 
arm of the channel of Pedernales, from which it 
branches off at 30 mites from the sea. Its mouth 
is in the southernmost part of the gulf of Paria, 
34 miles s. e. of that of the channel of Pedernales. 



The navigation is hardly fit for any vessels but 
canoes and shallops. 

Macareo is the name of the fourth mouth ; it en 
ters the sea, six leagues s. of Capuro, and is the 
channel of communication between Guayana and 
Trinidad, and every thing concurs to give it this 
advantage exclusively, it is navigable for mo 
derate-sized vessels, its channel is exceedingly 
straight and clear, and it falls into the sea oppo 
site the point and river Erin in Trinidad. 

The fifth mouth is very little frequented, on ac 
count of the difficulty of the navigation and the 
ferocity of the Indians inhabiting its banks. They 
are called Mariusas, and have given their name to 
this fifth passage of the Orinco. This mouth is 
35 miles e. s. e. of the fourth. 

Between Mariusas and the sixth mouth are se 
veral outlets to the sea, which are navigable by the 
tide or by the floods. 

Twenty-five miles more to the s. e. is what is 
called the Great Mouth of the Orinoco; it bears 
the name of Mouth of Vessels, because it is the 
only one which admits of ships of 200 or 300 tons 
burden. Its extent is six leagues, but it is far 
from being every where of an equal depth. 

Navigation of the Orinoco up to St. Thomas.* 
The grand mouth of the Orinoco is formed by 
cape Barima to s. s. e. which is in 8 54 lat. n. 
and the island of Cangrejos, lying w . n. w. of the 
cape. They are 25 miles from each other, but 
the breadth of the navigable part of the passage is 
not quite three. The depth of water on the bar, 
which lies a little farther oat to sea than the cape, 
is, at ebb, 17 feet. 

Immediately on passing the bar, the depth, on 
the side of the island, is fouror six fathoms, whilst 
on the side of the cape, it is not more than 1 \. The 
flats extend from Cangrejos seven leagues into the 
sea, but from cape Barima they do not extend 
more than two leagues. 

Nearly one league from Barima is a river of 
the same name, which discharges itself into the 
Orinoco. The entrance is by a narrow channel 
If fathom deep. On the same shores, s. of the 
Orinoco, and two leagues higher up than this river, 
is the mouth of the Amaruco, which crosses a great 
part of the most e. territory of Guayana, occupied 
by the Capuchins of Catalonia. Shallops can sail 
10 or 15 leagues up. It is s. of the island and 
cape of Cangrejos, which forms, as lias been be 
fore observed , the n. coast of the mouth of Na- 
vios or Vessels. 

Three leagues above Cangrejos is the island of 
Arenas, which is small and of a sandy soil. It is 
from 12 to 15 feeUmder water in spring tides. In] 



ORINOCO. 



489 



[the s. part of it is a channel, which is often altered 
by the sand, of which the bottom is composed. 
Before ascending half a league there are two points, 
called by the Spaniards Gordas. That on the n. 
gide has a flat which runs out a little, but not 
enough to obstruct the navigation. 

Proceeding along the s. shore of the Orinoco, 
eight leagues above Barima is the river Araturn, 
the source of which bounds the savannas of the 
missionaries. Its mouth is very narrow, but it is 
navigable for JO leagues. It communicates by 
different arms with the river Amacuro to the e. and 
with the Aguirre to the w. There is much wood 
on its banks, and some small islands, bearing its 
name, opposite its mouth. Onthew. side is the chan 
nel called Cocuma. ll discharges itself into the sea. 

Eleven leagues above Barima is the island of 
Pagayos, in the middle of the Orinoco, but nearest 
to its right bank. Its soil is white mud, it is 
covered with mangles, and at flood tide it is 11 
feet under water. It was formerly much larger 
than it is at present, and is observed to diminish 
sensibly. Immediately above the island of Paga 
yos, is that of J uncos. It is the most e. of the 
Itamaca islands, which occupy a space of J8 
leagues in the Orinoco. They divide the river 
into two branches ; the s. branch being called Ita 
maca, and the n. Zacoopana. Both of these are 
navigable, but the s. branch, although the least, 
has by far the most water. 

We will describe the Itamaca branch to the w. 
point of the chain of islands, and afterwards give 
a description of that of Zacoopana. 

The e. entrance of the Itamaca branch, which is 
900 fathoms wide, is formed by the island of Jun- 
cos and cape Barima Zanica, which juts out from 
the right bank of the Orinoco. A creek, called 
Carapo, runs from the cape in-shore, and after 
wards joins the river Arature. 

A little higher up is the mouth of the river 
Aguirre. Its source is in the tract of the mission 
aries of the Catalanian Capuchins. Its mouth is 
very broad, and the depth, at 10 or 12 leagues 
from the Orinoco, is three fathoms. It was once 
much more navigable than it is at present, but 
very, trifling repairs would be sufficient to restore 
it to its former state. As this river does not pass 
through any cultivated country, it is only fre 
quented by those who resort to its banks for wood. 
The trees on each side are so high, that the sail 
cannot be used, and vessels consequently avail 
themselves of the tide. 

Two leagues from the mouth of this river, in 
the midst of the Orinoco, is the little island of Ve- 

VOL. III. 



nado, and on the s. bank of the Orinoco, eight 
leagues above the Aguirre, is the creek of Caruzi- 
na. It proceeds from the Orinoco, runs by the 
back of the mountains, and thence takes its course 
s. c. thus forming of the bank of the Orinoco an 
island, on which the Guayanos Indians have built 
a hamlet, subject to the Indian Gemericabe. This 
creek or branch has plenty of water at its entrance, 
but the point of the rising grounds of Itamaca 
causes it to be hardly navigable for half a league. 
This creek spreads into an infinite number 
of branches, and therefore it might be of great 
use to agriculture, the neighbouring land lying 
too high for inundation. The Spaniards have re 
cently entertained the project of driving away the 
Guayanos Indians, of building villages, and of 
erecting batteries for the defence* of the Orinoco. 

The river Itamaca, on the n. side of the Ori 
noco, is next to be described. Its mouth is narrow, 
but deep, having from 16 to 18 feet water. There 
is a bank in the Orinoco running across the 
mouth of the Itamaca, with the exception of a 
very narrow passage, which requires, especially 
at low water, great precaution in the naviga 
tion. This river, six miles from its mouth, di 
vides into two branches, the first of which goes to 
the w. and runs through the valleys formed by the 
mountains, the other runs to the savanna,. near 
the mission of Polomar. The river is navigable 
up to where it thus branches off, for small craft 
and boats. The w. point of the Itamaca islands 
is 2y leagues from the river. 

We will here again descend the Orinoco to where 
the Itamaca and Zacoopana branches unite, for the 
purpose of describing the latter, and afterwards re- 
ascend in makiug the tour of the island of Juncos, 
leaving it to our left. 

From the e. point of Juncos runs out a flat to 
the n. making a very narrow but deep passage for 
vessels, which should keep close to the n. coast. 
Within the e. point of the island of Juncos is that 
of Pericos, which hafc very lately disappeared. It 
formed two channels, that to the s. was almost 
choked by the sand, that to the n. was narrow, 
and afforded but a difficult passage for vessels. 
This island was small and sandy, it was seen at 
ebbtide, and in the swellings of the Orinoco. It* 
disappearance was not occasioned by any earth 
quake or extraordinary inundation. 

Four leagues above the point where was once 
the island of Pericos, is the isle of Hogs, which we 
leave to the right, because it inclines to the n. The 
navigable channel continues to the s. ; it has, how 
ever, between it and the shore a narrow creek na-1 
3 u 



490 



ORINOCO. 



[vigable for small vessels. A league to the w. of 
the isle of Hogs is the channel Laurent, on the w. 
side of the Orinoco. From its moutli proceeds a 
shallow which crosses half of the Zacoopana chnu- 
rtd. The Laurent, at its mouth, has the appear 
ance of a large river, but at a very little dis 
tance to the n. it forms many ramifications, all of 
which are so shallow, that only by one can small 
vessels find egress to the sea. At the entrance of 
the Laurent channel there is a small island of the 
same name, from which proceeds a flat which ex 
tends to the mouth of Mateo, which crosses the 
Itamaca branch. Musquito island, situated near 
the s. shore, has from i(s e. and zo. points flats ex 
tending more than a league. In the middle of the 
river is the channel, half of a league broad. 

From the mouth of the Abacayo channel runs a 
shallow extending to the island of Palomas. On 
the n. coast are two channels which fall into the 
sea. Another flat runs from the island of Palomas, 
and reaches to the westernmost point of the Ita 
maca islands. 

At the mouth of the channel of the island of 
Zacoopana commences a flat, running two leagues 
to the w. and often filling half of the river. Be 
tween this flat and another which proceeds from 
the island of Palomas is the passage for vessels. 
Here the Orinoco, or rather that part of it which 
discharges itself into the sea by the mouth of Ves 
sels, forms only one channel, eight leagues w. In 
this space is seen the mouth of a lake, on the s. 
shore, at a little distance from the river. It ex 
tends to the foot of the mountain of Piacoa. From 
the middle of the Orinoco to the s. are seen the 
mountains of Meri. 

We now come to the chain of little islands which 
divide the channel of Piacoa from the river. 
They extend 12 leagues from s. tow. On the n. 
bank is the mouth of the Little Paragoan, from 
which runs a flat extending to the Great Paragoan. 
The two channels called Paragoan unite before 
falling into the sea. 

Above the Great Paragoan is detached the arm 
known under the name of Mouth of Pedernales, 
and which the Orinoco throws towards the coast of 
Trinidad. It forms the divers channels from the 
Orinoco to that island, and proceeds from the Orino 
co at a league from the e. point of Yaya. There 
is here a flat which crosses half the river. 

A league and a half up the river are the Red 
bogs. This is the first place where, the Orinoco 
re-appearing to the n. is seenTierraFirme, and land 
entirely secured from the water. Opposite is a 
shallow, which runs along the s. coast, nearly half 



a league from e. to w. The passage for ressels is 
here along the two banks, but the n. bank is the 
better of the two. In the middle of these bogs 
there is a very narrow channel called Guaritica, 
by which shallops can pass in the flood tides, or 
during the swelling of the river, to a lake which is 
close to it. 

A league higher up, on the n. bank, is the 
mouth of the Guarapo channel. During summer 
it has but very little water, but nevertheless for 
several years vessels carried on a contraband trade 
in mules, oxen, and the productions of Cumana 
and Venezuela, giving in exchange dry goods. 

This channel, excepting at its mouth, is very 
deep, and admits of the navigation of large vessels, 
but on account of the high mountain by which it 
runs, they are obliged to use the oar or to be 
towed. Two leagues above Guarapo, is the island 
of A ray a; it is of a moderate size, and is close to 
the n. coast. 

Towards the s. coast are seen the cascades of Pia 
coa, they are formed by three or four ridges which 
extend from the middle of the channel to the s. 
coast, but there is sufficient water on the w. coast 
for large vessels. On this coast was formerly the 
mission of Piacoa and the Catalanian Capuchins. 
Here is excellent pasture, very fertile land, good 
water, regular winds, and a good situation for 
agriculture. 

After having reveivved the three islands of Arciba, 
the next is that of Iguana, it is more than half a 
league from the n. bank. The river continues na 
vigable on the s. side. In summer, on the n. side, 
are banks of sand which have very little water, but 
in winter there are no obstructions. From the zc. 
point of the island of Iguana, the small mountain 
of Naparenia is only one league. It indeed ap 
pears to be nothing more than a high rock. 

All this coast as far as the isles of iguana and 
Araya is full of sand-banks. 

The Simon s channel, lying on the s. coast, has 
at its mouth the ruins of a small fort. From hence 
is seen the island of St. Vicente, having a flat on 
the e. part, which crosses the channel unto a little 
below the fortress, but which at full tide is of no 
inconvenience. This is the spot where once stood 
the ancient capital of Guayana before it was trans 
ferred to Angostura. The distance described is 
therefore 50 leagues, and it is consequently 40 
leagues hence to St. Thomas. The Spaniards, 
when they transferred the capital 40 leagues higher 
up, thought proper to leave the forts they ^des 
tined for the defence of Guayana, on the site of 
the old town. They are now seen at the foot of a] 





,L\i JO 



* ^--~ 



ORINOCO. 



491 



[small hill, one is called St. Francis and the other 
j;i Padastro. By the side of these are two small 
lakes, named El Zeibo and Baratello. Halt a 
league lower than St. Francis is the little rivulet 
of Usupamo, having a lake near its mouth. 

Nearly half a league above the old town, in 
the centre of the river, is the large rock of Moro- 
coto, it is rather nearer the s. bank than the n. 
and is visible in the summer, but under water 
during the winter. Not far from this rock is the 
island of Mares, and on the s. side is the rock of 
the same name, and another called [lactic. The 
channel n. of this island is preferable to that on the 
other side. Three leagues higher on the s. side, 
is point Aramaya, which is merely a jutting rock. 
Opposite this point are the three little islands of 
San Miguel: they are all of stone, with a little 
sand in summer. When the river is swelling they 
are nearly under water. On the right bank, oppo 
site the village of San Miguel, are two islands 
called Chacarandy, from the wood witli which 
they are covered ; they arc divided by only a nar 
row channel. The island of Faxardo is in the 
middle of the river, opposite the mouth of the 
river Caroni. It is SOOO fathoms long and 1387 
broad. Then), side is subject to inundations. On 
the right bank, and a league above this island, is 
the island of Torno. It is separated from the 
mainland by a small channel ; and on the w. 
point there are rocks, and a flat running out to five 
leagues. 

Point Cardinal is on the s. side of the island, 
three leagues above Faxardo. Nearly a quarter 
of a league from this point is a chain of rocks 
stretching to opposite Gurampo. During winter 
but one of these is visible, but in summer three 
are discernible opposite Gurampo. There is a 
port formed by point Cardinal, called Patacon. 
Gurampo is a number of rocks lying five leagues 
above the island of Faxardo, on the ;?. coast. 
These rocks form a port bearing the same name. 
A shallow runs from this port nearly n. and s. with 
E. point Cardinal, and having on the a), extremity 
three rocks, under water in winter. The island of 
Taquache lies half a league from Gurampo, on the 
left bank. It is \\ league from c. to w. 

On the opposite side of the river is the island of 
Zeiba, four leagues long and more than one league 
broad. The channel separating it from the main 
land has very little water, excepting in the w inter, 
Between the mainland to the n. and the island of 
Xaguache, there is a channel navigable at all sea 
sons. 

The river Cucazana on the e. point has a flat, 
running a little to the w. and occupying half of the 



river. At the mouth is the island of the same 
name, which nearly joins that of Taguache. It 
has also a flat on the w. point which is in many 
places visible during summer. 

The Mamo channel has at its mouth a flat 
reaching nearly to the middle of the river, and 
seven leagues below the capital is another, lying 
n. and s. with the island of Mamo, and having 
from the month of January to April only eight 
feet water. Vessels arc obliged to be lightened in 
order to pass, which is the case with another chan 
nel which forms the island of Mano. 

After this bar is passed, are numerous rocks on 
the coast and in the middle of the river. The 
Currucay points are but jutting rocks, and lie 
three leagues above port St. Anne. Nearly oppo 
site these points, in the middle of the river, is a large 
rock named La Pierre du Rosaire. Between this 
and the coast are several others. To the n. of the 
Pierre du Rosaire is a channel very narrow on ac 
count of the rocks lying under water, and stretch 
ing to nearly the coast. Vessels run great risks in 
summer, and in winter the current is so violent 
that if the wind dies away, they are in danger of 
being wrecked against the Pierre du Rosaire. A 
league above this is a point of rocks on then, shore, 
and some distance from this are three ridges near 
each other, and bearings, of the e. point of the 
island of Panapana. 

The island of Panapana is a league above point 
Des Lapins, separated from the s. shore by a chan 
nel moderately wide, but very shallow in summer. 
At the c. and o. points there are fiats Avith very 
little water on them. That of the w. point ascends 
more than a league, and inclines always to the s. 
Between this island, which is l\ league long, and 
the n. coast, is the principal channel of the Ori 
noco. It is rather narrow and of little depth, ex 
cepting when the river experiences its swellings. 

Two leagues higher up is the narrowest part of 
the Orinoco, called by the Spaniards Angostu- 
rita. Two rocks n. and s, form this strait. A 
little higher up, and nearly in the centre, is a large 
rock called L,avadero, that is, Washing-place. It 
is visible only in summer. Between this and the 
s. coast there is a little island of stones, opposite 
which the river Maruanta discharges itself. Point 
Tinco to the n. and point Nicasio to the s . are also 
formed of rocks. 

St. Thomas, the capital of Spanish Guayana, is 
the next place. It is situate at the foot of a small 
hill on the right b;mk of the river. There is a fort 
for its protection on the opposite side. This place 
is called Port Raphael, and is the passage of com 
munication between Guayana and the province of] 
3 R 2 



492 



ORINOCO. 



[Venezuela and Cuuiana. Between port St. Ra 
phael and the city, is an island called Del Medio, 
from being in the centre of the river. Jt is a rock 
under water in winter, but the n. side is dry dur 
ing summer. The principal channel is between 
this island and the city. It has at ebb tide 200 
feet of water, and about 50 more at flood. 

In summing up this description, it is to be ob 
served, that from the junction of the river A pure 
with the Orinoco to St. Thomas s, they reckon 80 
leagues. In all this space no other import ant river 
falls into the Orinoco on the s. save theCaura and 
Caucapasia. It is however true, that from its 
source it receives almost all the rivers by its left 
shore, and from the Apure it receives others which 
ensure it from thence to Guayana all the com 
merce of the s. plains. The navigation of all the 
upper part of the Orinoco is very far from being 
as easy and safe as the size of the river would make 
one imagine. Scattered with islands which ob 
struct the channel, and which throw its bed some 
times to the right bank, and sometimes to the left ; 
filled with rocks of all sizes and heights, of which 
some are consequently even with the water, and 
others of a depth more or less alarming according 
to the season ; subject to terrible squalls ; the Ori 
noco cannot be navigated but by good pilots, and 
with vessels of a certain construction and size ; 
though, be it observed, that this description relates 
here, peculiarly to the navigation from Gnayana 
to the Orinoco, and from the mouth of the Meta 
to the capital. 

Enchanting variety of ils banks. The naturalist 
must be enraptured with the navigation of this 
river. Its banks are frequently bordered by forests 
of majestic trees, which are the resort of birds of 
the most beautiful plumage and exquisite melody. 
Various species of monkeys contribute by their 
cries, their leaps, and gambols, to the embellish 
ment of the enchanting scenery. The savages in 
habiting the woods, content in sharing the posses 
sion with the wild beasts, are ted by the same fruits 
as the birds and quadrupeds, living in perfect har 
mony with them, neither inspiring fear nor feeling 
apprehension. In some parts, the eye, no longer 
confined in its view by the foliage of the forest, 
roves over enchanting plains, which burst upon 
the sight in luxuriant verdure, covered with ex 
cellent pasture, and extending 20 or 30 leagues. 

Importance of this river. Volume and rapidity 
of its water, arid its annual swell. The Orinoco, 
excepting the Amazonas, is the largest river in the 
world. Mr. de Humboldt observes, that the 
mouth of the Amazonas is much more extended 
than that of the Orinoco, but the latter river is of 



equal consideration with respect to the volume of 
water which it has in the interior of the continent, 
for at 200 leagues from the sea, it has a bed of 
from 2500 to 3000 fathoms, without the interrup 
tion of a single isle. Its breadth before St. Thomas 
is 3850 fathoms, and its depth, at the same place, 
according to the measurement made by order of 
the king in 1734, in the month of March, thesea- 
son when its waters are at the lowest, was 65 
fathoms. 

This river, like the Nile and others, has an an 
nual swell. This commences regularly in April 
and ends in August. All the month of September 
it remains with the vast body of water it has ac 
quired the five preceding months, and presents a 
spectacle astonishingly grand. With this en- 
grease of water it enlarges, as it were, its natural 
limits, making encroachments of from 20 to 30 
leagues on the land. The rise of the river is, op 
posite to St. Thomas, 30 fathoms, but it is greater 
in proportion to the proximity to the sea ; it is per 
ceptible at 350 leagues from its mouth, and never 
varies more than one fathom. It is pretended in 
the country, that there is every 25 years a periodi 
cal extraordinary rise of an additional fathom. 
The beginning of October the water begins to fall, 
leaving imperceptibly the plains, exposing in its 
bed a multitude of rocks and islands. J3y the 
end of February it is at its lowest ebb, continuing 
so till the commencement of April. During this 
interval, the tortoises deposit themselves on the 
places recently exposed, but which are still very 
humid ; it is then that the action of the sun soon 
develops in the egg the principles of fecundity. 
The Indians resort from all parts with their fami 
lies, in order to lay in a stock of food, drying the 
tortoises and extracting an oil from their eggs, which 
they either make Use of for themselves or sell. 

The wafer of the Orinoco is potable, and even 
some medicinal virtues are attributed to it. 

Its tides.! and peculiar animals in/tab/ting it. 
Though the tide is very strong at the mouth of the 
river, it is so broken and obstructed by the nume 
rous channels through which it passes, that before 
the town of St. Thomas it is scarcely perceptible, 
or rather there is no tide at all so high up, except 
ing in summer, or when the wind blows from the 
sea. The Orinoco abounds in fish of various de 
scriptions, but these, although they bear the same 
name as the fishes of Europe, are found not to cor 
respond precisely with them in their nature or 
quality. The amphibious animals are also curious 
and worthy of notice. For an account, however, 
of the most peculiar botli of the one and the other 
of the inhabitants of these waters, see the articles] 



O R 1 



O R I 



493 



rCARRlBE,CAYMAN,lGUANA,ClIIQUIRE,LAPA, 

WATER-DOG, DORMOUSE, MANATI, &amp;c. in the 
vocabulary of provincial terms at the end of this 
work. 

Table of the latitudes and longitudes. For the 
table of latitudes and longitudes of the most impor 
tant places in these parts, see the end of the gene 
ral preface.] 

[ORINOCO, LITTLE. See MOCOMOCO.] 

ORIO, a river of the province and government 
of Panama, in the kingdom of Tierra Firme in S. 
America. It divides the jurisdiction of this pro 
vince from that of Veraguas, and is the boundary 
of the isthmus. It runs from n. zo. to 5. e. and to 
the w. of the Punta Mala enters the Pacific sea, in 
lat. 7 25 n. 

ORISKUN1, a small river of the province and 
country of the Iroquees Indians in N. America, 
which runs w. then turns its course to n. and enters 
the Mohawks. 

ORISTAN, a city of the island of Jamaica, 
founded by the Spaniards in 1510 on the s. coast, 
but which has not existed since that the island be 
came in the possession of the English. 

ORITO, or LORITO-YACU, a river of the pro 
vince and country of LasArnazonas, which runs 
s. through the woods to the n. of this river. Near 
its source dwell many barbarous nations of Mainas, 
Zimarrones, and Ulnurarias Indians, and it enters 
the Marafion in lat. 4 5 W s. 

OR1TUCO, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Venezuela, and NuevoReyno de Gra 
nada. It rises in the mountains of the city of Al- 
tagracia, runs, forming a curve, to the w. and en 
ters the Guarico. 

ORIZABA, a jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor 
of Nueva Espana, belonging to the bishopric of 
La Puebla de los Angeles ; bounded e. by the 
town of Cordoba, n. w. by Vera Cruz, Antigua, 
s. w. by the province of Thehuacan, and n. w. by 
the mountains of Tepeaca. Its extent is a little 
more than seven leagues from e. to w. and five in 
width from n. to s. It is of an hot and rnoist tem 
perature, very fertile in tobacco, which is its prin 
cipal article of commerce, and the greater part of 
its inhabitants are drovers, employed by the traffic 
of the neighbouring provinces. The population 
consists of the following settlements : 
S. Miguel Thomatlan, San Martin Atlahuilco, 
Naranjal, San Andres Nexapa, 

San Juan de Atlaca, S. Francisco Necoxtla, 
Temilolacan, S. Juan Acolzingo, 

San Pedro Thequilan, S. Pedro Maltrata, 
Tenango, Huiluapan, 



Santa Maria Aquila, San Juan Bautista No- 
Ixtazoquitlan, gales, 

S. Juan del Rio, Santa Maria Ixhuatlan. 

Santiago Tilapdn, 

The capital is the settlement of the same name ; 
situate in a spacious plain of a league long from e. 
to w. and half a league wide from n. to s. It is 
of an hot and moist temperature, and one of the 
best settlements in the whole kingdom for its opu 
lence, pleasantness, abundance of provisions, and 
disposition of its houses. These are built so as to 
form straight streets, the principal of which is that 
called La Real, and which is upwards of a quarler 
of a league long. 

This town is fertilized by the abundant rivers 
with which it is surrounded. One of these rises 
in the sierra from a volcano, and, running for some 
distance, incorporates itself with the Tuzpango, 
which runs by the s. side, and from these two are 
thrown out many arms, which run in different di 
rections. 

The parish church is a costly and modern 
building, and a fine piece of architecture. It has 
a chapel of ease, which is a magnificent temple of 
JVuestra Sefiora de Guadalupe ; two convents of 
monks, namely, of barefooted Carmelites and San 
Juan de Dios, the latter of which is very useful in 
this town, because, as standing at the usual en 
trance of European travellers from Vera Cruz, 
who arrive sick, it affords its relief and hospitality 
readily and kindly offered by the monks, its inha 
bitants. They have, indeed, two curious infirma 
ries for this charitable purpose, the one appropri 
ated to the laity, the other to the clergy. 

The population is composed of 510 families of 
Spaniards, ^00 of Mustees, 220 of Mulattors, and 
800 of Mexican Indians, who gain their livelihood 
by cultivating maize, French beans, large vetches, 
ajon joli) and fruits, and maintaining thereby a 
commerce. The trade of the Spaniards consists in 
clothes, and native and European merchandise. 

This country produces much leaf-tobacco, some 
years as much as 2000 cargas, or loads, which are 
carried to Mexico, La Pnebla, and other cities and 
settlements of the kingdom, leaving a revenue to 
this of 100,000 dollars annually. In this trade 
many Mulattoes and Muslees are employed ; some, 
however, in mechanical works, and others as 
drovers. The above are formed into four compa 
nies of militia of 100 men each, and there are two 
companies of Spaniards, one of infantry, the other 
of horse, and all these are obliged to march to Vera 
Cruz upon necessity, and at 50 hours notice. 

This town, which is very large, lias three wards 



49* 



OKI 



or hermitages, and in the parish is venerated a 
miraculous image of the child Jesus lost, which 
was brought here from Genoa about the middle of 
the 16th century, and concerning which the fol 
lowing account is related by Don Joseph Villascuor 
in his " Teat.ro Americano," namely, " that a cer 
tain viceroy passing through the town, taking ad 
vantage of his authority, and induced by the vene 
ration in which lie held the ima&amp;lt;n&amp;gt;, to carry it away 
with him, in spite of the tears and entreaties of the 
inhabitants, whilst he was departing, was taken 
suddenly extremely ill ; and that a certain chap 
lain who had been picked out by the people, seiz 
ing the opportunity, went to the viceroy and in 
formed him, that heaven had heard the prayers of 
the disconsolate people, and that it would not suf 
fer any one with impunity to take away that 
image which had been such a consolation to them 
in their necessities and afflictions : it was further 
*iid, that the viceroy immediately delivered back 
the child, and that he as quickly convalesced." 
This image is held to the present day in the 
greatest reverence. 

[Orizaba, according to Humboldt, of the in- 
frndancy of Vera Cruz, lies a little to the n. of the 
Rio Blanco, which discharges itself into the La- 
guna d Alvarado. It has been long disputed if 
the new road from Mexico to Vera Cruz should go 
by Xalapa or Orizaba. Both these towns having 
a great interest in the direction of this road, have 
employed all the means of rivalry to gain over the 
constituted authorities to their respective sides. 
The result Avas, that the viceroys alternately em 
braced the cause of both parties, and during this 
state of uncertainty no road was constructed. 
Within these few years, however, a fine causeway 
was commenced from the fortress of Perote to Xa 
lapa, and from Xalapa to L Encero. 

Orizhba is 120 miles c. by $. of Mexico, in lat. 
1848 n. Long. 97 7 wJ\ 

ORIZABA, another settlement, the head settle 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Iximi- 
quilpan in the same kingdom, in the district of 
which arc many approximate wards ; amongst all 
of which are 945 families of Othomies Indians, 
and 80 of Spaniards, Mustees, and Midattoes, 
whose spiritual necessities arc attended lo by only 
two priests, by far too short a number to fulfil the 
duties required ; so that many are obliged to go 
without their assistance. Nearly all these settle 
ments are of a mild temperature, and fertilized 
with the waters from the river of the sierra of 
Mextitlan, by which also are irrigated many 
gardens, orchards, and cultivated fields. The in- 



O R O 

habitants make charcoal, fishing-tackle, and rig 
ging; they also procure honey from the inagucycs, 
which they cultivate. This head settlement of the 
district has in its division six estates, namely, 
Juan Do, Domingo, Azuchitlen, La Florida, 
Vctza, and San Pablo, in the which they gather 
great harvests of seed and grain, owing ( the fer 
tility procured by the aforesaid river. 

ORLEANS, NEW, a city of the province and 
government of Louisiana in N.America; situate 
between the e. shore of the river Mississippi and 
the Fish. Thirty-three miles from the sea. See 

NEW Oil LEANS. 

[ORLEANS, the middle of the three . counties 
of Vermont. A part of lake Memphremagog pro 
jects into the n. part of it from Canada. It con 
tains 23 townships. It is very high land, and 
sends its waters in almost every direction of the 
compass. Clyde, Barton, and Black rivers empty 
into lake Mcmphremagog ; the waters of many 
branches of Missiscoui, La Moelle, and Onion 
rivers, rising here, fall into lake Champlain ; those 
of Mulhegan and Pasumpsick empty into Connec 
ticut river.] 

[On LEANS, a township in the county of Barn- 
stable, Massachusetts; taken from the s. part of 
Eastham, and incorporated 1797.] 

[OHLKANS, Isle of, is situated in the river St. 
Lawrence, a small distance below Quebec, and is 
remarkable for the richness of its soil. It lies in 
the middle of the river; the channel is upon the s. 
side of the island, the n. side not having depth of 
water at full tide, even for shallops. The s. w. 
end of the island is called Point Orleans. The 
coast is rocky for a mile and a half within the s. 
channel, where there is a careening place for mer 
chant ships. Round point Levi, and along the 
s. e. side of the river, the shore is rocky, but the 
middle of the bason is entirely free.] 

ORLEANS, a French fort of the province and 
government of Louisiana, on the shore of the river 
Missouri, opposite the settlement of this name. 

ORNE, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Venezuela in the JNucvo Reyno de 
Granada. 

ORO, SAN JUAN DEL, a town of the province 
and corregmriento of Carabaya in Peru ; founded 
by the fugitive Spaniards of the parties of Pizarro 
and Almagro, and who, after penetrating through 
woods and chasms, established themselves liere, al 
lured by the richness of the country. They all 
became opulent, and having obtained a special 
privilege from the viceroy Don Antonio de Men- 
doza, some of them passed over to Espana., re- 



O R O 

ceivcd honours and rewards of the emperor, and 
nt last growing haughty and intoxicated with their 
good fortune, began to have patties and dissensions 
amongst each other, so that from being a very 
flourishing settlement, with a population of up 
wards of ijOOO, (his has become so reduced as to 
contain not more than six Spanish families. It is 
just at the source of the river Inambari. 

OHO, a settlement and real of silver mines, of 
the province of Tepegnana, and kingdom of 
Nucva Vizcaya, on the bank of the stream of 
Parral. 

OHO, a town of the province and country of 
Las Amazonas, in the territory of Mato Groso ; si 
tuate at the source of the river Maloques. To the 
n. are some rich gold mines, from which it takes 
its name. 

ORO, a river of the province and government of 
Santa Marta in the Nnevo Reyno tie Granada. 
It rises w. of the city of Salazar cle las Palmas, and 
enters the Lebrija, 

ORO, another, of the province of Pamplona in 
the same kingdom, which empties itself into the 
sea ; and is thus called from gold being found on 
its shores. 

ORO, another, of the province and government 
of Neiva in the same kingdom. It runs s, s. w. 
and enters the Magdalena, between those of Otaz 
and Neiva. 

Ouo, another, of the province and government 
of Darien, and kingdom of Tierra Firme, which, 
runs into the sea between the island of La Laguna 
and the river Francisa. 

Ono, another, with the dedicatory title of Fino, 
in the territory and country of the Gnayazas In 
dians in Brazil. It is small, runs n, n. t. and en 
ters the head of the Tocantines. 

ORO, an island of the N. sea, on the coast of 
the province and government of Darien in the 
kingdom of Tierra Firme. It is opposite the point 
which forms the bay and port of Calidonia to 
the zo. 

ORO, some mountains of the province and go 
vernment of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito, 
which run from re , to c . from the river I aures to 
that of Serre, to the n. of the settlement of the mis 
sions of San Nicolas. 

Ouo, another sierra or cordiUeni of mountains, 
of the province and government of Buenos Ay res 
in Peru. They run s.s.e. near the coast of the 
river La Plata. 

OROATA, a small lake of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas ; formed from a small 
liver which enters the Madera by the w. side. 

OROCOMA, an ancient and extensive province 



ORO 



495 



to the s. of the province of Venezuela and Nucvo 
Reyno de Granada, between the river San P. \!ro 
to the e. the mountains of Tucuyo to the n. those 
of Bogota to the w, and the llanos of Cazanare to 
the s.; bounded n. by the nation of the Cuicas In 
dians, and e. by a tribe of the nation of the 
Pauches. It is nearly depopulated, as it is sub 
ject to continual inundations. The climate is hot, 
moist, and unhealthy, but it abounds in excellent 
pastures. 

OROCOPICHE, a small river of the province 
and government of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia. 
It rises s. of the city of Nueva Guayana, runs n. 
and enters the Orinoco opposite that city. 

[ORODADA PENA, on the coast of Peru, is 
two leagues due n. of Lobos de Payta, and two s. 
by zo. of Payta.] 

OROKUP1ANAS, a nation of barbarian In 
dians of the province and country of Las Ama 
zonas, who inhabit, with various other nations, 
the sierras and mountains on the shore of the river 
Basuru.ru, the which empties itself into the Mara- 
non or Amazon by the n. coast, 32 leagues from 
the mouth of the Cuchiguara. 

[OROMCOTO, a river of New Brunswick, 
which empties into St. John s river. By this pas 
sage the Indians have a communication with Pas- 
sarnaquoddy bay.] 

ORONAS, SIERRAS DE, some mountains of 
the province and government of Darien, and king 
dom of Tierra Firme, near the s. coast. They 
run between the rivers Chepo and Francisca. 

[ORONDOCKS, an Indian tribe who live near 
Trois Rivieres, and could furnish 100 warriors 
about 20 years ago.] 

OROPESA, a town of the province and cor- 
regii/ricnto of Cochabarnba in Peru ; founded in 
a beautiful, fertile, and extensive valley of the 
name of Cochabarnba, and by which name the 
settlement is also known, by order of the viceroy 
Don Francisco de Toledo in 1575, on the ruins of 
another town which had been founded in 15G5 by 
Pedro de Cardenas, and which bore his title. This 
town is watered by a small river, called Sabaca, 
which fertilizes the neighbouring gardens ami 
orchards, and then enters the Cachirnayu. It 
has, besides the parish church, two convents of 
San Francisco, one of the Observers, and the 
other of the Recolctans, a convent of San Agustin, 
another of La Merced, an hospital of San Juan 
de Dios, two monasteries of nuns, the one of 
Santa Clara, the other of the barefooted Carme 
lites. Its population is composed of 17,000 souls 
in communion, amongst whom are many rich and 
noble families, descended from the ancient cem- 



496 



O R 



querors of Peru, and from some illustrious houses 
in Spain. In some foreign geographical charts 
this town is wrongly called Oropalza. Eight 
miles n. of Cochabamba, and 89 n. n. te&amp;gt;. of Chu- 
quisaca or La Plata, in lat. 18 11 s. Long. 
67 18 w. 

O HOPES A, a settlement of the same kingdom 
as the former, in the province and corregimiento 
of Quispicanchi, distant half a league from the 
lake called La Mohina, which is more than a 
league long, atid an half wide, and in which there 
i&amp;a quantity of totora and reed-mace, some fish 
and aquatic fowl. One end of it extends to the 
foot of the mountain called Rumicolca, where 
there are to be seen the ruins of the palace of the 
.Emperor Htiasca-Inca; and there is a tradition, 
that in the centre of this mountain were secreted 
the immense treasures of the 1 1 monarchs of Peru, 
when the Spaniards entered ; and this report has 
induced many to spend large sums in attempting 
to discover the fortunate spot, but to no purpose, 
nothing having been found but caves and openings 
which they call chinganas, and different channels 
for carrying off the water. This settlement has, 
besides the parish church, two others well adorned, 
with the titles of Nuestra Sefiora de la Estrellaand 
La Virgen de la Hermita; situate 10 miles e. of 
Cuzco, in lat. 13 42 s. Long. 71 6 w. 

OROPESA, another settlement, of the province 
and corregimiento of Aimaraes in the same king 
dom ; situate on the shore of the river Pacha- 
chaca. 

O HOPES A, a river of the same province and 
kingdom ns the former settlement. It rises in the 
province of Cotabambas, to the e. of the settlement 
of Pituhuanca, runs inclining to n. zo. and enters 
the Pachachaca. 

OROPI, a large lake of the province and coun 
try of Las Arnazonas, in the territory of the Gua- 
ranacaos Indians. It is formed from a waste water 
of a river which runs w. and then enters the 
Madera. 

OKOPOTO, a settlement and asicnto of rich 
gold mines in the province and corregimienlo of 
Asangaro, and kingdom of Peru. 

OROPUCHE, a settlement of the province of 
Barcelona and government of Cumana, on the 
shore of a river whi^h enters the Iluere, to the s. 
of the town of Aragua, and n. of the town of 
Pao, about an equal distance from each. 

OROPUCHE, a river of the island of Trini 
dad, which runs e. and enters the sea. 

OROQUARAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
but little known, of the province and country of 
Las Amazonas. They dwell in the woods to the 



O R U 

s. of the river Marafion, 45 leagues belo\r the 
mouth of the river Cayari. 

OROTINA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Nicoya, and kingdom of Guate 
mala. It is one of the principal there, and well 
peopled with Indians, who are of a good disposi 
tion and very friendly to the Spaniards. It is dis 
tant from the capital seven leagues by sea and 20 
by land. 

OROYA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tarma in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of the capital. 

[ORPHAN S Bank, a fishing bank of the.v. e. 
point of Chaleur s bay, on the n. e. coast of New 
Brunswick, in N. America. On it is from 75 to 
30 fathoms water.] 

[ORPHAN S Island, a settlement belonging to 
Hancock county, district of Maine, having 104 
inhabitants.] 

[ORRINGTON, a plantation in Hancock 
county, district of Maine, having 477 inhabitants. 
It lies on the e. side of Penobscot river, 16 miles 
above Buckstown, and 180 n. n. e. of Boston.] 

ORTEGA, SAN JOAQUIN DE, a settlement of 
the province of Tucuman in Peru, of the district 
of the country of Gran Chaco ; a reduction of the 
Morampas Indians made by the missionaries of the 
Jesuits, and now under the charge of the religious 
order of San Francisco. 

ORTEGA, another settlement, of the province 
and government of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada. 

ORTEZ, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Venezuela in the kingdom of Nuevo 
Granada ; situate on the shore of a river which 
enters the Guarico to the s. of the town of San 
Sebastian. 

ORTEZ, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayres in Peru, which runsw. 
and enters the rive* La Plata. 

OHTEZ, a shoal or sand-bank, at the entrance 
of the mouth of the river La Plata. 

ORTOCUNA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Xauja in Peru. 

[ORUA, Oiiuiio, or ARUBA, the most w. of 
the Caribbee islands in the \V r . Indies, called by 
the Spaniards Las Islas de Sotovento. It is on 
the coast of the Spanish main. Lat. 123l w. 
Long. 70 T w.] 

ORUBA. [See ORUA.] 

ORUBILLA, another, a small island of the N. 
sea, to the w. of the former. 

ORUILIERES, a river of the province of 
Guayana, in the French possessions. It enters tho 
Oyapoco. 

2 



O R U 

ORUNA, SAN JOSEPH DR, a city and capital 
of the island and government of Trinidad ; founded 
on a mountain in a strong and advantageous situa 
tion by Gonzalo Ximencz de Qucsada in J591, at 
two leagues from the sea. It belongs to the bishop 
ric of Puertorico; and in its parish church is seen 
the sepulchre of Nicolas de Labrit, a French bi 
shop, killed by the Caribes Indians, by the Cano 
de Aquire, not far from the coast, whilst instruct 
ing them in the faith. In this city there is a con 
vent of the religious order of Sat) Francisco. 

ORUOILLA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Lampa in Peru. 

ORURO, a province and corregimiento of Peru ; 
bounded n. by the province of Sicasica, e&amp;lt; by 
that of Cochabamba, s. and s. e. by that of Paria, 
and w. and n. w. by that of Pacajes. It is of a 
cold and dry temperature, and very subject to 
tempests. Its productions are papas, quinua, and 
some barley. It has breeds of large and native cat 
tle, and much gunpowder is made here from the 
abundance of saltpetre, although not so much as 
in former times, when its gold and silver mines 
were in a flourishing state. At present these are in 
great decay, and the greater part are filled with 
water, which, on account of the want of declivity 
in the territory, it is impossible to drain, and on 
this account the population is daily diminishing. 
The whole of the province does not count more 
than 8000 souls. It is 18 leagues from e. to w. 
and 20 from . to s. Its corregidor had a rep art i- 
miento of 35,527 dollars ; and it used to pay an 
alcabala of 284 dollars annually. 

The capital is the town of the same name ; found 
ed in a beautiful valley, of nine miles long, 
the greater part being swampy and abound 
ing in saltpetre, with the name of S:m Felipe 
de Asturia. In 1590, were re-opened some of 
the rich mines which were begun to be worked by 
the Indians in the time of their Incas; and amongst 
the best of these was the mine called Pic de Gallo, 
which is, however, at the present day abandoned, 
the mine of Popo, and a few others, only being 
being worked, although these alone yield yearly 
600 bars of silver of about 200 marks each bar ; 
and in this consists the commerce of the place. 

It has five convents, namely of San Francisco, 
Santo Domingo, San Agustin, La Merced, San 
Juan de Dios, and a college which belonged to 
the Jesuits ; also four parishes for its numerous 
population, with the titles of Sa;i Felipe, San Mi 
guel de la Rancheria, San lldefonso de Paria and 
Sepulturas. Eighty- five miles 5. with a slight in 
clination to the e. of La Paz, and 70 n. n. w. of 
Potosi, in lat. 18 48 s. Long. 68 w. 

VOL. m. 



O S A 



497 



[ORWELL, a township of Vermont, the 
n. westernmost in Rutland county, and situated 
on the e. side of lake Champlain. It contains 778 
inhabitants. Mount Independence stands in this 
township opposite Ticonderoga, in the state of 
New York. Near mount Independence is a cha 
lybeate spring.] 

O SAB AW, a small island of the N. sea, near the 
coast of the province of Georgia. It forms with 
the island of Wasa a strait of its name. 

[OSAGE, GRAND, a nation of Indians of N. 
America, who claim the country within the follow 
ing limits, viz. commencing at the mouth of a 
s. branch of the Osage river, called Neangua, and 
with the same to its source ; thence s. to intersect 
the Arkansas about 100 miles below the three forks 
of that river; thence up its principal branch to 
the confluence of a large n. branch, lying a consi 
derable distance a), of the Great Saline, and with that 
stream nearly to its source; thence n. towards the 
Kansas river, embracing the waters of the upper 
portion of the Osage river, and thence obliquely 
approaching the same to the beginning. The cli 
mate of the country they inhabit is delightful, 
and the soil fertile in the extreme. The face of 
the country is generally level and well watered ; 
the e. part of the country is covered with a variety 
of excellent timber ; the w. and middle country 
consists of high prairies. Their territory em 
braces within its limits four salines, which are, in 
point of magnitude and excellence, unequalled by 
any known in N. America ; there are also many 
others of less note. The principal part of the 
Great Osage nation have always resided at their 
villages, on the Osage river, since they have been 
known to the inhabitants of Louisiana. About 
five years since, nearly one-half of this nation, 
headed by their chief the Big-track, emigrated to 
three forks of the Arkansas, near which, and on 
its n. side, they established a village, where they 
now reside. The Little Osage nation formerly re 
sided on the s. W. side of the Missouri, near the 
mouth of Grand river; but being reduced by con 
tinual warfare with their neighbours, were com 
pelled to seek the protection of the Great Osage, 
near whom they now reside. There is no doubt 
but their trade will increase : they could furnish a 
much larger quantity of beaver than they do. 
Two villages on the Osage river might be pre 
vailed on to remove to the Arkansas and the Kan 
sas higher up the Missouri ; and thus leave a suffi 
cient scope of country for the Shawnces, Dille- 
wars, M iames, and Kickapoos. The Osages cul 
tivate corn, beans, &amp;c.] 

OS.AGE, a river which rises in the territory of 
3s 



498 



o s o 



i\\e aforesaid Indians, runs n. t. and enters the 
Missouri. 

OSATAMA, a small settlement of the corrcgi- 
mienlo of Pasca in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; 
annexed to the curacy of Fusagusaga. 

OSBORN, a settlement of the island of Barba- 
does, in the district and parish of S. Thomas. 
O8SEY. See PAXAUOS. 

OSIACUR1, a settlement of (lie province and 
government of Cartagena in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada; situate in the vicinity of the road which 
leads from that capital to the river Grande de la 
Magdalena, between the settlement of Piojon and 
Malambo. Thirty-five miles n. e. of Cartagena, 
on the w. side of R. Magdalena. 

OSIPEE, a small river of the province of Con 
tinent, one of the four of New England in N. 
America. It rises from a small lake, runs e. and 
enters the Saco. 

[OSNABURG, a small island in the S. Pacific 
ocean, having the appearance of the roof of a 
house. It is about four leagues in circuit ; is 
high land ; full of cocoa trees ; has no anchoring 
place, and scarcely affords landing for a boat. It 
Avas discovered by Captain Wallis, and is called 
Maitea by the natives. Lat. 17 40 s. Long. 
148 6 o&amp;gt;.] 

[OSNABURG, another island in the same sea, 
discovered by Captain Carteret. Lat. 22 4 s. 
Long. 148 36 w.] 

[OsNAuuRG House, a settlement of the Hud 
son s bay company, in N. America ; situated at 
the n. e. corner of lake St. Joseph, 122 miles w. 
by s. of Gloucester house. Lat. 51 4 n. Long. 
90 15 w.] 

OSNO, SAN MIGUET, DE, a settlement of the 
province and corregimiento of Guanta in Peru ; 
annexed to the curacy of Tambos. 

OSNO, another settlement, with the dedicatory 
title of San Salvador, to distinguish it from the 
former, in the same province and kingdom, and 
also annexed to that curacy. 

OSO, Rio DEL, a river in the province of 
Nuevo Mexico and N. America. 

OSORNO, a city of the kingdom of Chile, 
founded by.D. Andres Hurtadode Mendoza, mar 
quis of Canete, in 1558, on the shore of the river 
Bueno, 24 miles from the S. s a, 212 s. of the 
city of La Concepcion, and 34 from the garrison 
of Valdivia. Its territory was barren in vegetable 
productions, but abundant in gold mines, the 
which made it a rich and beautiful town, inha 
bited by many illustrious families. It had two 
convents, one of San Francisco, the other of S. 
Domingo, and a monastery of the nuns of Santa 



OSS 

Clara. The Charaucabis and Arucanos Indians, 
who made an insurrection here in 1599, destroyed 
and burnt the town, putting to death the Spaniards, 
and taking away the women to marry with them. 
After this lamentable fall it has never since been 
rebuilt, and nothing but its ruins remain. It 
stood in lat. 40 20 s. 

OSORNO, a mountain or volcano of the same 
kingdom, to the e. of the former city, in the cor- 
dillera of the Andes of that kingdom. Sixty- 
seven miles e. by s. of the city of its name, in 
lat. 40 36 5. 

OSORNO, a canal between the continent of the 
same kingdom and the n. point of the isle of Chiloe, 
at the entrance to the ancud or archipelago of 
Chiloe, the which Mr. Martiniere calls the lake of 
Anaud, in the article Osorno. 

OSPA, a settlement of the province of Florida 
in N. America. 

OSPINO, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; founded a few years since. 

[OSSABAW Sound and Island, on the coast 
of the state of Georgia. The sound opens between 
Wassaw island on the n. and Ossabaw island on 
the 5. and leads into the river Ogeechee.] 

[OSS1PEE, or OSAPY, a township, mountain, 
and pond, in New Hampshire, in Stafford county, 
near the e. line of the state. The town was incor 
porated in 1785, and has 139 inhabitants. The 
lake lies n. e. of Winnipiseogee lake, between 
which and Ossipee lake is Ossipee mountain, de 
scribed in the account of New Hampshire. Its 
waters run e. and joined by South river, form 
Great Ossipee river, which empties into Saco 
river, near the division line between York and 
Cumberland counties, in Maine, between Limerick 
and Gorham.l 

[OSSNOBIAN, or ASSENEKOYNE Indians, a 
tribe found about the source of Ossnobian or Asse- 
neboyne river, far w. of lake Superior. They are 
said by the Moravian missionaries to live wholly 
on animal food, or at least to confine themselves 
to the spontaneous productions of nature ; giving 
those who dig the ground the appellation of slaves. 
Bread is unknown to them. A traveller who lived 
some months in their country offered to some a 
few remnants of bread, which they chewed and 
spit out again, calling it rotten wood. These In 
dians, as well as those numerous nations who in 
habit the country from lake Superior, towards the 
Shining mountains, are great admirers of the best 
hunting horses, in which the country abounds. 
The horses prepared by them for hunters have 
large holes cut above their natural nostrils, which 

2 



O S T 

(hey say makes them longer winded than others not 
thus prepared. 

The Ossnobians have no permanent place of 
abode, but live wholly in tents, made of buffalo 
and other hides, with which they travel from one 
place to another, like the Arabs ; and as soon as 
the food for their horses is expended, they remove 
and pitch their tents in another fertile spot ; and 
so on continually, scarcely ever returning to the 
same spots again.J 

OSTIA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Cartagena in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; situate in one of the islands which are 
formed by the arms of the river Cauca. 

[OSTICO, a small lake in Onondago county, 
New York, partly in the s. e. corner of Marcellus, 
and n. w. corner of the township of Tully. It 
sends its waters from the n. end, which is eight 
miles s. w. of Onondago castle, by a stream 16 
miles long, to Salt lake.] 

OST1MURI, a province of Mexico, in the 
government of Sonora, with the title of San llde- 
fonso. It begins on the other side of the river 
Mayo, seven leagues from the real of Los Alamos, 
so as that from thence to the river Chico it is 40 
leagues from n. tow. bounded by the river Grande 
de lliaquis. It is very fertile in maize, pease, 
French beans, and pulse, in the summer time ; for 
in the winter the river rises to such a height as to 
inundate the greater part of the territory, not only 
destroying the crops, but even the settlements. It 
has many mines of gold and silver, which 
metals are of base alloy, and are but little co 
veted. 

This province is peopled by different nations of 
Indians, who were reduced to the faith by the 
Jesuits, who founded the following settlements : 
Rio Chico, the capital, S. Marcial, 
Ostimuri, formerly the S. Joseph, 



O S T 



499 



capital, 

Bethlem, 

Ruan, 

Pot an, 
Bocon, 

Cocarin, 

Todos Santos, 

Nacozari, 

S. Xavier, 

O post ura, 

Oputu, 

Comoripa, 

Zuaque, 

Yccora, 

S. Nicolas, 

Onabas, 



Nacori, 

Cumpas, 

Thesico, 

Tonichi, 

Onapa, 

Aribethechi, 

Bacanora, 

Saguaripa, 

Las Juntas, 

Tacupero, 

S. Marcos, 

S. Miguel, 

Tecoripa, 

Matape, 

Guazabas. 



[OST1NES, or CHARLESTOWN, a consider 
able town in the island of Barbadoes.l 

OST1ONES, a port of the S. sea, in the pro- 
vince and government of Choco, and Nuevo Rey 
no de Granada, between the port of Buenaven 



tura and the point Arena. 

OST1TAN, SAN PEDRO DE, a small settlement 
or ward of the head settlement of the district of 
Moloacan, and alcaldia mayor of Acayuca, in Nu- 
eva Espana, close to the settlement of Iluaman- 
guillo. 

- OSTOGERON, a settlement of Indians of the 
province and colony of Pennsylvania, N. A merica ; 
situate on the shore of the e. arm of the river Sus- 
quehannah. 

OSTOTIPAC, or TEPIC, a province arid al 
caldia mayor of Nueva Galicia, and bishopric of 
Guadalaxara, in N. America. It is of limited 
extent and hot temperature, but abounding in 
cattle, and producing large crops of cotton, maize 
and coro, and plenty of salt, these being the ar 
ticles of its commerce. The capital is the settlement 
of the same name, inhabited by a large popula 
tion of Indians, Mustees, and Mulattoes, who live 
in the estates, and the ranches of its district ; it is 
100 miles to the w. one quarter to the n. w. of Gua 
dalaxara, in 104 45 long. 21 37 n. lat. The 
other settlements of this jurisdiction are reduced 
to the following : 

S. Sebastian, Mascota, Talpa. 

OSTOTIPAC, another settlement, of the jurisdic 
tion and alcaldia mayor of Olmnba in Nueva 
Espana; inhabited by 144 families of Indians, 
and being one league s. e. of its capital. 

OSTOTIPAC, another, with the dedicatory title 
of Santa Maria, in the head settlement of the dis 
trict and alcaldia mayor of Tepeaca in the same 
kingdom as the former. It contains only 13 fami 
lies of Indians, and is a league and an half from 
its capital. 

OSTOTIPAQUILLO, a jurisdiction and alcal 
dia mayor of the kingdom of Nueva Galicia, and bi 
shopric of Guadalaxara, in N. America, and the 
most reduced of any there, being equally without 
productions and inhabitants. It is of a hot tempera 
ture, and yields nothing but some sugar cane, of 
which honey, the only branch of its commerce, is 
made. Its population is reduced to the two settle 
ments of Cacalutla and San Francisco, besides the 
capital, which consists of 60 families of Indians. 
It is 25 leagues n. w. of the city of Guadalaxara. 
OSTOT1TLAN, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of To- 
luca in Nueva Espaua ; it contains 58 families of 
Indians, and is a little to the w. of its capital. 
3s 2 



500 

OSTOZINCO, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Acantepec, and alcaldia 
mayor of Tlapa, in Nueva Espana. It contains 50 
families of Indians, and is three leagues and a 
half from its head settlement. 

OSTRAS, Rio DE LAS, a river of the province 
and captainship of Rio Janeiro in Brazil, which 
runs s. s. e. and enters the sea opposite the isle of 
Anconi. 

OSTUA, a settlement of the head settlement 
and district of San Pedro de Metapas, and alcal 
dia mayor of Santa Ana, in the kingdom of Gua 
temala, annexed to the curacy of that head settle 
ment. 

OSTUMA, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district of Santiago Nunualco, in the pro 
vince and alcaldia mayor of San Vicente de Austria, 
and kingdom of Guatemala ; annexed to the cu 
racy of its head settlement. 

OSTUMCALCO, SAN JUAN DR, a principal 
and head settlement of the district of the alcaldia 
mayor and province of Quczaltenango in the 
kingdom of Guatemala. It contains in its dis 
trict 5200 Indians of the Quihe, Kazchiquel, and 
Zotohil nations, and was one of the doctrinal es 
tablishments of the religious order of San Fran- 



OTA 

them by the peace of 1763. It was delivered up 
to the United States, July 14, 1796. It is about 
110 miles e. by n. of Niagara, in lat. 43 23 n 



[OTABALO. SeeOxAVALo.J 

[OTAHA, oneof the Society islands in the S. Pa 
cific ocean, whose w. end is in lat. 16 26 s. and 
long. 151 30 w. It has two good harbours. See 
OHAMENE andO;iERUuu.A. 

OTAII1T1, or OTAHEITI, an island of the 
S. sea, which givfs name to various others, dis 
covered by the English captain, Samuel Wal- 
lis, in 1767, commander of the ship Dolphin, in 
the reign of George III. king of England, and for 
whom he took possession of it. 

The viceroy of Peru, Don Manuel Arval, sent 
the pilot, Don Joseph Amich, to reconnoitre these 
islands in 1772 ; but he being prevented from the 
badness of the weather to effect his object, the 
king determined to send some missionaries amongst 
these barbarians, to reduce them to the faith ; and 
accordingly, in 1774, there went out to this end 
the Fathers Geronirno, Clot, and Narciso Gonza 
lez, of the order of San Francisco, taking with 
them some Indians who had been 



CISCO. 



catechized and 

baptized at Lima; and these being established in 
the aforesaid island of Otahiti, which is the prin- 

[OSWEGATCH1E River and Lake, in Ilerke- cipal, remained there till 1775, when the Captain 
mer county, New York. The river empties into Don Cayetano arrived in the Aguila frigate with 

provisions for them; and then the missionaries 
finding that no troops were sent for their protec 
tion, determined to retire, after merely making a 
few observations respecting the islands, as to their 
productions and the manners of the natives ; and it 
is from their accounts that we shall relate the fol 
lowing particulars. 

These islands, it seems, are well peopled with 
infidels, and in each of them is a cacique or lord, 



New York. The river empties into 
the river St. Lawrence, or Catariqui. Oswegat- 
chie lake is about 19 miles long from s. w. to n.e. 
and two broad, and sends its waters n. e. into the 
river of its name. It is about 10 miles 5. e. of the 
Thousand lakes, near the entrance into lake Onta 
rio. There is a fort of the same name, situated on the 
Cataraqui river, 62 miles n. e. of Kingston on lake 
Ontario.] 

[OS W EG ATCII I ES, an Indian tribe residing at 
Swagatchey, on the river St. Lawrence, in Canada. 
They could furnish about 100 warriors 20 years 
since.] 



whom they style eriri ; also in the great islands are 
many subordinate to one superior, who is called 
eririattu. The temperature of them all is hot and 



[ OS W EGO, a navigable river of New York, moist, so that they are well covered with trees and 



which conveys the waters of Oneida and a number 
of small lakes, into lake Ontario. It is more 
commonly colled ONONDAGO ; which see.] 

OSWEGO, a fort of the English, built in the 
territory and country of the Iroquees Indians, on 
the ,9. shore of the lake Ontario, and at the entrance 
or mouth of the river Qnondago, or Oswego, 
where the former carry on a great commerce with 
the Indians in hides, giving in exchange all kinds 
of iron ware, brandy, and other articles ; which 
traffic begins in the month of May, and lasts till 
the end of July. [This fort was taken by the Bri 
tish from the French in 1756, and confirmed to 



shady ; they produce many cocos, plantains, names, 
and another fruit which serves as bread. They 
have swine and turkeys, and grow much sugar 
cane. 

The natives are corpulent and well made, of a 
brown mulatto colour, with long and crisp hair, 
which they anoint with oil of cocos. They go 
constantly naked, and wear only a swathe round 
the waist, passing one end between the thighs; the 
chiefs wear a small poncho or matted cloak of 
very fine palm, and some very delicate woven 
stuffs which the women make from the barks of 
trees, and of which specimens are to be seen iu the 



O T A H I T I. 



50J 



royal cabinet of natural history at this court. 
These Indians are pacific, cheerful, jovial, and do 
cile, manifest great genius in the building of their 
houses and canoes, and in the manufacture of their 
woven stuffs. They, however, use the barbarous 
custom of sacrificing to their false idols. Whilst 
the aforesaid missionaries were amongst them, the 
eriri fell sick, and to implore with greater success 
for his speedy recovery, they sacrificed to their 
deity four of their unfortunate prisoners. They 
form amongst themselves societies, wherein they 
mutually engage to stand by and assist each other 
in any difficulties ; but it is indispensable that those 
admitted should be without male children, and 
this ordinance has been the cause of parents conti 
nually putting their infant sons to death. 

[Otahiti consists of two peninsulas, which are 
connected by a low neck of land, about two miles 
over ; the circumference of both peninsulas is 
somewhat more than 90 miles. The whole island 
is surrounded by a reef of coral rocks, within which 
the shore forms several excellent bays and harbours, 
where there is room and depth of water for any num 
ber of the largest ships. The face of the country, 
except that part of it which borders upon the sea, 
is very uneven ; it rises in ridges that run up into 
the middle of the island, and there forms moun 
tains, that may be seen at the distance of 60 miles. 
Between these ridges and the sea is a border of low 
land, extending along all the coast, except in a 
few places, where the ridges rise directly from the 
sea. This border is of different breadths, but no 
\vhcre more than a mile and a half. There are se 
veral rivers much larger than could be expected 
from the extent of the island ; among the rocks 
through which these precipitate their waters from 
the mountains, not the least appearance of minerals 
is to be found. The stones shew evident tokens 
of having been burnt. Traces of fire are also ma 
nifest in the very clay upon the hills. It may 
therefore not unreasonably be supposed, that this 
and the neighbouring islands are either shattered 
remains of a continent, which were left behind 
when the rest was sunk by the explosion of a sub 
terraneous fire, or have been torn from rocks under 
the bed of the sea, by the same cause, and thrown 
up in heaps to an height which the waters never 
reach. The low lands between the foot of the 
ridges and the sea, and some of the interjacent 
valleys, are the only parts of the island that are in 
habited. Here indeed it is populous. The houses 
do not form villages or towns, but are ranged along 
the whole border, at the distance of about 50 yards 
from each other. 

When the island was first discovered, hogs, dogs, 



and poultry were the only tame animals; ducks, 
pigeons, paroquets, with a few other birds and rats, 
the only wild animals. The breed of hogs has been 
greatly improved by some of a larger kind, that 
were left by the Spaniards in 1774. Goats were 
first introduced by Captain Cook in 1773 ; to these 
the Spaniards have added some, and they are now 
in such plenty, that every chief of any note has 
them. Cats were left by Captain Cook, and Eu 
ropean dogs of several sorts by the Spaniards. In 
1777, the stock of new animals received the im 
portant addition of a turkey cock and hen ; a pea 
cock and hen ; a gander and three geese ; a drake 
and four ducks; a horse and roare; a bull and 
three cows. A bull and a ram had been also left 
by the Spaniards. Beasts of prey or noxious 
reptiles, there are none. 

The vegetable productions are bread-fruit, co 
coa-nuts, bannanas of 13 sorts, and all excellent ; 
plantains; a fruit resembling an apple; sweet pota 
toes, yams, and cocoas. 

The people exceed the middle size of Euro 
peans in stature. In their dispositions, notwith 
standing the charge of infanticide, before al 
leged against them ; they arc brave, open, and 
generous, without either suspicion or treachery. 
Except a few traces of natural cunning, and some 
traits of dissimulation, equally artless and inoffen 
sive, they possess the most perfect simplicity of 
character. Their actions are guided by the im 
mediate impulse of the reigning passion. Their 
passions are the genuine effusions of the heart, 
which they have never been taught to disguise or 
repress, and are therefore depictured by the strongest 
expressions of countenance and gesture. Their 
feelings are lively, but in no case permanent; they 
are affected by all the changesof the passing hour, 
and reflect the colour of the time, however fre 
quently it may vary. Their vivacity is never 
disturbed by anxiety or care, insomuch that when 
brought to the brink of the grave by disease, or 
when preparing to go to battle, their faces are un 
clouded by melancholy or serious reflection. Their 
language is soft and melodious ; it abounds with 
vowels, and is easily pronounced. It is rich in 
beautiful and figurative expressions, and admits of 
that inverted arrangement of words, which distin 
guishes the ancient from most modern languages, 
It is so copious, that for the bread-fruit alone they 
have above twenty names. Add to this, that be 
sides the common dialect, they often expostulate 
in a kind of stanza or recitative, which is answered 
in the same manner. 

The two peninsulas formerly made but one king 
dom. They are now divided into two, under the] 



502 



OTA 



[names of Opureanou or Otaheitenooe, and Tira- 
bou ; although Otoo, the sovereign of the former, 
still possesses a nominal superiority over the latter, 
and is styled king of the whole island. To him 
also the island of Eimeo is subject. These king 
doms are subdivided into districts, each with its 
respective chief. The number of inhabitants in 
1774 was estimated by Captain Cook at 204,000. 
Wars are frequent between the two kingdoms, and 
perhaps between separate districts of each. The 
inhabitants of Eimeo are often excited by some 
powerful chief to assert their independence. The 
power and strength of this and the neighbouring 
islands lie entirely in their navies; and all their de 
cisive battles are fought on the water. Otahiti 
alone is supposed to be able to send out 1720 war 
canoes, and 68,000 able men. The chief of each 
district superintends the equipping of the fleet in 
that district ; but they must all pass in review be 
fore the king, so that he knows the state of the whole 
before they assemble to go on service. Otahiti. lies 
in about 17 40 of s. lat. and 149 25 ofw. long.] 
The archipelago consists of 23 islands, the 
names of which are the following : 
S. Simon, Opija, 

S. Quintin, Tajaa, 

Todos Santos, Oyataa, 

Matutarua, Oagine, 

S. Cristoval, Tupa, 

Otahiti, Obayo, 

Morea, Guayope, 

Gerriia, Ayuayu, 

Tapuamanu, Atiu, 

Mavava, Tatupa, 

Tira, Quemaura. 

Paraporra, 

[OTAKOOTAI , or OK ATOOT A 1 A , a small island 
in the S. Pacific ocean, four leagues from Wateeoo, 
and about three miles in circuit. Lat. J9 50 s. 
Long. 15823 o&amp;gt;.]. 

OTALLUC, a river of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Ambato in the kingdom of Quito. It 
rises in the mountains of Avitahua, runs frornw. to 
s. and enters the Pastaza by the n. side, in lat. 
1 30 s. 

OTANAU1S, a barbarous nation of Indians, of 
the province and country of Las Amazonas, who 
dwell with many other nations on the shores of the 
river Napo. 

OTAO, a settlement of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Guarochiri in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Casta. 

OTAOS, a settlement of the missions which were 
held by the Jesuits in the province of Topia, and 
kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya. 



OTA 

OTATAI, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Marauan in Brazil. It rises near 
the coast, runs n. between the Grande de Paraguay 
and the Camindey, and enters the sea in the low 
coast. 

OTATITLAN, SAN ANDRES DE, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the district of Tlacotal- 
pan, and alcaldia mayor of Cozamaloapan, in 
Nueva Espana, at the distance of a league from 
the river Grande de Alvarado, in the middle of a 
lofty mountain. It contains 19 families of Indians 
and a beautiful temple, in which is venerated a mi 
raculous image of Christ crucified, with the same 
title as has the settlement ; and of which the fol 
lowing account is extant, namely, that more than 
170 years ago an Indian, who had cut a piece of 
cedar, was desirous of making a cross, and was 
looking out for a person who might undertake the 
work, together with the image of our Lord ; that 
there arrived at his house two handsome youths, 
who professed themselves sculptors, and offered to 
do what he required; that he put them into an 
apartment where the wood was, paid them for their 
hire, and left with them some food ; when, return 
ing the following day to see what they had done, 
he found to his surprise the youths flown, the 
money and the food untouched, and the image 
most beautifully and perfectly finished. This set 
tlement is 13 leagues e. of its head settlement. 

OTAVALO, a province and corregimiento of 
the kingdom of Quito; bounded e. by the moun 
tain of Cayambe, n. e. by that of the town of 
Ibarra, n. w. by Esmeraldas, and s. by the dis 
trict of the corregimiento of the city of Quito. It 
is 12 leagues long from n. w. to s. e. and running 
in width from s. to n. 

It is watered by the river Batan, which rises, as 
well as other different streams that fertilize it, in 
the mountains, and becoming united with the rest, 
forms the river Blanco. Although, as we have 
made appear, its territory is not of much extent, 
it is covered with cultivated estates and manufac 
tories where they make linens peculiar to the coun 
try, or, as they are sometimes called, tucuyos, car 
pets, quilts, and other articles, all of white cotton, 
the which are much esteemed throughout the 
kingdom. 

The mode of sowing the wheat and barley in 
this province is very singular, for instead of scat 
tering the seed they make small holes and pour in 
a certain quantity from their hands; a practice 
proved by experience amongst them to be very 
advantageous, and to yield from 100 to 150 grains 
for one. In the estates are enclosures for breeding 
horses, as also dairies 5 where they make a large por- 



OTA 



O T O 



503 



tion of cheese, to carry for sale to the other juris 
dictions. The pasture in these farms being very 
fine, and abounding in excellent cattle, and al 
though it is not in want of sheep, yet are these less 
common than other animals. 

In the territory of this province are two lakes, 
one of which is called S.Pablo, from a settlement of 
that name on its shore, the same being a league 
long, and half a league wide, and abounding in 
geese, herons, gatleretus or ducks, and covered with 
the reed called totora ; moreover receiving its wa 
ters from the mountain Mojanda, and having issue 
out from it one of the arms which form the river 
Blanco. The other lake, which is at a small 
distance off, is of the same size, and is called Cui- 
coch.i, from being upon the mountain of this name 
on a small table just before the extreme top of the 
said mountain. In the middle of this latter lake 
are two islands, in which breed many cuyes, or 
white rabbits, and deer, who swim from the island, 
and when pursued by the hunters, regain it for se 
curity in the same manner. In this lake are found 
some small fish no bigger than prawns and without 
scales : the Spaniards call them prenadiUas^ and 
esteem them so much that they are carried as a 
rarity to Quito for sale. 

The settlement of Cayambe, situate in the middle 
of an extensive llano, or plain, is backed by some 
lofty mountains of those cordilleras called Cayam- 
buro, which vie with Chimboraso, and are taller 
than any lying between that spot and Quito, from 
which place they are discernible. These moun 
tains being constantly covered with snow, make 
the temperature of the valley cold and unpleasant, 
assisted in no small degree by the strong winds 
which continually blow here. 

The inhabitants of this province are divided 
into the seven following settlements : 

Cayambe, San Pablo, 

Tabacundo, Tocache, 

Atontaqui, Urcuqui. 

Cotacache, 

The capital, which is the town and asiento of 
the same name, is in a fine situation, of a cold 
temperature, and abounding in cattle, with which 
it supplies the other settlements. The natives are 
rather inclined to the manufacture of cotton stuffs, 
in which they have a great trade, than to the cul 
tivation of the land. It has two parishes, and a 
good convent of the monks of San Francisco. Its 
population amounts to about 18 or 20,000 souls. 
[It is in lat. 13 3" n. and long. 78 5 w. It is 
30 miles n. e. of Quito, and 167 s. s. w. of Po- 
payan, on the royal road between those places.] 
OTAZj JESUS NAZARENQ J&amp;gt;E, a settlement of 



the province and government of Neiva in the 
Nuevo Key no de Granada, on the shore of a small 
river called Cano de Otaz. It is of the same tem 
perature, and produces the same fruits as the other 
settlements of this jurisdiction, but in less quantity, 
from the want of people, its inhabitants amount 
ing to only 40 Indians. 

The aforesaid river runs to s.s.w. and enters 
the Grande de la Magdalena, between those of 
Norte and Oro. 

[OTCH1ER, a bay on the n. coast of S. Ame 
rica, to the w. of the river or creek called Urano, 
and e. of cape Caldero.] 

OTEAPA, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district of Tenanzitlan, and nlc.aldia mayor 
of Acayuca,inNueva Espaiia, containing 69 fami 
lies of Indians. It is eight leagues to the e. one 
quarter to s. e. of its head settlement. 

[OTEAVANOOA, a large and spacious har 
bour and bay, on the s. w. coast of the island of 
Bolabola, one of the Society islands. Lat. 16 
18 s. Long. 151 43 .] 

OTEQUET, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chancay in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Iguari. 

OTER, a small river of the province and co 
lony of Virginia, which runs s.e. and enters the 
Staunton. 

OTER, a small island of the province of Georgia, 
one of those called the Georgian ; situate near that 
of Scabrouks. 

OTERREZfJCA, a settlement of the jurisdic 
tion of the Villa de Honda in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. 

OTHOVES, a barbarous nation of Indians, of 
the province and government of Louisiana in N. 
America, who dwell near the shores of the river 
Missouri. They are not numerous. 

[OT1SFIELD, a plantation in Cumberland 
county, district of Maine, e. of Bridgetown in 
York county. A stream from Songo pond passes 
through the w. part of this town, on its way to 
Sebago. It is very free of ragged hills and moun 
tains. The greatest part of it affords a growth of 
beech, maple, ash, bass, and birch, and is good 
land. It contains 197 inhabitants.] 

OTOCA, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Lucauas in Peru. 

OTQCTATA, a settlement of Indians, of the 
province and government of Louisiana in N.Ame 
rica, on the shore of the river Panis. 

[OTOGAMIES, an Indian nation in the 
N. W. territory, who inhabit between the lake 
of the Woods and Mississippi river. Its war 
riors amount to 300.] 



504 



O T O 



OTOLUA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Popayan in the Nuevo Key no de Gra-, 
nada, on the shore of a river at a small distance 
from the city of Bugn, to the n.w. and which river 
divides the settlement from this city. 

OTOMACOS, a nation of Indians, reduced, for 
the greater part, to the faith, and dwelling in the 
vicinity of the Orinoco and Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada. They are of such extravagant and rare 
customs in their natural state of gentilism, that they 
deserve particular note. At the first dawn of light 
they all start from their sleep, and begin distress 
ing cries and shouts for their dead, the which last 
till day-light ; and then they begin to dance and 
sing and amuse themselves till twelve at night, thus 
allowing themselves no more than three hours sleep. 
During the morning they go and throw themselves 
into the river, and then assemble at the doors of 
their captains, and there pick out those who are to 
go either fishing, or hunting on the mountains the 
wild-boars, or to employ themselves in tilling the 
ground ; after these are selected, the rest are al 
lowed to go and amuse themselves. 

It is truly curious to see them play at tennis ; 
their dexterity is wonderful, and some of them will 
throw themselves along the ground to meet the 
ball, and will repel it with their shoulder. This 
game is well ordered : they have regular umpires, 
and there is much betting on the two sides, or par 
ties, which regularly amount to 12 each. 

The women, in the mean time, occupy them 
selves in making very fine crockery-ware, and in 
weaving curious garments and nets, sacks, &amp;c. of 
hemp, or pita, which they procure from the Mau- 
riche, as also in making pavilions or tents to de 
fend them whilst asleep from the swarms of mos 
quitoes with which they are infested. About mid 
day they give over their labour, and also amuse 
themselves in||playing at ball, and with no less dex 
terity than their husbands. 

These Indians have, in their play, a way of cut 
ting and lacerating themselves with iron spikes to 
such a degree, that in order to stop themselves 
from bleeding to death they are obliged to plunge 
into the cold river, and will there fill up the wounds 
with sand ; a practice which, instead of being fatal 
to them, makes them robust and hardy. They are 
fond of eating earth ; and this food is, no doubt, 
prevented from being fatal to them through the 
quantity of oil or grease of the alligator, with which 
they mix it up. 

This is the only nation of Indians of this king 
dom who permit polygamy. The young men are 
forced to marry old widows, and the old men, on 
losing their wives, may marry young women ; 



O T O 

since they assert that it is madness to put two 
foolish unexperienced people together. 

These Indians were, formerly, very numerous 
and at constant war with the Caribes, until that 
these, aided by the Dutch, brought fire-arms into 
the field, when the Otomacos were so discomfited 
as to betake themselves to unknown and distant 
parts. 

They make their bread of certain roots, which 
they permit to putrefy in water, and then mix it 
up with^the earth and grease, as we have before ob 
served. This nation is bounded n. e. by the nation 
of the Paos, and n. w. by that of the Irauros. 
They began to be reduced to the Catholic faith bv 
the Jesuits in 1732. 

OTOM1ES, a nation of civilised Indians of 
Nueva Espaiia ; thus called as being descendants 
ofOtomiel, sixth son of Iztac Micuatl, a noble of 
the Seven Caves, and of one of the most numerous 
nations of that kingdom. 

They became united to the republic of Tlax- 
cala, when they fled from the war made against 
them by the emperor of Mexico, who wished to 
subject them to his dominion ; and when the same 
declared war against this republic, the greatest 
confidence was put in these Indians, and they 
were placed at the very frontiers of Mexico : also 
in reward for their services they were endowed 
with great honours, and the first families of Tlax- 
cala gave them their daughters to wife ; nor have 
the Mexicans been ever able to shake their alle 
giance to this republic. 

At the entrance of the Spaniards, they were in 
duced to serve in the conquest of that empire, and 
after this they changed their name from Otomies 
to Chichimccas. 

OTONCAPULCO, a small settlement of the 
province of Mexico and kingdom of Nueva Es- 
pana, where Cortes, after the fatigues of battle 
rested himself the night that he retired from 
Mexico, and where he afterwards constructed a 
temple, with the title of Nuestra Senora. See RE- 

MEDIOS. 

OTONTEPEC, SAN JUAN DF, a settlement of 
the head settlement of the district of Tautoyuca 
. and alcaldia mayor of Tampico, in Nueva Espaiia! 
It contains 69 families of Indians, and is 13 leagues 
w. of its head settlement. 

OTOPARI, a large river of the kingdom of 
Peru, which rises between the Inambari and Cn. 
cluvara, near the province of Paucartambo. It 
runs with different names for an infinite number of 
leagues through unknown countries of infidel In 
dians^ making one large curve, until that, direct 
ing its course to n. in the territory or country of 



O T T 

Las Amazonas, it enters the Maranon or Amazon 
by (wo arms. 

OTOPUN, a settlement of Indians, of the mis 
sions which are held by the religious order of S. 
Domingo, in the territory and district of the city 
of San Christoval, in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada ; situate on the shore of the river Apure. It 
is or an hot temperature, abounding in cacao ^ 
maize, i/ucas, and other fruits of a warm climate ; 
but of so small a population as to contain no more 
than 50 Indians. 

OTOQUE, a small island of the S. sea, in the 
gulf of Panama, near the point of Chame, on the 
coast of Tierra Firme. It is very delightful, and 
well cultivated with vegetable productions, and of 
an hot though healthy temperature. In lat. 8 37 
. Long. 79 25 w. 

OTOQUILLO, a small island of the same pro 
vince and kingdom as the former, and situate near 

O * 

to it. 

OTOTITLAN, a settlement of the missions 
which were held by the Jesuits, in the province of 
Topia and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya, on the 
shore of the river Tabala. 

[OTSEGO, a county of New York, on the s. 
side of Mohawk river, opposite the German flats. 
The head waters of Susquehannah, and the Cook- 
quago branch of Delaware, intersect this county. 
Here are also the lakes Otsego and Caniaderago, 
which send their waters, in an united stream, to 
the Susquehannah. It contains nine townships, 
viz. Kortright, Harpersfield, Franklin, Cherry 
Valley, Dorlach, Richfield, Otsego, Burlington, 
and Unadilla. It contained, a few years ago, 
about 1000 inhabitants ; but such has been the 
rapid settlement of this county, that in January 
1796 it contained 3237 inhabitants qualified to be 
electors. In 179 J, when this county was but 
thinly settled, as many as 300 chests of maple 
sugar were manufactured here, 4001bs. each. 
The courts arc held at Cooperstown in the town 
ship of Otsego.] 

[OTSEGO, a township and lake in the county 
above described. The township was taken from 
Unadilla, and incorporated in 1796. On the e. 
the township encloses lake Otsego, which sepa 
rates it from Cherry Valley. Lake Otsego is about 
nine miles long, and little more than a mile wide. 
The lands on its banks are very good, and the cul 
tivation of it easy. In 1790, it contained 1702 
inhabitants, including eight slaves. By the state 
census of 1796, there were 490 of its inhabitants 
electors.] 

[OTTAWAS, an Indian nation in the N. W. 
territory, who inhabit the e. side of lake Michigan, 

VOh. III. 



O T T 



505 



21 miles from Michilimackinack. Their hunting 
grounds lie between lakes Michigan and Huron. 
They could furnish 200 warriors 20 years ago. A 
tribe of these also lived near St. Joseph s, and had 
150 warriors. Another tribe lived with the Chip- 
pewas, on Saguinam bay, who together could 
raise 200 warriors. Two of these tribes, lately 
hostile, signed the treaty of peace with the United 
States, at Greenville, August 3d, 1795. In con 
sequence of lands ceded by them to the United 
States, government has agreed to pay them in 
goods, 1000 dollars a year, for ever.] 

[OTTAWAS, a large river of Canada, which 
empties into the St. Lawrence at the lake of the 
Two Mountains, ] 1 miles from Montreal. The 
communication of the city of Montreal with the 
high lands, by this river, if not impracticable, is 
at least very expensive and precarious, by reason 
of its rapids and falls.] 

[OTTER Bay, on the s. coast of the island of 
Newfoundland, is between Bear bay and Swift 
bay, and near cape Raye, the s. w. point of the 
island.] 

[OTTER Creek, called by the French Riviere i 
Lotris, a river of Vermont, which rises in Brom 
ley, and pursuing by its course aw. direction about 
90 miles, empties into lake Champlain at Ferris- 
burgh ; and in its course receives about 15 small 
tributary streams. In it are large falls at Rutland 1 
Pittsford, Middlebury, and Vergennes. Between 
the falls the water is deep and navigable for the 
largest boats. Vessels of any burden may go up 
to the falls at Vergennes, five miles from its mouth. 
The head of this river is not more than 30 feet 
from Batten kill, which runs in a contrary direc 
tion, and falls into Hudson s river. Its mouth is 
three miles n. of Bason harbour.] 

[OTTER Creek, a small stream which empties 
into Kentucky river, in the state of that name, and 
e, of Boonsborough.J 

[OTTER S Head, a small peninsula, projecting 
from the n. e. shore of lake Superior, and n. w. of 
Michipicoton island.] 

[OTTOES, Indians of N. America. They 
have no idea of an exclusive possession of any 
country, nor do they assign themselves any limits. 
It would appear that they would not object to the 
introduction of any well-disposed Indians; they 
treat the traders with respect and hospitality, gene 
rally. In their occupations of hunting and culti 
vation, they are the same with the Kanzas and 
Osage. They hunt on the Saline and JNimmehaw 
rivers, and in the plains w. of them. The coun 
try in which they hunt lies well ; it is extremely 
fertile and well watered ; that part of it which 
3 T 



506 



O T Z 



borders on the Nimmeluuv and Missouri possesses 
a good portion of timber: population rather in 
creasing. They have always resided near the place 
where their village is situated, and are the descen 
dants of the Missouris. j 

OTUM[&amp;gt;A, a province and alcaldia mayor of 
Nucva Espana, and one of the smallest and poor 
est, although formerly one of the richest, from the 
abundance of cochineal which was found here. 
Its jurisdiction consists of three settlements, name 
ly, Goatlanzinco, Axapusco, Ostotipac, and some 
wards or small settlements annexed to them. 

The capital is of the same name, formerly a 
large and good town, as may be seen by the re 
mains and ruins of its walls. It consists now of 
only 10 or 12 houses of Spanish families, and 406 
of Indians, employed in cultivating maize, barley, 
and other seeds ; as also in the breeding of pigs. 
It has a convent of the religious order of San Fran 
cisco, governed by the curate until that it was 
resigned to some nuns. The water was brought to 
the town by an aqueduct, made at great expence 
and with much art, a work which proved thai this 
jurisdiction was formerly capable of going to a 
great expence. In the middle of the chief square 
is a pyramidical stone, remarkable for its height, as 
being of only one piece. 

This town is the place where the viceroys resign 
the staff and the command to the successor, and on 
this occasion it is thronged with all the prelates and 
chiefs who come to compliment their new master ; 
and indeed, this is the only time that it can be said 
to be inhabited, as it is in itself one of the most 
barren and unpeopled towns of the kingdom. 
Twenty-six miles n. e. of Mexico, in long. 98 
44 o&amp;gt;. Lat. 1940 30". 

OTUMBA, a beautiful and extensive valley of 
the former province, celebrated for the victory 
which was gained by Ilernan Cortes against the 
whole power of the Mexican empire, when this 
was obliged to retreat from that court, and re-esta 
blish itself in Tlaxcala. It is at the foot of some 
very lofty mountains which give it its name. 

OTUSCO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Caxamarca la Grande in Peru. 

OTUSTLA, a settlement of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Chiapa in the kingdom of Gua 
temala, of the district of that city. 

OTUTO, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Guamachuco in Peru, at the source 
of the river Bamba. 

OTZANDERKET, a small lake of Canada, 
between the salt lakes and the river Femmes- 
Hlanches. 

OT/OLOTEPEC, S. BARTOLOWE DE, a set- 



O T Z 

tlement and head settlement of the district of the 
cJcaldia mat/or of Metepec in Nueva Espana. It 
contains S80 families of Indians, and is the head 
of the curacy, to which as many other Indians are 
annexed. Three leagues s. e.of its capital. 

OTZOLOTEPTC, another settlement, with the 
dedicatory title of Santa Maria, which is the head 
settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Miahuatlan, in the same kingdom ; of a cold and 
moist temperature from being in the sierra. It 
contains 970 families of Indians, including those 
of its wards, who cultivate maize and other seeds, 
although its principal trade is in cochineal. Eigh 
teen leagues s. e, of its capital. 

OTZOLOTEPKC, another, of the head settlement 
of the district of Puxrnecatan, and alcaldia mayor 
ofVillalta, in the same kingdom; containing 10 
families of Indians. Twenty-six leagues from its 
capital. 

OTZOLOTEPF.C, another, with the dedicatory 
title of San Juan, the head settlement of the dis 
trict of the alcaldia mayor of Miahuatan ; situate 
in the sierra. Thirty leagues from the capital. 

OTZOLOTEPEC, another, with the dedicatory 
title of Santa Maria, the head settlement of the 
district of the alcaldia mayor of Antequera, in the 
province and bishopric of Oaxaca in Nueva Es 
pana. It contains 30 families of Indians, who 
live by cultivating cochineal, wheat, and other 
seeds, for commerce. Thirty leagues e. s. e. of its 
capital. 

OTZULUMA, SANTA MARIA I&amp;gt;F,, a settle 
ment and head settlement of the district- and alcal 
dia mayor of Tampico in Nueva Espana ; of a 
dry and hot temperature. It contains a convent 
of the order of San Francisco, and its population 
is composed of 214 families of Guastecos Indians, 
and 62 of Mulattoes, whosow maize, and breed some 
large cattle, of which they make dried meat, their 
only article of trade, save that of the same catl e 
alive, which they take annually to sell in the neigh 
bouring jurisdictions, and from the product of 
which they procure themselves such articles as 
they may require, and which their territory docs 
not afford. 

This part of the country is much infested with 
poisonous insects, no place more so. Here ( jire 
three cultivated estates and grazing tarm8*for\ targe 
cattle ; and formerly it used to buy .quantities pf 
salt brought in the vessels from Campeehe, with 
which to cure their fish and meats ; but this system 
of trade has gone to decay from the very we.fe;&amp;lt;!&amp;ed 
price of the salt, and since the coast here affords 
none. Fourteen leagues . zcvof its, capita^ and 80 
from Mexico. 



O U A 

fOUABASH. See WABASH River.] 

O DACHAS, a lake of the province and govern 
ment of Louisiana in N. America, on the coast 
and island formed by the rivers Mississippi and 
Chetimachas. It empties itself into the sea by two 
mouths near (he bay of Ascension. 

OUACHETAS, a river of the same province 
and government as the former lake. It rises from 
another lake, between the river Negro and Missis 
sippi, runsy. and turning w. with many windings, 
cnfcrs the former river. 

OUADEBA, a river of the same province and 
government as the former settlement. It rises from 
three lakes to the s. of lake Superior, runs w. and 
turning its course to s. w. enters the Mississippi. 

OUADEUAMENISSOUTE, or River of ST. 
PETER, in the same province and government as 
the former. It rises from cape Tinton, runs ^. 
and enters the Verde or Green river. 

OUADOUGEOUNATON, a settlement of In 
dians of the province and government of Louisiana, 
in the territory of the Sioux of the West. 

OUAGARON, a river of the province and 
country of the Iroquees Indians in Canada, which 
runs s. and enters the Catarakuy. 

OUAINCO, a settlement of Indians of the pro* 
vince and government of Louisiana in N. Ame 
rica ; situate on the shore of Rouge river. 

[OUAIS S Bay and River are about two 
leagues round the n. point of the island of Cape 
Breton, in the gulf of St. Lawrence, ad s. s. w. 
of the island of Limbach.] 

[OUANAM1NTHE, a French parish and vil 
lage on the n. side of the island of St. Domingo, 
about a league and a half w. of Daxabon, in the 
Spanish part, from which it is separated by the 
river Massacre, six leagues from the mouth of the 
river, and five s. e. of fort Dauphin.] 

OUANAR1, a river of the province of Gua- 
yana or Nueva Andalucia, in the French posses 
sions. It enters the sea between the Aprobague 
and the Oyapoco. 

OUANARI, some mountains of this province, 
which run as far as the sea-coast. 

OUANDO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. 

OUAOUACHE, a river of Canada in N. Ame- 
callcd also S. Gerome and Handsome river. 



QUA 



50? 



nca 



It is the Ohio, and was discovered by the Fathers 
Marquete and San Joliet, Frenchmen, of the 
abolished order of Jesuits, in 1673, they having 
been the first who navigated it. 
OUAPITOUGAN, an island of the gulf of St. 



Lawrence-, near the coast of the country and land 
of Labrador. 

[OUAQUAPI1ENOGAW, or EKANPAXO&amp;A, 
is a lake or rather marsh, between Flint and Oak- 
mulgee rivers in Georgia, and is nearly 300 miles 
in circumference. Jn wet seasons it appears like 
an inland sea, and has several large islands of rich 
land ; one of which the present generation of Creole 
Indians represent as the most blissful spot on earth. 
They say it is inhabited by a peculiar race of In 
dians, whose women are incomparably beautiful. 
They tell that this terrestrial paradise has been seen 
by some enterprising hunters, when in pursuit 
of their game, who being lost in inextricable 
swamps and bogs, and on the point of perishing, 
were unexpectedly relieved by a company of beau 
tiful women, whom they call Daughters of the 
Sun, who kindly gave them such provisions as 
they had with then), consisting of fruit and corn 
cakes, and then enjoined them to fly for safety to 
their own country, because their husbands were 
fierce men and cruel to strangers. They further 
say, that these hunters had a view of their setlle- 
ments, situated on the elevated banks of an island, 
in a beautiful lake ; but in all their endeavours to 
approach it, they were involved in perpetual laby 
rinths, and, like enchanted land, still as they ima 
gined they had just gained it, it seemed to fly 
before them ; and having quitted the delusive pur 
suit, they with much ditliculty effected a retreat. 
They tell another story concerning this sequestered 
country, which seems not improbable, which is, 
that the inhabitants are the posterity of a fugitive 
remnant of the ancient Yamases, who escaped 
massacre after a bloody and decisive battle between 
them and the Creeks, (who it is certain conquered 
and nearly exterminated that once powerful peo 
ple), and here found an asylum remote and se 
cure from the fury of their proud conquerors. The 
rivers St. Mary and Sitilla, which fall into the 
Atlantic, and the beautiful Little St. Juan, which 
empties into the bay of Appalachi at St. Mark s, 
are said, by Bartram, to flow from this lake.] 

OUAQUEZUP1, a river of the province and 
captainship of Marauan in Brazil, which flows 
down from the mountains of the w. and runs e. 
until it enters the Miari. Near its source dwell 
some barbarian Tocantines Indians, and in its 
vicinity are cultivated sugar-canes, of which sugar 
is made here. 

OUARABICHE, a rapid river of the province 

of Nueva Andalucia, which runs from e. tow. 

passing through the country inhabited by the 

Saimagoes Indians, and after a course of 25 

3x2 



508 



CUE 



leagues becomes divided into two arms, which 
branch into 20 or more, entering the Atlantic sea, 
opposite the cape or fort Gallo, of the island of 
Trinidad, in kit. 9 49 n. 

OUARIPANA, a river of the province and 
country of Las Ama/onas, and part possessed by 
the Portuguese. It rises in the territory of the 
Moruas Indians, runs e. and turning its course to 
5. s. e. enters the Marailon, between those of Iru- 
pura and Putumayo, very near the settlement of 
San Christoval. 

OUAS, a settlement of the province and for- 
regimiento of Guamalies in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Puchas. 

OUASA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Guayana, in the part possessed by the 
French. It enters the Couripi. 

[OUAS1OTO Mountains are situated n. w. of 
the Laurel mountains in Virginia. They are 50 
or CO miles wide at the gap, and 450 in length n\ e. 
and s. w. They abound in coal, lime, and free 
stone. Their summits are generally covered with 
good soil, and a variety of timber, and the inter 
vale lands are well watered.] 

OUATESAOU, a small river of the country or 
land of Labrador, which runs s. between the Sal 
mon and Misina rivers, and enters the sea in the 
gulf of S. Lawrence. 

OUATIROU, a settlement of the island of Ja 
maica ; situate in the bay of Kozo, with a good 
tort. The French, under Mr. Ducase, took it 
after great resistance, from the English, in 1694. 

OUEJAS, Rio DI; LAS, a river in the province 
and government of Buenos Ay res. It is an arm 
of the river Salado, which issues from the lake of 
Christal, runs s. s. e. and enters the Parana. 

OUEJAS, another river, in the province and go 
vernment of Popayan, and Nuevo Hey no de Gra 
nada, which rises near the city of Cali, and enters 
the Grande de la Magdalena, although Mr. Bellin 
asserts that it enters the Cauca. 

OUELLE, a small river of Canada in N. 
America, which rises from a small lake, runs 10. 
and enters the S. Lawrence. 

[It has its source in mountains to the s. and 
falls into the aforesaid river, near 100 miles below 
Quebec. For several miles before it joins the St. 
Lawrence, it runs through a level and very fertile 
country ; and the tide flows up for a considerable 
way, so as to make it navigable for small vessels. 
This district is well cultivated, and very populous. 
The neighbouring parishes of Kamouraska and 
St. Ann s are also populous, and well cultivated. 

The configuration of this part of the country is 
very curious. In the middle of rich plains you 



GUI 

see a number of small hills covered with wood ; 
they rise like so many rocks in the ocean. On 
approaching and examining them narrowly, you 
find that they are literally bare rocks, of primitive 
granite, full of fissures, in which pine trees hare 
taken root, and grown to a considerable size, so as 
to cover the rocks. It is probable the great river 
at some former period covered this part of the 
country, when these hills were so many islands ; 
and that the rich soil which now surrounds them, 
is a deposition from its waters. The probability 
of this conjecture is strengthened by the circum 
stance, that the islands of Kamouratfka, still insu 
lated only at high water, resemble in every re 
spect the rocky hills surrounded by the lertile 
fields."] 

[OUEPAS, a town on the coast of Costa Rica, 
on the N. Pacific ocean, and s. of Carthago.] 

O UETACAR ES, a barbarous nation of Indians of 
the kingdom of Brazil, who wander aboutthe woods 
and mountains. They are ferocious, cruel, and of 
terrible aspect, entirely naked, both men and women 
cannibals, and have a language entirely different 
from any other nation of that kingdom, with all 
of whom they are at continual war. Their hatred 
to the Portuguese isinveterate, notwithstandingthey 
have some commercial dealings with them ; but on 
these occasions both parties meet armed, and all that 
can be said in favour of these Indians is, that they 
are faithful to their engagements. 

[OU1ATANON, a small stockaded fort in the 
N. W. territory, on the zo. side of the Wabash 
river, in lat. 40 20 ti. and long. 86 28 ro. and 
said to be about 120 miles s. w. effort St. Joseph. 
This was formerly a French post. Thus far the 
Wabash is navigable 4 12 miles from its mouth, 
including its windings, for bat-tea ux drawing three 
feet water. A silver mine has been discovered 
here. The neighbouring Indians are the Kicfca- 
poos, Musquitons, Pyankishaws, and n principal 
part of the Ouiatanons. The whole of these tribes 
could furnish, about 20 years ago, 1000 warriors. 
The fertility of soil and diversity of timber in this 
country are the same as in the vicinity of post St. 
Vincent.] 

OUIGNES, Bay of, in the island of S, Chris 
topher, one of the Antilles, on the n. w. coast, and 
in the part possessed by the French be-fore that 
the island was ceded to the English. It lies be 
tween the cape Enrage and the bay of Papillons. 

[OUINEASKE or SHELBUUNE Bay, on the 
e. side of lake Champlain, sets up s. e. through 
the town of Burlington, in Vermont, into the n. 
part of Shelburne.] 

[OU1SCONS1NG, a navigable river of the 



OUR 

N. W. territory, which empties into the Missis 
sippi, in lat. 41 56 and long. 89 45 , where are 
villages of the Sack and Fox tribes of Indians. 
This river has a communication with Fox river, 
which, passing through Winnebago lake, enters 
Puan bay in lake Michigan. Between the two 
rivers there is a portage of only two miles. On 
this river and its branches reside the Indians of its 
name. Warriors 300.] 

OUITCHAGENE, a small lake of New 
France or Canada, in the country of the Petit 
Mustassins Indians. 

OULAMAN1TIE, a small river of the same 
province as the former, which runs w. between 
those of Bucies and Margurite, and enters the lake 
Michigan. 

[OULIONT, a village of the state of New 
York, on the post-road from Hudson to the 
Painted post. It is 27 miles w. of Delaware, and 
37 n. e. of Union, on Susquehannah river, and 
lies on the n. side of a creek of its name which 
empties into Unaclilla river.] 

OUMACHIS, a small river, also of the same 
province as the former, in the country and terri 
tory of the Algenovins Indians. It runs s. e. and 
enters the lake S. Peter, formed by the river S. 
Lawrence. ^ 

OUMAM1S, a nation of Indians of Canada in 
N. America. 

OUMAN1OUETS, a small lake of the same 
province, formed from the waste-waters of the 
rivers Beauharnois and Miskovaskane. 

OUM.AS, a barbarous nation of Indians of New 
France or Canada, who dwell two leagues from 
the part where the Mississippi divides itself. Its 
natives are very well disposed to the French. 

OURAMANI, a river of the province of Vir 
ginia in N. America. It runs w. and enters the 
Illinois. On its shores copper mines have been 
discovered. 

OURANGABENA, a lake of Canada, on the 
confines of Nova Scotia ; formed from the river S. 
Francis, and entering the S. George. 

OURO, CORIGO DE, a village or settlement of 
the Portuguese, in the kingdom of Brazil ; situate 
on the shore of the river Manuel Alz, not far 
from the Tocantincs. 

OURO, a river in the same district as the former 
settlement. It is small, rises near that of Manuel 
Alz, runs nearly due w. and enters the Tocantines 
close to the settlement of its name. 

OURS, or BEARS, Cape of the, on the s. coast 
of the island of S. John, of Nova Scotia. 

OURS, some mountains or cordilleras of the 
2 



O U Y 



509 



province and government of Louisiana, which 
run from w, to e. fromthe shore of the Mississippi ; 
so called from abounding in bears. 

OURS, a river of the province of N. Carolina. 
It is small, runs in a serpentine course s. w. and 
enters the Pelisipi. 

OURS, another, a small river of Canada, which 
runs n. e. then turns s. e. and enters the lake Erie. 

[ OURS, a bay, with the additional title of Blancs, 
on the s. coast of Newfoundland, towards the w. 
extremity. See BCAR Cove.] 

OURS, a port of the province of Nova Scotia 
or Acadia in N. America. 

OUTAGAMIS, a barbarous nation of Indians 
of Canada in N. America. They were of ferocious 
customs, and interrupted the commerce between 
the French and the other nations. They are also 
called Fox Indians, and were begun to be won 
over to the English by the Iroquees. They made 
war against the French in 17 IS, besieging a fort 
which these had in the part called the Strait, the 
commander of which was Mr. du Buisson, who 
manifested such resistance against their attack 
that they were at last obliged to sue for peace, 
through the numbers they had lost. At the pre 
sent day they are almost extinct. 

OUTAGAMIS, a river of Canada in N. America. 
It runs through the country of the Indians of its 
name, expanding itself as wide as a lake, and 
enters another river called Kitchigamini. 

OUTARDES, a river of New Britain or country 
of Labrador in N. America. It is large, rises 
from a small lake, and enters the river S. Law 
rence. 

OUTAUES, a nation of Indians, of the same 
country as the former, almost entirely destroyed 
by the Iroquees ; and the few remaining wander 
about on the shores of the Mississippi. They were 
reduced to the Catholic religion by the Fathers 
Urevilletes and Garreau, Frenchmen, of the so- 
society of the Jesuits, in 1656. 

[OUTER Buoy, in Hudson s bay, lies in lat. 
51 38 n. and five miles e. of N. bluff.] 

[OUTER Island, on the coast of Labrador, is 
in the cluster called St. Augustin s Square ; s. w. 
of Sandy island, and e. of Inner island.] 

[OUTIMACS, a tribe of Indians in the N. W. 
territory, residing between lakes Michigan and 
St. Clair. Warriors 200.] 

OUYAPE, a settlement of Indians of the pro 
vince and government of Louisiana, on the shore 
of the river Mississippi ; 550 leagues from the mouth 
or entrance of which the French have a fort for 
their defence. 



510 



O W H 



[OU YATOISKA Bay and River, on the coast of 
Esquimaux, or n. shore of the gulf S. Lawrence, 
is to the w. of Natnchqtioin river. 1 

[OTEN S-MOUTH Bay, in "the district of 
Muine, lies on the s. side of Booth-bay township, 
in Lincoln county, 12 miles from the shire town.] 

[OY^ID, a township of New York, in Onon- 
dago county. It was incorporated in 1794; is se 
parated from Milton on the r. by Cayuga lake, 
and comprehends all the lands in the county on 
the i&amp;gt;. side of Seneca lake. The centre of the 
township is 20 miles s. of the re 1 , side of the ferry 
on Cayuga lake. In 1796, there were 107 of its 
inhabitants qualified to be electors.] 

[OWASCO, a lake, partly in the towns of 
Aurelius and Scipio, in Onondago county, New 
York. It is about 10 miles long and one broad, 
and communicates with Seneca river on the n. 
by a stream which runs through the town of Bru 
tus. The high road from Kaat s kill w. passes 
towards Cayuga ferry, near the n. end of the 
lake.] 

[OWEGO, a post-town in Tioga county, New 
York, on the e. branch of the Snsquehammh, 14 
miles o&amp;gt;. of Union, 30 n. e. of Athens, at Tioga 
point, and 144 from Philadelphia. In 1796, 170 
of its inhabitants were electors.] 

[OWEGO Creek, in Tioga county, serves as the 
e. boundary of the township of its name. It has 
several small branches which unite and empty 
through the n. bank of the w. branch of Susqne- 
hannah river, about 18| miles w. of the mouth of 
Chenengo river.] 

OWENDOES, a settlement of Indians of- Ca 
nada in N. America, on the shore of the river 
Bever. Here the English had an establishment, 
one of the first formed by them on the Ohio. 

[OWHARREE, a harbour on the n. part of 
the w. coast of Houaheine, one of the Society 
islands, 25 leagues n. w. by a\ of Otaheite island. 
Lat. 16 44 s. Long. 151 5 w.] 

[OWHYHEE, the largest of the Sandwich 
islands, is about 300 miles in circumference; be 
tween 18 40 and 20 20 n. lat. and between 
154 50 and 156* 10 w. long, from Greenwich. 
The extensive mountain, named Mouna Roa, on 
the s. e. part of the island, is 16,OJO feet high. 
It consists of three peaks which are perpetually 
covered with snow, (though within the tropics), 
that are visible 40 leagues out at sea. At the s. 
end of the island is a village called Kaoo-A-poona, 
on thes. c. side ; Ahcedoo is on the n. e. part of the 
island, Amakooa on the n. end, Tirooa on the 
. w. side, where is the bay of Toyahyab, and on 



O X I 

the w. side, n. w. of Kaoo, is the bay of Kara-ka- 
kooa. It has the same productions as the Society 
and Friendly islands^ and about 150,000 inhabi 
tants, who are naturally mild, friendly, and hos 
pitable to strangers. The sea abounds with a great 
variety of excellent fish. The celebrated naviga 
tor Capt. James Cook lost his life here, by an un 
fortunate and momentary jealousy of the natives.] 
[OWL S HEAD, a head-land on the w. side of 
Penobscot bay, in the district of Maine. It has 
a good harbour on the larboard hand as you go to 
the e. The harbour makes with a deep cove ; has 
four fathoms water, and muddy bottom. It is 
open to the e. to n. and e. n. e. winds ; but in all 
other winds you are safe. The tide of flood sets 
to the e. and the tide of ebb .?. a?, through the 
Muscle ridges.] 

fOX, a river of Louisiana. See RED River.] 
[OXBOW, GREAT, a bend of the river Con 
necticut, about the middle of the township of NEW- 
BUR Y, in Vermont, which see. It contains 450 
acres of the finest meadow-land in New England.] 
[OXFORD, a township in Worcester county, 
Massachusetts. It contains 1000 inhabitants ; is 
12 miles s. of Worcester, and 44 s. w. of Boston.] 
[OXFORD, a village in Bristol county, Massa 
chusetts. See NEW BEDFORD.] 

[OXFORD, a parish in the n. part of Derby in 
Connecticut, containing 140 families. Seventeen 
miles n. TO. of Newhaven.] 

[OXFORD, a post-town of New York, in Tioga 
county, 22 miles n. e. of Union, and 16 to. of 
Butternuts. This township lies between Jericho and 
Union, and is bounded n. on Norwich, and w. by 
the tract called the Chenengo triangle. It was in 
corporated in 1793. Here is an incorporated aca 
demy.] 

[OXFORD, a township of New Jersey ; situated 
in Sussex county, on the e. bank of Delaware 
river, 13 miles n. e. of Easton in Pennsylvania. 
It contains 1905 inhabitants, including 65 slaves.] 
[OXFORD, a township of Pennsylvania; situated 
in Philadelphia county. There is one of the same 
name in Chester county.] 

[OXFORD, a port of entry, on the e. shore of 
Chesapeak bay, in Talbot county. Its exports in 
1794 amounted to 6956 dollars. It is 12 miles s. 
of Easton, and about 47 s. e. of Baltimore.] 

[OXFORD, a small post-town of N. Carolina, 
30 miles from Hillsborough.] 

OX1BA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Guayaquil in the kingdom of Quito. It 
also takes the names of Caluma and Caracol from 
the settlements through which it passes. 



O Y A 

OX1TLAN, SAN LUCAS DE, a settlement and 
head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor 
of Teutitla in Nueva Espana ; of a hot tompe- 
rature. It contains 60 families of Indians, who 
trade in cotton and cainilla^ and is JO leagues s. 
of its capital. 

OYA, a settlement of the kingdom of Nueva 
Vizcaya in N. America ; situate near the garrison 
of Conch os. 

OYAC, a river of the province and government 
of Guayana, in the French possessions. 

OYACACIII, a small and poor settlement of 
Indians of the kingdom of Quito; situate on the 
w. shore of the river Suno ; annexed to the curacy 
of the settlement of Quinche. It is celebrated for 
a wonderful image of our Lady, the devotion of 
which began from the fame of its miracles in 1591. 
This image was removed to Quinche in 1640. 
The climate of Oyacachi is cold and moist; si 
tuate amongst woods almost uninhabitable ; and 
the few Indians residing iu it gain their livelihood 
by sawing planks, which they carry tosell at Cay- 
amba and the other immediate settlements. In 
. lat. 10 7" s.. 

OYACATLA, a settlement of Indians of the 
province of Misteca in Nueva Espana, in the time 
of the Indian gentilism, but now not existing. 

OYADA1BUISC, SANTIAGO DE, a settlement 
of the province and government of Sonora in N. 
America ; situate in the country of the Cocomari- 
eopas Indians, on the shore of the grand river 
Gila, between the town of San Felipe and the set 
tlement of S. Simon de Tucsani. 

OYAMBARO, a settlement of the kingdom of 
Quito, on the liana or plain of Yaruqui. 

OYAPAPU, or ORAPAPU, a small river of the 
province and government of Guayana,. which runs 
e. and enters the Aruy. 

OYAPO, a river of the same province and go 
vernment as the former, in the part occupied by 
the French. 

OYAPOC, a river of the same province as the 
former, ia the district of the French, who have 
built a fort on its shore, called S. Luis. Some 
geographers wrongly confound this river with that 
of Vicente Pinzon. It is one of the largest rivers 
in that territory, and enters the sea in a kind of 
bay of four leagues wide, and into which other ri 
vers also flow. The point which forms the bay 
on the e. side is called Cape Orange, which is 
distinguished at a great distance off. This river is 
two leagues wide at its mouth, and there is an 
chorage of four fathoms. At the distance of one 
league from its entrauce is an island, called De 



O Y S 



511 



Biches, which is covered at high tides, and to go 
up the river you pass to the w. of it, the other side 
not being navigable on account of the sand banks 
there. Six leagues up the river is a bay or port, 
where very near the shore there is six fathoms of 
water, and where is the fort of which we have 
spoken, built in 1726. The territory in its vici 
nity is very fertile and well cultivated. The Dutch 
established themselves there in 1676, and the 
French were some time before they drove them 
out. Three leagues from the island are other 
small isles, and from thence the river becomes gra 
dually narrower and shallower, until it is scarcely 
more than seven or eight feet deep. 

OYAPOC, a settlement of the French, in the same 
province, and on the shore of the former river. 

OYES, or GEESE, River of the, in the county 
of Lunenburgh, of the province of Virginia, to the 
s. e. It is small and enters the Staunton. 

OYES, an island in the gulf of S. Lawrence, at 
the entrance, close to the point of Raye, of the s. 
coast of Newfoundland. 

OYOLO, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Parinacochas in Peru. 

OYON, a settlement of the province and c.or- 
regimiento of Caxatambo, in the same kingdom as 
the former ; annexed to the curacy of Churin. 

[0-YONG-YVONGEYK, on lake Ontario, 
at Johnson s landing-place, about four miles e. of 
fort Niagara.] 

[OYSTER BAY, a township of New York ; 
situated in Queen s county, Long island, extend 
ing from the sound s&amp;gt; to the Atlantic ocean, and 
includes Lloyd s neck, or Queen s village, and 
Hog s island. It contains 4097 inhabitants, of 
whom 611 are electors, and 381 slaves.] 

[OYSTEU Bay, a harbour for small vessels in the 
s. w. limits of the town of BARNSTABLE, in Barn- 
stable county, Massachusets; which see. It affords 
excellent oysters ; hence its name.] 

[OYSTER Beds, in Delaware bay, lie opposite 
Nantuxet bay.] 

[OYSTER Point, on the coast of S. Carolina, 
where the water does not ebb till an hour and a 
half after it begins to ebb at the bar of Ashley 
river, near Charlestown. It is best to go in ail 
hour and an half before high water.] 

[OYSTER Pond, a part of the waters of the At 
lantic ocean, which set up w-. into Long island, in 
the state of New York, between,the n. easternmost 
point of the island called Oyster Pond Point, and 
Gardner s island. Off the point are two small 
isles, one of which is called Plumb Island.] 

[OYSTER River, a w. branch of PISCATAQUA 



O Z I 

river in New Hampshire; which see. Durham 
stands on its s. side, near its junction with the 
main stream at Helton s point.] 

[OZAMA, one of the largest rivers of the island 
of St. Domingo in the W. Indies, and on which 
the city of St. Domingo is situated. It is navi 
gable nine or 10 leagues from s. ton. One may 
judge of the enormous volume of water which the 
continent stream of Isabella and O/ama sends to 
the sea, by the red colour it gives it in the time of 
the floods, and which is perceivable as far as the 
eye can distinguish. There is a rock at the mouth 
which prevents the entrance of vessels drawing 
more than 18 or 20 feet of water. The river for a 
league is 24 feet deep ; and its banks are 20 feet 
perpendicular ; but n. of the city this height is 
reduced to four feet. This real natural bason has 
a bottom of mud or soft sand, with a number of 
careening places. It seldom overflows its banks, 
except in very extraordinary inundations. The 
road before the mouth of the Ozama is very indif 
ferent, and lies exposed from a&amp;gt;. 5. w. to e. It is 
impossible to anchor in it in the time of the s. 
winds ; and the n. winds drive the vessels from 
their moorings out into the sea, which here runs 
extremely high. Sec DOMINGO City. The mouth 
of the river is in lat. 18 18 n. and long. 72 38 w. 
from Paris.] 

OZAMA, a large and abundant river of the island 
S. Domingo, which rises in the mountains, runs w. 
and enters the sea, having at its mouth the capital 
of the island. 

OZCOT1CA, a settlement of Indians of the 
kingdom of Nueva Espana, in the time of the gen 
tilism of the Indians, but no longer existing. It 
was one of those destined to maintain the provi 
sions of the Casa Real. 

OZELOTLAN, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Chinameca, and alcaldia 
mayor of the province of San Miguel, in the king 
dom of Guatemala ; annexed to the curacy of that 
head settlement. 

OZICALA, SAN T JUAN DE, a very considerable 
head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor 
of San Miguel in the kingdom of Guatemala, its 
district consists of 1450 Indians of the nations Ulua 
and Popoluca, the which are divided into nine 
settlements. 

OZIER, a port of the coast of the river Missis 
sippi in the province and government of Louisiana; 
discovered by Hernando de Soto, conqueror of 
Florida, in 1541. 



O Z U 

OZIERS, Isles of, situate near the coast of the 
river S. Lawrence in Canada. They are many, and 
all small, at the mouth of the river Des Outardes. 

OZOCOTLAN, a settlement of the province 
and kingdom of Guatemala. 

OZOGOCIIE, a river of the province and cor- 
regimienlo of Alausi in the kingdom of Quito. It 
ris~es from the lake Mactallan, runs n. and uniting 
itself with the Guamote, in lat. 1 54 s. forms 
the Achambo, receiving first the waters of the lake 
Colay-cocha. Its waters then proceed to fertilize 
the province of Riobamba. 

OZOMATLAN, a settlement of the alcaldia 
mat/or of Tixtlan in Nueva Espana ; situate on 
the other side of the river of Las Balzas. It con 
tains 48 families of Indians, and is one league from 
the settlement of Hostotipan. 

OZTLOTLAUCHAN, a settlement of the 
kingdom of Tezcuco in Nueva Espana, in the time 
of the gentilism of the Indians. 

OZTOLOAPAN, SAN MARTIN DE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of the district of San 
Francisco del Valle, and alcaldia mayor of Zul- 
tepec, in Nueva Espana. It was formerly very 
numerous, since it counted 800 families of Indians, 
but was almost depopulated by an epidemical dis 
order. It is of great extent, has a good parish 
church, and is 12 leagues w. of the real of the 
Mines. 

OZTOMATACAS, a barbarous nation of In 
dians of Nueva Espana, made war against and 
conquered by Motezuma, the last emperor of that 
kingdom. 

OZTOPALCO, a settlement of the province 
and alcaldia mayor of Tezcuco in Nueva Espana; 
situate near the capital. 

OZTOT1PAC, a settlement of the province 
and alcaldia mayor of Tezcuco in Nueva Espana. 
It was the capital of a noble in the time of the gen 
tilism. See OSTOTIPAC. 

OZUANAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, but 
little known, dwelling in the vicinities of the river 
Yotan and living by the chase, their arms being 
bows and arrows. 

OZUMAZINTLA, a settlement of the pro 
vince and alcaldia mayor of Los Zoques in the 
kingdom of Guatemala. 

OZUMBA. a settlement of the alcaldia mayor 
of Chalco in Nueva Espana. It contains 278 fa 
milies of Indians, some Spaniards, and a convent 
of the religious order of San Francisco. Four 
leagues from its capital. 

