THE GEOGRAPHICAL AND HISTORICAL DICTIONARY OF AMERICA AND THE WEST INDIES 

|AARONSBURGH lies at the head of Penns Creek, Northumberland county, Pennsylvania ; about 30 miles w. from Lewisburgh, and 40 w. by n. from Sunbury. Lat. 40 52 30" n. Long. 77 31 30" o&gt;.
|ABACACTIS, or ABACARIS, a settlement of Indians, of this name, in the province of the Amazonas, and in the part or territory possessed by the Portuguese. It is a reduction of the religious order of the Carmelites of this nation, situate on the shores of a lake of the same name. It lies between this lake and a river, which is also so called, and which is a large arm of the Madeira, which, passing through this territory, afterwards returns to that from whence it flowed, forming the island of Topinambes. 
|ABACO, one of the largest and most northern of the Bahama islands, situate upon the s. e. end of the Little Bahama bank. The Hole in the Rock, or (as it is most commonly called) the Hole in the Wall, is the most southern point of the island, and bears about 18 leagues north from the island of New Providence, about 9 or 10 leagues in a n. w. direction from Egg Island, and about 10 or 12 in a n. e. direction from the Berry islands. About 10 leagues to the n. of the Hole in the Wall, on the e. side of the island, is Little Harbour, the entrance to which is be tween the main land of Abaco and Ledyard s Key, and within which there is good anchorage. There is also an anchorage to the w. of the Hole in the Wall. 
The island of Abaco is at present uninhabited. In 1788 it contained about 50 settlers and 200 Negroes. The lands granted by the crown, pre vious to May 1803, amounted to 14,058 acres, for the purpose of cultivation ; but the settlers who occupied it have since removed. It contains great quantities of the various kinds of woods which are common to almost all the Bahama islands. 
To the northward of Abaco, is a long chain of small islands or keys, (including Elbow Key, Man of War Key, Great Guana Key, the Galapagos, &c. fec.) reaching, in a n. w. direction, almost to the Matanilla reefs on the Florida stream ; from whence the Little Bahama bank ex tends, in a southerly direction, to the west point of the island of the Grand Bahama. [Lat. 26 22 n. Long. 77 14 w. See BAHAMAS. 
|ABACOOCHE, or COOSEE, a large river, rising in the s. w. territory, passing into Georgia, through the Cherokee into the Creek country, where it unites with the Oakfuskee, and forms the Alibama. 
|ABACQUA, a settlement of the province and government of Buenos Ayres, situate on the shore of the river Parana, near the spot where it enters the Paraguay, to the e. of the city of Corrientes. 
|ABACU, a point of land on the s. coast of the island of St. Domingo. 
|ABADES, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Popayan, in the district and jurisdic tion of San J uan de Pasto. 
|ABANCAY, a province and corregimiento of Peru, bounded on the e. by the large city of Cuzco, (its jurisdiction beginning at the parish of Santa Ana of that city), and on the w. by the province of Andahuailas ; w. by that of Calcaylares, form ing, in this part, an extended chain of snow-covered mountains ; s. by the provinces of Cotabamba and Aimaraez ; s. w. by Chilques and Masques. It extends 26 leagues from e. to w. and is 14 broad. Its most considerable river is the Apurimac, which is separated from it at the n. w. and bends its course, united with other streams, towards the mountains of the Andes. This river is crossed by a wooden bridge of 80 yards long and 3 broad, which is in the high road from Lima to Cuzco, and other provinces of the sierra. The toll collected here is four rials of silver for every load of goods of the produce of the country, and twelve for those of the produce of Europe. The temperature of this province is mild, and for the most part salu brious, with the exception of a few vallies, where, on account of the excessive heat and humidity, tertian agues are not uncommon. It produces wheat, maize, and other grain in great abundance, and its breed of horned cattle is by no means in considerable ; but its principal production is sugar, which they refine so well, that it may chal lenge the finest European sugars for whiteness : this is carried for sale to Cuzco and other pro vinces, and is held in great estimation. It also produces hemp, cloth manufactures of the coun try ; and in its territories mines of silver are not wanting, especially in the mountain which they call Jalcanta, although the natives avail them selves not of the advantages so liberally held out to them. Its jurisdiction comprehends 17 settle ments, f \\erepartiwentO) quota of tribute, amounted to 108,750 djllars, and it rendered yearly 870 for the alcdbala. 
The following are the 17 settlements : The capital, Limatambo, 
Huanicapa, Mollepata, 
Curahuasi, Pantipata, 
Cachora, Pibil, 
Antilla, Chonta, 
Anta, Pocquiura, 
Ibin, Surite, 
ChachaypucquiOj Huaracondo. 
Sumata, 
|ABANCAY, the capital of the above province, founded in a spacious valley, which gives it its title : it is also so called from a river, over which has been thrown one of the largest bridges in the kingdom, being the first that was built there, and looked upon as a monument of skill. In the above valley the jurisdiction of this province, and that of Andahuailas, becomes divided. It is also memor able for the victories gained in its vicinity by the king s troops against Gonzalo Pizarro, in the years 1542 and 1548. It has a convent of the religious order of St. Dominic ; this order being the first of those which established themselves in Peru. 20 leagues distant from the city of Cuzco. Lat. 13 31 30* s. Long. 72 26 w. 
|ABANCAY, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Cuenca, in the kingdom of Quito, situate on the shore of the river Paute. 
|ABANES, a barbarous nation of Indians, of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, in the plains of San Juan, to the n. of the Orinoco. They inhabit the woods on the shores of this river, as well as other small woods ; and are bounded, e. by the Salivas, and w. by the Caberres and Andaquies. They are docile, of good dispositions, and are easily converted to the Catholic faith. 
|ABANGOUI, a large settlement of the pro vince and government of Paraguay. It is com posed of Indians of the Guarani nation, and situate on the shore of the river Taquani. It was disco vered by Alvar Nunez, Cabezade Vaca, in 1541. 
|ABARANQUEN, a small river of the pro vince and government of Guayana, or Nueva Andalusia. It rises in the country of the Quiriquipas Indians, runs from s. to n. and enters the Aruy. 
|ABARY, a small river of Guayana, between the Berbice and the Demerary. See MAH AICA. 
|ABBEVILLE County, in Ninety-six district, S. Carolina, bounded on the n. e. by the Saluda, and on the s. w. by the Savannah, is 35 miles in length and 21 in breadth ; contains 9197 in habitants, including 1665 slaves. 
|ABBOTS, a small river of N. Carolina, Avhich runs s. w. and enters the Pcdi, at a little distance from the source of this river, in the territory of the Granville limits. 
|ABECOCHI, a settlement of Indians of S. Carolina, situate on the shore of the river Cousa. The English have a settlement here, with a fort for its defence. 
|ABEICAS, a nation of Indians of New France, bounded on the n. by the Alibaniis, and e. by the Cheraquis. They live at a distance from the large rivers, and the only produce of their terri tory is some canes, which are not thicker than a finger, but of so hard a texture, that, when split, they cut exactly like a knife. These Indians speak the Tchicachan language, and with the other nations are in alliance against the Iroquees. 
|ABERCORN, a (own of the province and co lony of New Georgia, on the shore of the river Savannah, near where it enters the sea, and at a league s distance from the city of this name. [It is about 30 miles from the sea, 5 miles from Ebenezer, and 13 n. w. of Savannah. 
|ABIDE, mountains, or serrania, of the province and government of Cartagena. They rim from w. to n. e. from near the large river of Magdalena to the province of Choco, and the S. Sea. Their limits and extent are not known, but they are leagues wide, and were discovered by Capt. Francisco Cesar in 1536 ; he being the first who penetrated into them, after a labour of 10 months, in which time he had to undergo the most extreme privations and excessive perils ; not that these exceeded the hardships which were endured by the licentiate Badillo, who entered upon its conquest with a fine army. 
|ABIGIRAS, a settlement of Indians, one of the missions, or a reduction, which belonged to the regular order of the Jesuits, in the province and government of Mainas, of the kingdom of Quito ; founded in the year 1665, by the father Lorenzo Lucero, on the shore of the river Curarari, 20 leagues from its mouth, and 240 from Quito. 
|ABINEAU Port, on the n. side of lake Erie, is about 13 miles w. s. w. from fort Eric. Lat. 42 6 n. Long. 79 15 o&gt;. 
|ABINGDON, a town at the head of the tide waters of Bush river, Harford county, Maryland, 12 miles s. w. from Havre-de-Grace, and 20 n. e. from Baltimore. Cokesbury college, instituted by the methodists in 1785, is in this town. Lat. 39 27 30" n. Long. 76 20 35" w.
|ABINGDON, the chief town of Washington county, Virginia, contained but about 20 houses in 1788, and in 1796 upwards of 150. It is about 145 miles from Campbell s station, near Holston ; 260 from Richmond in Virginia, in a direct line, and 3JO as the road runs, bearing a little to the s. of w. Lat. 36 41 30" n. Long. 81 59 . 
|ABINGTON, a township in Plymouth coun ty, Massachusetts; 22 miles 5. e. from Boston, and contains 1453 inhabitants. Lat. 42 4 30". 
|ABINGTON, a parish in the town ot Pomfrei in Connecticut. Lat. 42 4 30". Long. 70 51 30". 
|ABINGTON, a village in Pennsylvania, 12 miles w. of Philadelphia. 
|ABIPI, a small settlement of the jurisdiction of Muzo, and corregimiento of Tunja, in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of a hot temperature, producing some wheat, maize, yucas, plantains, and canes ; it has been celebrated for iis rich mines of emeralds, which aie. however, at present aban doned from want of water ; it is nearly three leagues distant from the large mine of Itoco. 
|ABIPONES, a nation of barbarous Indians, of the province and government of Tucuman, in habiting the s. shores of the river Bermejo. Their number once exceeded 100,000 ; but they are certainly at present much reduced. They go naked, except that the women cover themselves with little skins, prettily ornamented, which they call queyapi. They aro very good swimmers, of a lofty and robust stature, and well featured : but they paint their faces and the rest of their body, and arc very much given to war, which they carry on chiefly against such as come cither to hunt or to fish upon their territory. Their victims they have a custom of sticking upon lofty poles, as a land mark, or by way of intimidation to their enemies. From their infancy they cut and scarify their bodies, to make themselves hardy. When their country is inundated, which happens in the five winter months, they retire to live in the islands, or upon the tops of trees : they have some slight no tion of agriculture, but they live by fishing, and the produce of the chase, holding in the highest estimation the flesh of tigers, which they divide among their relations, as a sort of precious relic or dainty ; also asserting that it has the properties of infusing strength and valour. They have no know ledge either of God, of law, or of policy; but they believe in the immortality of the soul, and that there is a land of consummate bliss, where they shall dance and divert themselves after their death. When a man dies, his widow observes a state of celibacy, and fasts a year, which consists in an ab stinence from fish: this period being fulfilled, an assembly run out to meet her, and inform her that her husband has given her leave to marry. The women occupy themselves in spinning and sewing hides; the men are idlers, and the boys run about the whole day in exercising their strength. The men are much addicted to drunkenness, and then the women are accustomed to conceal their husband s weapons, for fear of being killed. They do not rear more than two or three children, killing all above this number. 
|ABISCA, an extensive province of the king dom of Peru, to the e. of the Cordillera of the Andes, between the rivers Yetau and Anmrumago,, and to the s. of Cuzco. It is little known, con sisting entirely of woods, rivers, and lakes ; and hither many barbarous nations of Indians have re tired, selecting for their dwelling places the few plains which belong to the province. The Em peror Yupanqui endeavoured to make it subser vient to his controul, but without success : the same disappointment awaited Pedro de Andia in his attempt to subjugate it in the year 1538. 
|ABISMES, QUARTEL DBS, that part or divi sion of the island of Guadaloupe which looks to the n. e. It takes its name from its having some creeks, or inlets, which serve as places of shelter for vessels, in case of invasion either from enemies or from hurricanes. Here they ride quite safe, for the bottom is very good ; and being made fast to the strong palm-trees which abound here, they stand in no need of being anchored, which would be inconvenient, and attended with risk, on ac count of the thick roots thrown out by the above trees. Further on is a small island called Des Cochons, where an engineer, of the name of Renau, endeavoured, without success, in 1700, to build a fort, for the sake of securing the harbour, which is a good one. 
|ABITANJS, a mountain of the province and corregimiento of Lipes in Peru. In the Quechuan tongue it signifies the ore of gold, from a cele brated mine which is at present nearly abandoned, from the want of workmen. It is nearly contigu ous to thetesettlement of Colcha. 
|ABITIBBI, a small lake in Upper Canada, on the s. side of which is a settlement called Frederick, which last lies in n. lat. 48 35 . w. long. 82. Also the name of a river which runs n. and joins Moose river near its mouth at James s bay. 
|ABITIBIS, a lake of the country of Hudson, in the territory of the Indians of this name. [This lake is n. of Nipissing lake, the . e. boundary of Canada, in New South Wales : it has communi cation with James s bay, near Moose fort. Lat. 48 39 n. Long. 79 2 o&gt;. 
|ABITIGAS, a nation of barbarous Indians, of the province and corregimiento of Tarma in Peru. It is very numerous and warlike; and they live a wandering life in the woods. It is CO leagues to the e. of the mountains of the Andes ; bounded on the s. by the Ipilcos Indians. 
|ABORROEN, a port of the coast of Brasil, in the province and captainship of Seara, between the river Escorgogive and the bay of Inobu. 
|ABRA, an island of the straits of Magellan, at the entrance of the third and last narrow pass, called the Passage. 
|ABRAMS CREEK falls into Hudson s river, near the city of Hudson. 
|ABREOLHOS, or ABREOGOS, Point of, on the coast of Brasil, and of the province and cap tainship of Espiritu Santo, between the rivers Percipe and Quororupa, in s. lat. 18 19 30". w. long. 39 51 30". Here are some hidden rocks, or sand-banks, extremely dangerous ; and al though there are various navigable channels, it requires the utmost caution to avoid shipwreck, this having been the lot of an infinite number of vessels. These sand-banks are more than 20 leagues distant from the continent, and extend themselves upwards of five leagues to the e. of the island of Tuego. Their situation, taken in the the centre, is in 170 51 20" s. lat. w. long. 39 lo. 
|ABROJOS, or BAXOS DE BABUCA, a bank, with several small rocks and isles, e. of Turk s island, in n. lat. 21 5 . w. long. 70 40 . Between this bank and Turk s island is a deep channel, for ships of any burden, three leagues wide. 
|ABROJOS, a shoal of the N. sea. See the ar ticle PANUELA QUADRADO. 
|ABSECON BEACH, on the coast of New Jersey, 16 miles s. w. from Little Egg harbour. 
|ABUCARA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Lucanas in Peru, in a valley of the same name. It was anciently the capital of this province, and had the same denomination. At present it is much reduced, the corregidor haying left it to establish himself in Lucanas. Lat. 15 33 5. Long. 73 28 w. 
|ABUCEES, S. JOSEPH DE LOS, a settlement of the missions of the Sucumbios Indians, who were founded by, and maintained at the expence of, the abolished order of the Jesuits, in the pro vince and government of Quixos and Marcas, of the kingdom of Quito ; situate on the shore of a small river, which enters the Putumayo. Lat. 36 n. Long. 75 22 w. 
|ABLJRRA, S. BARTOLOME DE, a town of the province and government of Antioquia, in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, founded in 154?, by the Marshal George Robledo, in u fertile and ex tensive valley of the same name, which was dis covered in 1540 by Captain Geronimo Luis Texelo. It abounds in all kinds of fruits, seeds, and vegetables, and is of a hot temperature. In its district are found many huacas, or sepulchres of the Indians, in which great riches are deposited. It has now so much fallen to decay, that it is no more than a miserable hamlet. In its vicinity are some streams of salt water, from which the Indians procure salt for their use. Lat. 5 51 30" . Long. 75 17 w. 
|ACA, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Tlaxclala, in Nueva Espana. 
|ACAAY, a parish in Paraguay, situate on a small river which runs into the Rio Paraguay. It is about 14 leagues s. e. of Asuncion. Lat. 25 54 1" s. Long. 57 23 to. 
|ACACUNA, a mountain of Peru, in the pro vince and corrcgimiento of Arica in Peru. It is very lofty, and is four leagues distant from the S. sea ; is very barren, and situate between the promontory of Ilo and the river Sama. Lat.70 3 29 s. [Long. 18 35 a?. 
|ACADIA, a province and peninsula of N. America, on the e. coast of Canada, between the island or bank of Newfoundland and New England, by which it is bounded on the w. It is more than 100 leagues in length from n. w. to s. e. arid nearly 80 in width, from n. e. tos. w. from the gulph of St. Lawrence to the river Santa Cruz. It was dis covered in 1497 by Sebastian Cabot, sent thither from England by Henry VII. The French, un der the command of Jacob Cartier, of St. M aloes, established themselves here in 1534, in order to carry on a cod -fishery on the bank of Newfound land ; and in 1G04, Peter Guest, a gentleman of the household of Henry IV. of France, was sent by that king to establish a colony, which he founded at Port Royal. The English entered it under Gilbert Humphry, in consequence of a grant which had been made to this person by Queen Elizabeth, and gave it the title of Nova Scotia. In 1621 King James 1. made a donation of it to the Earl of Stirling ; and in 1627 the French, commanded by Kirk de la Rochelle, made them selves masters of it, destroying all the establish ments of the English, who were obliged to sur render it up, in 1629, by the treaty of St. Germains. The French shortly afterwards lost it ; a Governor Philip having taken possession of it ; but they, however, regained it in 1691, through the conduct of Mr. De Villebon. In order to settle the pretensions of the rival courts, commissioners were, by mutual consent, appointed in the peace ofRiswick, in 1697, to consider which should be the limits of Nova Scotia and New England ; and in the peace of Utrecht, it was entirely ceded to the English, who afterwards returned to it. This beautiful country contains many rivers and lakes ; the principal of these is the Rosignol, well stocked with fish : there are also many woods, full of ex cellent timber, and thronged with very singular birds ; as, for instance, the Colibri, or humming bird, and various others. The same woods abound in many kinds of fruits and medicinal herbs. It is very fertile in wheat, maize, pulse of all sorts, and also produces cattle of various kinds, animals of the chase, and abundance of fine fish. Its principal commerce is in skins and salt fish. The winter is longer and colder than in Europe. The capital is Port Royal. [The name of Acadia was first applied to a tract from the 40th to the 46th degree of n. lat. granted to De Mons, Nov. 8, J603, by Henry IV. of France. For the present state of this country, see NOVA SCOTIA. 
|ACAGUATO, a settlement of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tancitaro. It is so reduced as to consist of no more than 15 families of Indians, who maintain themselves by sowing some maize, and other vegetable productions. Eight leagues s. of the capital. 
|ACAHILA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Yamparaes in Peru, dependent on the archbishopric of Charcas, and annexed to the curacy of S. Christ obal de Pilcomayo. 
|ACAIA, a settlement of the province and corre gimiento of Caxatambo in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Churin. 
|ACAMBARO, the head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Zelaya, in the province and bishopric of Mechoacan. It contains 490 families of Indians, 80 of Mustees and Mulattoes, and a convent of the order of St. Fran cis. In its district there are other small settle ments or wards. Seven leagues s. of its capital. 
|ACAMISTLAHUAC, the head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Tasco, an nexed to the curacy of its capital, from whence it is distant two leagues to the e. n. e. It contains 50 Indian families
|ACAMUCHITLAN, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of Texopilco, and alcal dia mayor of Zultepec. It contains 60 Indian fa milies, whose commerce is in sugar and honey. It produces also maize, and cultivates many vege table productions. Five leagues n. of its head settlement. 
|ACAMON, a river of the province and government of Guayana, or Nueva Andalucia. ft arises in the serranias of Usupama; runs w. n. w. and enters the Caroni. 
|ACANTEPEC, the head settlement of the al caldia mayor of Tlapa. It is of a cold and moist temperature, contains 92 Indian families, among which are included those of another settlement in its vicinity, all of whom maintain themselves by manufacturing cotton stuffs. 
|ACANTI, a river of the province and govern ment of Darien, in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. It rises in the mountains which lie towards the n. and empties itself into the sea between Cape Tiburon and the bay of Calidonia. 
|ACAPALA, a settlement of the province and alcaldia mayor of Chiapa, in the kingdom of Guatemala. Lat. 16 53 n. Long. 93 52 w . [It is situate on the Tobasco river, near the city of Chiapa, and not far from a bay in the S. sea, called Teguantipac. 
|ACAPAZINGO, SAN DIEGO DE, the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Cuernavaca. 
|ACAPETLAHUAIA, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of Escateopan, and alcal dia mayor of Zaqualpa. It contains 180 Indian families. 
|ACAPONETA, the alcaldia mayor of the kingdom of Galicia, and bishopric ofGuadalaxara, in Nueva Espana. Its jurisdiction is reduced. It enjoys various hot and cold temperatures, and has therefore the crops peculiar to both climates ; and the same are sown in its district, and produce abundantly. The capital is the town of the same name, situate between the two rivers St. Pedro and de Canas ; the latter dividing Nueva Espana from the provinces of Rosario and Cinaloa, as also the bishoprics of Durango and Gaudalaxara, from whence it is distant 83 leagues, w. n. w. It has a convent of the order of St. Francisco. Long. 105 40 30*. Lat. 22 43* 30". 
|ACAPULCO, or Los REYES, the capital city of the government of Nueva Espana, situate on the coast of the S. sea. Its inhabitants amount to nearly 400 families of Chinese, Mulattoes, and Negroes. It has a parish church, with two vicars, and two convents, one of the order of St. Francis, and the other of St. Hyppolite de la Casidad, which is a royal hospital ; an office of public accounts, with an accountant and treasurer for the managing and keeping the accounts of the duties produced by the goods brought in the China ships. The city is small, and the churches and houses are moderately ornamented. The greater part of the city is on the sea-shore. The air is of an extremely hot and moist temperature ; for, independent of its being in the torrid zone, it is entirely shut out from the . winds, being surrounded by lofty serranias. These circumstances render it very unhealthy, especially in the wet season, on account of the damps and sea-winds blowing from the s. e. to the great detriment of the inhabitants and mer chants who come to trade here ; this being the principal cause why there are scarcely more than eight Spanish families who reside here. It is equally in want of every sort of provision, owing to the reduced and barren state of the land, and is forced to seek its necessary supplies from the In dian settlements within its jurisdiction. The only commerce which it can be said to have, is a fair which is held on the arrival of the ships from China ; and when these depart, there are no other means for the people of maintaining a trade, and if the above resource should happen to fail for three or four years, the place must inevitably be abandoned. At the distance of a musket-shot, and on a pro montory running far into the sea, is situate the castle and royal fort of San Diego, mounted with 31 pieces of artillery, the greater part of them 24 pounders, for the defence of the entrance of the port, which is safe, and so spacious, that .500 ships can lay at anchor in it with ease. It is sur rounded by lofty rising grounds. Its principal mouth is on the s. side, formed by an island of an oblong figure, and somewhat inclining to the s. w. The same island forms also another mouth, which they call chica, or little. The canals on either side of the island are 25 fathoms deep. The go vernor of the castle has the rank ofcastellano, with the title of lieutenant-general of the coasts of the S. Sea ; and for the defence of these coasts, there are three companies of militia, composed of the the whole of the inhabitants, namely, one company of Chinese, another of Mulattoes, and the third of Negroes, who run to arms whenever they hear the cannon fired three times at short intervals. In the settlements of its neighbourhood they grow cotton, maize, and other seeds, vegetables and fruits. They have cattle of the large and small kind, and some tobacco, all of which productions are sufficient for the use of the castle and the city, which is 80 leagues distant from Mexico. [The famous cut in the mountain, (abra de San Nicholas), near the bay de la Langosta, for the admission of the sea winds, was recently finished. The popu lation of this miserable town, inhabited almost ex clusively by people of colour, amounts to 9000 at the time of the arrival of the Manilla galleon (nao de China}. Its habitual population is only 4000. The chief trade of Acapulco continues still to be its commerce with Manilla. The Manilla ship arrives once a year at Acapulco, with a cargo of Indian goods, valued at 12 or 1 300,000 dollars, and carries back silver in exchange, with a very small quantity of American produce, and some European goods. Lat. according to Humboldt, 1650 29 . Long, by ditto, 99 46 . Lat, accord ing to the Spaniards, 16 50 30". Long, by ditto, 100. Both longitudes being measured from the meridian of Greenwich . 
|ACARAGA, a river of the province and govern ment of Paraguay. It rises in the province of the Parana, and running n. enters the Uruguay, where is the city of Asuncion. It is navigable by ca noes throughout, and abounds in fish. 
|ACARAI, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Paraguay, founded near the river Pa rana, and rather towards the w. by the missionary Jesuits, in 1624, where they also built a fort to protect it against the incursions of the infidel Indians. 
|ACARAI, a river of the province and govern ment of Paraguay. It runs s. s. e. and enters the Parana opposite the settlement of La Poblacion Nueva. 
|ACARAPU, a small river of the province and colony of Surinam, in the part of Guayana be longing to the Dutch. It is one of those which enter the Cuyuni. 
|ACARI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Camana, in Peru, situate in a beau tiful and extensive valley, in which there is a very lofty mountain, which they call Sahuacario, com posed of misshapen stones and sand, in which, at certain times of the year, especially in the months of December and January, is heard a loud and con tinued murmuringjwhich excites universal astonish ment, and which, no doubt, is to be attributed to the air in some of its cavities. On its skirts are two fortresses, which were built in the time of the gentilism of the Indians. There is a port half-way between the town of St. Juan and the city of Arequipa, which is 8 leagues distant from the lat ter, and 1 1 from the former. It is very convenient, and has an excellent bottom, but is frequented only by small vessels. It is in lat. 15 15 . s. Long. 75 30" w. 
|ACARI, a point or cape of the coast of the S. sea, of the same province, and of the corregimicnto of Camana. 
|ACARI, a river of the above province, which runs to the s. e. 
|ACARI, another river, of the province and cap tainship of Para in the kingdom of Brasil. It is small, runs n. afterwards inclines to the n. n. w. and enters the river of Las Amazonas, just where this empties itself into the sea. 
|ACARIGUA, a settlement of the province and government of Venezuela, situate on the shore of the river of its name, and close upon the . side of the town of Ararul. 
|ACARIGUA, a river of the above province and government, which rises near the town of Araure, and runs s. to enter the river of La Portuguesa. 
|ACARRETO, a port of the coast of Tierra Firme, in the province and government of Darien, near cape Tiburon. [Lat. 8 S9 y n. Long. 77* 24 30" o&gt;. 
|ACARUACA, a small river of the province and country of the AmazonaSj in the part belonging to the Portuguese. It runs from n. to *. form ing a bow, and enters the Matari. 
|ACASABASTIAN, a river in the province of Vera Paz in Mexico. It runs into the Golfo Dulce, and has a town situated on its banks of the same name. The source of this river is not far from the S. sea. 
|ACASABASTLAN, a settlement of the kingdom of Guatemala, in the province and alcaldia mayor of Chiapa. 
|ACASATHULA, a sea-port, situated on a point of land, in the province of Guatemala Pro per, in Mexico, on a bay of the S. sea, about four leagues from Trinidad. It receives the greatest part of the treasures from Peru and Mexico. In its neighbourhood are three volcanoes.
|ACASSA, a river of the province and govern ment of Guayana, in the part possessed by the French. It enters the sea between the Ayapoco and Cape Orange. 
|ACATEPEC, a settlement of the head settle ment and alcaldia mayor of Thehuacan, where there is a convent or vicarage of the order of St. Francis. It contains 860 Indian families (includ ing those of the wards of its district) in a spacious valley, which begins at the end of the settlement and extends itself above a league. In this valley are 12 cultivated estates, on which live 40 Indian families. It is four leagues s. s. w. of its capital. 
|ACATEPEC, another settlement in the head settlement and district of Chinantla, of the alcaldia mayor of Cozamaloapan. It is situate in a very pleasant plain, and surrounded by three lofty mountains. The number of its inhabitants is re duced. A very rapid and broad river passes near this settlement; and as this is the direct way to the city of Oaxaca and other jurisdictions, and as the travellers, who come here in great numbers, must necessarily cross the river in barks or canoes, the Indians, who are very expert in this sort of navi gation, contrive by these means to procure them selves a decent livelihood. 10 leagues w. of its head settlement. 
|ACATEPEC, another settlement of the alcaldia mayor of the same kingdom, situate between two high ridges. It contains 100 Indian families, and is annexed to the curacy of San Lorenzo, from whence it is two leagues distant. 
|ACATEPEC, another settlement, having also the dedicatory title of San Miguel, in the alcaldia mayor of Huamelula, situate in a hollow. The climate here is hot. At its skirts runs a river, the waters of which fertilize the land, which abounds in gardens and cultivated spots. It contains 39 Indian families; and is annexed to the curacy of Tlacolula, from whence it is distant a league and a half to the n. 
|ACATEPEC, another settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Xicayan, of the same kingdom. It contains 12 Indian families, and is 10 leagues distant from its head settlement. 
|AGATEPEQUE, S. FRANCISO DE, asettlement of the head settlement of St. Andres de Cholula, and alcaldia mayor of this name. It contains 140 Indian families, and is half a league to the s. of its capital. 
|ACATEPEQUE, another settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Igualapa, situate at a league s distance to the e. of the same. 
|ACATIC, a settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Tecpatitlan, in the kingdom and bishopric ot Nueva Galicia. It is four leagues to the s. of its capital. 
|ACATICO, a settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Cuquio, in Nueva Espana. 
|ACATLAN, a settlement and capital of the al caldia mayor of this name. It is of a mild tempe rature, and its situation is at the entrance of the Misteca Baxa. It contains 850 families of Indians, and 20 of Spaniards and Mustees. In its vicinity are some excellent salt-grounds, in which its com merce chiefly consists. The jurisdiction of this alcaldia , which contains four other head settle ments of the district, is fertile and pleasant, abounding in flowers, fruits, all kinds of pulse and seeds, and is well watered. They have here large breeds of goats, which they slaughter chiefly for the skin and the fat, salting down the flesh, and sending it to La Puebla and other parts to be sold. In its district are many cultivated lands. It is 55 leagues leagues to the e. s. e. of Mexico. Long. 275 10 . w. Lat. 19 4 fi. 
|ACATLAN, another settlement of the same name, whh the dedicatory title of S. Andres, in the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Xalapa, in the same kingdom, situate on a clayey spot of ground, of a cold moist temperature, rendered fertile by an abundance of streams, which in a very regular man ner water the lands ; although , it being void of moun tains and exposed to the n. winds, the fruits within its neighourhood do not come to maturity. It con tains 180 Indian families, including those of the new settlement, which was established at a league s distance to the 5. of its head settlement, and which is called San Miguel de las Aguastelas. Acatlan is a league and a half distant from its head settle ment. 
|ACATLAN, another settlement, having the de* dicatory title of San Pedro, belonging to the head settlement of Malacatepec and alcaldia mayor of Nexapa, in the same kingdom. It contains SO In dian families, who trade in wool and HI the fish called bobo, quantities of which are found in a large river which runs close by the settlement, and which are a great source of emolument to them. It is four leagues /?. of its capital. 
|ACATLAN, another settlement of the head settlement of Zitlala, of the same alcaldia and king dom. It contains 198 Indian families, and its situation is a league and an half n. of its head settlement. 
|ACATLAN, another settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Sentipac, of the same kingdom. It is of a cold temperature, con tains 42 Indian families, and is 15 leagues n. e. of its capital. 
|ACATLAN, another settlement of the head settlement of Atotonilco, and alcaldia mayor of Tulanzingo in the same kingdom. It contains 115 Indian families, and a convent of the religious order of St. Augustin. Two leagues n. of its head settlement. 
|ACATLAZINGO, SANTA MARIA DE, a settlement of the head settlement of Xicula, and al caldia mayor of Nexapa, situate in a plain that is surrounded on all sides by mountains. It contains 67 Indian families, who employ themselves in the culture of the cochineal plant. 
|ACATULA, a settlement of the province and government of Venezuela, situate on the shore of the river Guasqui, to the e. of the city of Coro. 
|ACAXEE, a nation of Indians of the province ofTopia. It is well peopled, and was converted to the Catholic faith by the father Hernando de Santaren, and others of the abolished society of the Jesuits, in 1602. They are docile, of good dispo sitions and abilities. In the time of their idolatry, they used to bend the heads of their dead with their bodies and knees together, and in this posture inter them in a cave, or under a rock, giving them provi sions for the journey which they fancied them about to make ; also laying by them a bow and arrows for their defence. Should an Indian woman hap pen to have died in child-bed, the infant was put to death ; for they used to say, it was the cause of her death. These Indians were once induced by a sorcerer to make an insurrection, but it was quelled by the governor of the province, Don Francisco de Ordinola, in the year 1612. 
|ACAXETE, SANTA MARIA DE, the head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Tepcaca, situate on the slope of the noted sierra of Tlascala. It is of a cold and dry temperature, contains seven Spanish families, 10 of Mustees and Mulattoes, and 176 of Mexican Indians. In its vicinity is a reservoir, formed of hewn stone, which serves at once to catch the waters as they come down from the sierra, and to conduct them to Tepcaca, three leagues n. n. w. of its capital. 
|ACAXUCHITLAN, the head settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Tuluzingo, to the n. e. It con tains 406 Indian families, and is a curacy of the bishopric of La Puebla de los Angeles. Distant four leagues to the e. of its capital. 
|ACAYUCA, the alcaldia mayor of Nueva Esparia, and of the province of Goazacoalco. Its jurisdiction is very extended, and consists, for the most part, of places of a hot and moist temperature, but so fertile is it that it gives annually lour crops of maize; and as there is no demand for this pro duction in the other provinces, it follows, of course, that the Indians here are little given to industry. Indeed the ground never requires the plough, and the whole of their labours during the seed-time consist merely in smoothing the surface of the mountains, and in scratching up the ground with a pointed stick. It is at times infested by locusts, which destroy the plants and crops ; and having never been able to find a remedy against this evil, the inhabitants had recourse to the protection of the virgin of La Conception, which is revered in the head settlement of the district of the Chichimecas ; and it is said that, owing to her mediatory influence, the plague has been thought to diminish. This province is watered by the abundant river of the Goazacoalco. The settlements of this alcaldia are, Xocoteapa, Olutla, Macayapa, Otcapa, Menzapa, Pochutla, Molocan, Ostitan, Theimanquillo, Cozolcaque, Tinantitlan, Ixhuatla, Chinameca, Macatcpeque, Zoconusco, 
|ACAYUCA, the capital of the above, situate on the coast of the N. sea. Its inhabitants are com posed of 30 families of Spaniards, 296 of Indians, and 70 of Mustees and Mulattoes. It lies a little more -than 100 leagues s. e. of Mexico. Lat. 17 53 n. Long. 94 46 30" w. 
|ACAYUCA, another settlement in the alcaldia mayor of Pachuca, in the kingdom of Nueva Espaiia, annexed to the curacy of Tezayuca, and containing 100 Indian families. 
|ACAZINGO, ST. JUAN DE, the head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Tep caca, situate in a plain of a mild temperature, and watered by two streams which run close to all the houses of the settlement, to the great comfort of the inhabitants. In the middle of the above plain there is a beautiful fountain, a convent of the reli gious order of St. Francis, a very ancient build ing, and some other buildings, which have been erected since the conquest of the country. The parish church is a piece of the most ancient archi tecture. The inhabitants are composed of 150 families of Spaniards, 104 of Mustees, 31 of Mu lattoes, and 700 of Indians ; 3| leagues c. to the n. e. of its capital. 
|ACAZUTLA, a port of the S. sea, on the coast of the province of the alcaldia mayor of Zuchitepec, in the kingdom of Guatemala, between the point of Los Remedios, and the settlement of Guapaca. [Lat. 14 42 n. Long. 90 3 w.~ 
|ACCHA, a settlement of the province a;id corregimienloof Chilques arid Masques in Peru, situ ate on the skirt of a mountain, which has a pro minence, seeming as though it were about to fall upon the settlement. This mountain is constantly dwindling away without any assignable cause. Lat. 13 19 s. Long. 71 13 w. 
|ACCHA-AMANSALA, a settlement of the pro vince and corregimiento of Chilques and Masques in Peru. 
|ACCIIA-URINZABA, a settlement of the pro vince and corregimiento of Chilques and Masques in Peru. 
|ACCITES, a river of the province and go vernment of Caraccas, in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. It rises in the mountains, and enters the Orituco. 
|ACCOCESAWS. The ancient town and prin cipal place of residence of these Indians is on the w. side of Colorado of Rio Rouge, about 200 miles s. w. of Nacogdoches, but they often change their place of residence for a season : being near th bay, they make great use of fish, oysters &c. ; kill a great many deer, which are the largest and fattest in the province ; and their country is uni versally said to be inferior to no part of the pro vince in soil, growth of timber, good ness of water, and beauty of surface ; they have a language pe culiar to themselves, but have a mode of commu nication by dumb signs, which they all understand : number about 80 men. Thirty or forty years ago, the Spaniards had a mission here, but broke it up, or moved it to Nacogdoches. They talk of resettling it, and speak in the highest terms of the country. 
|ACCOMACK County, in Virginia, is situated on a peninsula, bounded //. by Maryland, e. by the ocean, and on the w. by Chcsapeak bay, and contains 13,959 inhabitants, including 4262 skyes. 
|ACHA, Mountains of, in the province and government of G nay ana ; they run from n. to *. on the shore of the river Carom. 
|ACHACACHE, a settlement of the province and corregimtenlo of Omasuyos, the capital of this province, in Peru. It contains, besides the parish chapel, another, in which is an image of Christ, with the dedicatory title of La Misericordia. Lat. 16 33 30" s. Long. 79 23 20 a?. 
|ACHAGUA, a nation of Indians of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, who dwell among the plains of Gazanare and Meta, and in the woods which skirt the river Ele. They are bold in their en gagements with wild beasts, but with human be ings they have recourse rather to poison and stratagem ; they are dexterous in the use of the dart and spear, and never miss their aim ; are particularly fond of horses, of which they take the utmost care, anointing and rubbing them with oil ; and it is a great thing among them to have one of these animals of peculiar size and beauty. They go naked, but, for the sake of decency, wear a small apron made of the thread of aloes, the rest of their bodies being painted of different colours. They are accustomed, at the birth of their chil dren, to smear them with a bituminous ointment, which hinders the hair from growing, even upon the eye-brows. The women s brows are also en tirely deprived of hair, and the juice of jugua being immediately rubbed into the little holes formed by the depilatory operation, they remain bald for ever afler. They are of a gentle disposisition, but much given to intoxication. The Jesuits reduced many to the catholic faith, forming them into settlements, in 166 1 . 
|ACHA LA, Mountains of, in the province and government of Tucuman, bounded by the moun tains of Augo or Mendoza, of the kingdom of Chile ; they run from n. n. w. to s. s. c. at the sources of the river Quarto. 
|ACHAMQUI. See CHANQUI. 
|ACHAS, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Guamanga in Peru, situate on the confines which divide the above province from Huanta. 
|ACHEPE, Bay of, a small port of the N. sea, on the e. coast of the Isla Real, or Cape Breton. It is close to N. cape. 
|ACHIACHICA, a town in Mexico. See ANC F.LOS. 
|ACHIANTLAS, MIGUEL DE, the head settle ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Tepozcolula. It contains a convent of monks of Santo Domingo, and 260 families of Indians, who occupy themselves in cultivating and improving the land. It is eight leagues to the w. with an in clination to the s. of its capital. 
|ACI1IBAMBA, a river of the province and government of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito ; it rises in the mountains, and enters the Maranon. 
|ACFIINUTLAN, a very lofty mountain of the province and government of Guayana, or Nueva Andalucia. It is on the shore of the river Orinoco, and to the e. of the Ciudad Real, (royal city), the river Tacuragua running between them. 
|ACIIIRA. See CATA-MAGU. 
|ACHITE, a small river of the province and government of Guayana. It runs from 5. to n. and enters the Cuyuni. 
|ACHOCALLA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Pacages in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Viacha. 
|ACHOGOA, a settlement of the province and government of Cinaloa, founded by the mission aries of the Jesuits, between the rivers Tuerte, Mayo, and Ribas. 
|ACHOMA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Collahuas in Peru. In its vici nity is a volcano, called Amboto and Sahuarcuca, which vomits smoke and flames; the latter of which are seen clearly at night. 
|ACHONGA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Angaraes in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Lircay. 
|ACHOUPEKAHIGAN, a river of Canada. It runs e. afterwards turns to the s. and enters the lake of St. Thomas. 
|ACKLIN S Island. See CROOKED Island. 
|ACLA, a small city of the kingdom of Tierra Firme, in the province of Darien, founded by Gabriel de Roxas, in 1514, on the coast of the S. sea, at the mouth of the gulph of Uraba, in front of the island of Pinos, with a good fort, then much frequented and very convenient, from having a good bottom, but somewhat incommoded by cur rents. Pedro Arias Davila built here a fort for its defence in 1516 ; but the settlement, never theless, did not keep long together, the Spaniards having abandoned it, on account of its unhealthiness, in 1532. [Lat. 8 56 n. Long. 77 40 a&gt;. 
|ACOBAMBA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Angaraes in Peru. It was the capital, but at present the town of Guancavelica bears that title, on account of its being the resi dence of the governor and other people of conse quence. It is of a good temperature, and so abundant in grain, that its crops of wheat amount to 25,000 bushels yearly. In an estate near it, are some pyramidical stones, and in other parts are the ruins of some well made benches in the shape of couches, which have been much injured by time, and were there before the coming of the Spaniards. Lat. 13 lb 30" s. Long. 74 32 30" w. 
|ACOBAMBA, another settlement of the same name in the province and corregimiento of Jauja, annexed to the curaey of Cocliangara. 
|ACOBAMBA, another settlement of the province and corregimiento of Tarma. 
|ACOBAMBILLA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Angaraes in Peru, annexed to the caracy of Conaica. 
|ACOCHALA, a very lofty mountain of the province and corregimiento of Lipes, in the arch bishopric of Charcas, where there are some very fine silver mines, which are, however, little work ed for want of hands. 
|ACOLA, a settlement of the province and cor regimiento of Lucanas in Peru, annexed to the curacy of its capital. 
|ACOLMAN, SAN AGUSTIN DE, a settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Tezcoco, in Nueva Espana, situate in a pleasant valley of a benign temperature. There are some wards united to its district, and the number of its inhabitants, including these wards, amounts to 240 Indian families, besides a convent of monks of the order of St. Augustin. 
|ACOMA, a settlement of Nucvo Mexico, situ ate on the shore of a river which enters the Grande of the N. between the settlements of San Juan and La Laguna. [It is on a high mountain, with a strong castle, and is the capital of the province. Lat. 35 24 n. Long. 106 U 10 to. 
|ACOMACK, a county of the province and colony of Virginia, which preserves i(s Indian name. It is the largest county of the province, containing 200,925 acres of ground : but not so well peopled as the others, and has only one parish, which is of the same name. Different rivers take their rise here ; among the most noted is the Clisfconossea. 
|ACOMAIO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Huanuco in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Santa Maria del Valle, situate on the confines of the infidel Panataguas Indians. 
|ACOMAIO, another settlement of the province and corregimiento of Quispicanchi in Peru. 
|ACOMARCA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Vilcas Huaman in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Vilcas. 
|ACOMES, a fall of the river Amariscoggin, in the province of Continent, one of the fouf which compose the colony of New England. 
|ACOMULCO, a settlement of the head settle ment and alcaldia mayor of Zochicoatlan in Nueva Espafia. It contains 12 Indiau families, and is two leagues to the u. of its capital. 
|ACONCAGUA, a province and corregimietito of the kingdom of Chile ; bounded n. by a part of the province of Quillota, e. by the Cordillera, s. by the valley of Colina, of the jurisdiction of Santiago, zo. by the province of Quillota. Its territory is level and well watered. It is divided into two parts by a large river of the same name, having a bridge built of stone and mortar, with two arches. It produces abundance of wheat and much wild marjoram, which is carried to Peru, and forms the principal branch of its commerce. In this province is the royal road, lying through the Cordillera in the way to Mendoza, which is very rough and dangerous, on account of the many slopes and steep declivities towards the river ; the path is very narrow, and in various places it is necessary to open a pass by means of a pick-axe ; so that, if at any time the mules should crowd together, they would push each other into the river, which has not unfrequcntly been the case. The royal treasures are carried by this road from the month of Novem ber to April and part of May. A few years since, some small houses of brick and mortar have been built on one or other side of the Cordillera, which they call casuchas (miserable huts) ; in these thej put, in the winter time, some coal, biscuit, and hung beef, so that the couriers, providing them selves with the keys of the doors at Mendoza, or, on the other side, at the Guardia of Aconcagua, may have something to live upon, in case they should be stopt by a fall of snow on their journey ; and with this precaution, a courier goes every month to Santiago, carrying with him the mails brought by the ships from Europe. In the winter it is customary to walk on foot over the snow, from Paramillo, which is three leagues from the top of the Cordillera, and four from its descent to the place which is called Los Ojos de Agua, through the valley of Putaendo ; but towards the n. there is another way, which thej r call De Los Patos, which is the road generally taken in going to tbp city of San Juan ; but the Cordillera being more lofty here, it is only passable in the months of February and March. The inhabitants of this province amount, on an average, to 8000 souls. The capital is San Felipe el Real. [Lat. 32 11 s. Long. 70 12 30" w.~ 
|ACONCAGUA, a large river which runs through the above province, rising in the mountains of the Cordillera and running through it by the side of the road which leads to Buenos Ayres ; branching out various ways, and watering, from the place in which it rises, the extensive vallies of Curimon, Aconcagua, Quillota, and Concon ; in which are cultivated large crops of wheat, flax and hemp ; and it, moreover, enters the sea in as large a stream as if it had never undergone the like ramifications : its mouth is in 33 lat. 
|ACONCAGUA, a settlement of the same pro vince, which was formerly its capital, until the foundation of the city of S. Felipe. It is very thinly peopled, and is situate in the valley of this name. 
|ACONCAGUA, a volcano of the same province. 
|ACONCHI, a settlement of the province and government of Sonora in Nueva Espana. 3 ACONICHI, a settlement of Indians of N.Ca rolina, situate on the shore of the river Eno. 
|ACONICHI, an island in ihe middle of the river Dan, in the same province. 
|ACONQUIJA, the most lofty mountain of the province and government of Tucuman, in the district of the city of Catamarca, and very near it. It is perpetually covered with snow, and abounds with minerals of gold. Its jurisdiction is disputed by the province of Atacama. 
|ACOPIA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Quispicanchi in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Sangarara. 
|ACORA, a settlement of the province and government of Chucuito in Peru, situate on the shore of the Gran Laguna (great lake). Lat. 16 40 30" s. Long. 70 15 w. 
|ACORI, a small river of the province and cap tainship of Para in Brazil. It runs w. bet ween the Pacajes and Yavarais, and enters the river of the Amazonas, in the arm formed by the island of Marajo. 
|ACORIA, a settlement of the province and ccrregimievto of Angaraes in Peru. 
|ACORO, a settlement of the province and corregimienlo of Huanta in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Tambillo. 
|ACOS, a settlement of the province and correginrifnto of Jauja in Peru. 
|At os, another settlement of the province and rorregt mifnto of Quispicanchi, annexed to the curacy of Acomayo. 
|ACOSTA, a settlement of the province and captainship of Pernambuco in Brazil, situate on the n. shore of the large river of San Francisco, near where it enters the sea. 
|ACOSTAMBA, a settlement of the province and correginricnto of Ctistro-virrcyna in Peru, an nexed to the curacy of Pilpichacha. 
|ACOSTAMBO, a settlement of the province and covregimiento of Huanta in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Huaribamba. 
|ACOTAMA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Chancay in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Iguari. 
|ACOTITLAN, a settlement of the head settle ment and alcaldia mayor of Autlan. It con tains 15 Indian families, who employ themselves in breeding the larger sort of cattle, in making sugar and honey, in dressing seeds, and extracting oil of cacao, which abounds greatly, from the num ber of trees yielding this fruit. It is annexed to the curacy of Tccolotlan, from whence it is two leagues to the s. w. 
|ACOUEZ, an Indian nation in Canada. 
|ACOXCHIAPA, a settlement of the head settlement of Xonacatepec, and alcaldia mayor of Cuemavaca, in Nueva Espana. 
|ACQUACKNACK, or ACQUAKINUNK, a town on the w. side of Passaic river, in Essex county, New Jersey, ten miles . of Newark, and 17 n. w. from New York. Lat. 40 47 n. Long. 74 10 w. 
|ACTIPA, SAN MATEO I&gt;E, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Tezcoro in Nueva Espaiia, an nexed to the curacy of Capulalpa. 
|ACTIPAQUE, SANTA MARIA DE, a settle* ment of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Toluca in Nueva Espaiia, four leagues to the s. of its capital, and situate on the shore of the lake Tezcoco. 
|ACTON, a township in Middlesex county, Massachusetts, containing 853 inhabitants; 24 miles n. w. of Boston. 
|ACTOPAN, the district and alcaldia mayor of Nueva Espana, commonly called Octupan. Its productions and commerce are as follows : They consist in seeds, rigging, saltpetre, and the feed ing of goats and sheep, chiefly prized on account of their skins and their fat. It is of a mikt tem perature ; but the ground is infested with prickly plants, thorns, and teasels. There are some estates here of about eight or ten labouring families each. In this district, and in its environs, are many sing ing birds, which, in the Mexican language, are called zenzontla ; and among others is the nightin gale. The capital bears the same name, and in it there are no less than 2750 families of Othomies Indians, divided into two parties, and sepa rated by the church, which is a convent of the order of St. Augustin, and a very ancient piece of architecture. It also contains 50 families of Spa niards, Mulattoes, and Muslccs. 23 leagues n. n. e. of Mexico. Long. 98 49 w.. Lat. 20 19 30" n. 
|ACTUPAN, SAN PEDRO m, the head settlemcnt of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Xochimilco, in the same kingdom. It contains 210 Indian families, including those of its wards. 
|ACUA, a river of the kingdom of Brazil, in the island of Joancs or Marajo. It runs s. s. e. and enters the large arm of the river of the Amozonas. 
|ACUIAPAN, a settlement of the head settle, ment and alcaldia mayor of Zultepec in Nueva Espafia, situate between two craggy steeps, and annexed to the curacy of Temascaltepec. It con tains 38 Indian families, who carry on a commerce by the dressing of hides of large and small cattle. Six leagues n. of its capital. 
|ACUILPA, a settlement of the head settlement of Olinaltt, and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa, in Nueva Espaiia. It is of a hot and moist tempe rature, abounding in grain, chia, (a white medicinal earth), seeds, and other productions, with which its inhabitants carry on a trade. These consist of 92 Indian families. It is a little more than three leagues from its head settlement. 
|ACUIO, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Cinaqua in Nueva Espana ; of a hot temperature, and inhabited only by nine Indian families, whose commerce consists in collecting salt and wild wax. It belongs to the curacy of Tauricato, and in its district are 1 1 sugar mills, and seven pastures fit for the larger cattle, and which are so extensive and considerable as to employ in them 50 families of Spaniards, and 235 of Mustees, Mulattoes, and Negroes. 30 leagues towards the s. of its capital. 
|ACUL, a settlement of the island of St. Do mingo, in the part possessed by the French ; si tuate on the n. coast, on the shore of the port of Petit-Goane. 
|ACUL, another settlement in the same island, belonging also to the French ; situate s. of the Llanos of the N. 
|ACUL, another settlement on the s. coast, upon the bay which forms the point of Abacu. 
|ACUL, a river of the above island. It is small, and runs-into the sea behind the point of Abacu. 
|ACULA, SAN PCDKO DE, a settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Cozamaloapan in Nueva Espana, situate upon a high hill, and bounded by a large lake of salubrious water, called by the Indians Pitetla ; which lake empties itself into the sea by the sand bank of Alvarado, and the waters of which, in the winter time, overflow to such a degree as nearly to inun date the country. It contains 305 Indian families, and is four leagues to the e. of its capital. 
|ACULEO, a lake of the kingdom of Chile, which empties itself into the river Maipo, famous for good fish, highly prized in the city of Santiago. It is three leagues in length, and in some parts one in breadth. It is in the district of the settlement of Maipo, of the province arid corregimiento of Rancagua. 
|AC LIMA, a river of the captainship of Seara in Brazil : it enters the sea between the lake Lpieni and the cape of Las Sierras. 
|ACLliAGU, ANGORAS, or CAMOSIX, a river of the province and captains/tip of Seara in Bra zil, which rises in the province of Pernambuco, runs n. for many leagues, and enters the sea be tween the points of Tortuga and Pahneras. 
|ACURAIPITI, a river of the province and government of Paraguay, which runs s. s. e. and enters the Parana. 
|ACUTITLAN, a settlement of the head settle ment of the district of Tepuxilco, and alcaldia mayor of Zultepec, in Nueva Espana. It contains 45 Indian families, who trade in sugar, honey, and maize, and many other of its natural productions. It is five leagues n. e. of its head settlement, and a quarter of a league from Acamuchitlan. 
|ACUTZIO, a settlement of the head settle ment of Tiripitio, and alcaldia mayor of Valladolid, and bishopric of Mechoacan. It contains 136 families of Indians, and 11 of Spaniards and Muatees. There are six large cultivated estates in its district, which produce abundance of wheat, maize, and other seeds ; and these estates keep in employ eight families of Spaniards, 60 of Mulat toes, and 102 of Indians, who have also under their care many herds of large and small cattle, which breed here. It is one league and a half s. of its head settlement. 
|ADAES, NUESTRA SGNORA DEL PILAR DE Los, a town and garrison of the province of Los Texas, or Nuevas Felipinas, and the last of these settlements, being upon the confines of the French colonies. It is of a mild temperature, very fertile, and abounding in seeds and fruits, which the earth produces without any cultivation ; such as chesnuts, grapes, and walnuts. The garrison consists of a captain and 57 men, for the defence of the In dian settlements lately converted by the missions belonging to the religious order of St. Francis. It is 215 leagues from its capital, and 576 from Mexico. Long. 93 35 . Lat, 32 9 . 
|AOAES, a lake of the above province, about five leagues broad, and 10 in circumference, forming agulphjin which large ships can sail with ease. It is more than 180 fat horns deep, as was once proved, when it was found that a line of that length did not reach the bottom. It abounds in a variety offish, which are caught in vast quantities without nets &gt; the same being the case with regard to the nume rous rivers which intersect and fertilize the pro vince ; all of them entering and augmenting the already abundant stream of the Mississippi. In the middle of the lake is a pyramid ical mount, of above 100 yards in circumference, composed of a stone similar to crystal, and being the loftiest of any in the province. Its borders abound with cattle, called cibolaa a sort of wild cow, having the neck well covered with a long and soft wool, and affording delicious food to the natives. By the fat which they procure from the numerous ant-eaters, which breed here, they supply the want of oil. There are also some castors, and other kinds of mountain-animals. Two leagues from the gar rison. 
|ADAES, a river of the above province, which runs s. e. in the district or country of the Indians, who give it the denomination ; and enters the river Mexicano. 
|ADAIZE are Indians of N. America, who live about 40 miles from Natchitoches, below the Yattasses, on a lake called Lac Macdon, which com municates with the division of Red river that passes by Bayau Pierre. They live at or near where their ancestors have lived from time imme morial. They being the nearest nation to the old Spanish fort, or mission of Adaize, that place was named after them, being about 20 miles from them to the s. There are now but 20 men of them re maining, but more women. Their language dif fers from all others, and is so difficult to speak or understand, that no nation can speak ten words of k ; but they all speak Caddo, and most of them French, to Avhom they were always attached, and join them against the Natchez Indians. After the massacre of Natchez, in 1798, while the Spaniards occupied the post of Adaize, their priests took much pains to proselyte these Indians to the Roman Catholic religion, but, we are informed, were totally unsuccessful. 
|ADAMS, a township in Berkshire county, Massachusetts, containing 2040 inhabitants, is about 140 miles n. w. of Boston. In the n. part of this town is a great natural curiosity. A pretty mill stream, called Hudson s brook, which rises in Vermont, and falls into the n. branch of Hoosuck river, has, for 30 or 40 rods, formed a very deep channel, in some places CO feet deep, through a quarry of white marble. Over this channel, where deepest, some of the rocks remain, and form a natural bridge. From the top of this bridge to the water is 62 feet ; its length is about 12 or 15, and its breadth about 10. Partly under this bridge, and about 10 or 12 feet below it. is another, which is wider, but not so long ; for at the e. end they form one body of rock, 12 or 14 feet thick, and under this the water flows. The rocks here are mostly while, and in other places clouded, like the coarse marble common at Lanesborough, and in other towns in Berkshire county. 
|ADAMSTOWN, a town in Lancaster county, Pennsylvania, containing about 40 houses ; 20 miles n. e. of Lancaster. 
|ADAUA, a river of the province and govern ment of St. Juan de los Llanos, in the Nuero Reyno de Granada. It rises between the Meta and Meteta, runs e. and enters the Orinoco in the port of San Francisco de Borja . 
|ADAUQUIAIVA, a small river of the province and government of Guayana, or Nueva Andalucia, which rises near the sierra of Parime ; and to e. enters the sources of the running from is* Cauca. 
|ADA YES. See MEXICANO River. 
|ADDI, a settlement of the province and govern ment of Sonora in Nueva Espaiia ; situate on the shore of a small river, between the settlements of Uquitoa and Tibutana. 
|ADDIS, a settlement of the island of Barbadocs, one of the Antilles ; situate in the district of the parish of Christ Church, on the s. coast. 
|ADDISON, a township of the district of Maine in Washington county, 10 miles s. w. of Machias, on the sea-board, between Englishmen s bay and Pleasant river. It was called No. 6. until it was incorporated in Feb. 1797. 
|ADDISON County, in Vermont, is on the e, side of lake Champlain, and is divided nearly into equal parts by Otter creek ; has Chittenden county on the n. and Rutland county on the s. and con tains 6449 inhabitants, dispersed in 21 townships. It is about 30 miles by 27. A range of the green mountains passes through it. Chief town Middlebury, granted Nov. 1761. 
|ADDISON, a town of the above county, con taining 401 inhabitants. It lies on lake Champlain, and is separated from Newhaven, on the e. by Otter creek. Snake mountains on the s, e. lie partly in this township, granted 1761. 
|ADEQUATANGI& Creek, in New York state, is the eastern head-water of Susquehannah river. 
|ADICONI, a port on the coast of the N. sea, in the province and government of Venezuela. It is e. of the peninsula of Parauana. 
|ADMIRALTY Bay, and Port Mulgrave, on the n. zo. coast of America, lie in Lat. 59 31 n. Long. 140 18 . a&gt;. 
|ADOLES, a settlement of Indians, of the province of Orinoco, and part of the Saliva nation, forming a separate district, and situate in the plains of San Juan, of the new kingdom of Gra nada, near the river Sinaruco. It was destroyed by the Caribee indians in 1684. 
|ADORATORIO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Huarochiri in Peru, situate w. of Lurin. 
|ADSON S Town lies near the n. e. line of New Jersey, and s. e. of the Drowned Lands ; 27 miles n. of Morristown, and 24 ??. w. of Patterson. 
|ADUANA, a settlement of the province and government of Maracaibo, situate on the shore of the lake of this name, on the e. side. 
|ADVANCE. See FORWARD. 
|AEIQUAIA, the head settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Tonala in Nueva Espana. 
|AERIUCTUQUEN, a mountain of the prov.inceand colony of Surinam, or part of Guayana, in the Dutch possessions. It is the beginning of the great sierra of Binocote, between the rivers Cutini and Caroni. 
|AFFREUX, a lake of the province and colony of Virginia, near the coast. 
|AFLJERA, one of the islands of Juan Fernandes, on the S. sea coast, in the kingdom of Chile. About 400 leagues to the n. of Cape Horn. This coast swarms with sea lions and wolves. Lat. 33 47 s. Long. 80 41 w. 
|AGA, a mountain of the province and captain ship of Rio Janeiro in Brazil. It is between the rivers Irutiba and Tapoana, on the sea-coast. 
|AGACES, a nation of Indians, of the province of Paraguay, on the shore of the river of this name, towards the e. The people are numerous, valiant, and of a lofty stature. In ancient times they were masters of that river, cruising about in it, and being the enemies of the Guaranies ; but after several conflicts, they were at last subjected by Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca, governor of the province, in 1542. 
|AGALTECA, a river of the province and go vernment of Honduras, in the kingdom of Guate mala. 
|AGAMENTIGUS, a river of the province and colony of New England, of York county, dis trict of Maine. It is indebted to the ocean for its waters, through Pascataqua bay ; having no con siderable aid from streams of fresh water. Its mouth is about four miles s. from Cape Neddie river. Small vessels can enter here. 
|AGAMENTIGUS, a mountain of consider able elevation in the district of Maine, distant about six miles from Bald Head, and eight from York harbour. Lat. 43 12 n. and Long. 70 43 w. from Greenwich. It is a noted land-mark for seamen, and is a good directory for the entry of Pascataqua harbour, as it lies very nearly in the same meridian with it and with Pigeon hill, on Cape Ann. The mountain is covered with wood and shrubs, and affords pasture up to its summit, where there is an enchanting prospect. The cultivated parts of the country, especially on the s. and s. w. appear as a beautiful garden, in tersected by the majestic river Pascataqua, its bays and branches. The immense ranges of mountains on the n. and n. zo. afford a sublime spectacle; and on the sea side the various indentings of the coast, from Cape Ann to Cape Elizabeth, are plainly in view in a clear day ; and the Atlantic stretches to the e. as far as the power of vision extends. At this spot the bearing of the following objects were taken, with a good sur veying instrument, October II, 1780. Summit of the White mountains, n. 15 w. Cape Porpoise, n. 63 e Rochester hill, n. 64 w. .Tuckaway South peak, s. 80 w. Frost s hill, Kittery, s. 57 w. Saddle of Bonabeag, n. 14 w. Isle of Shoals Meeting-house, s. 6 e. Varney s hill, in Dover, distant 10| miles by mensuration, n. 89 w. Variation of the needle,
|AGAMUNTIC, or AMAGTJNTIC Pond, in the district of Maine, sends its waters northward to the Chaudiere, through the west branch of that river. 
|AGCHILLA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Pilaya and Paspaya in Peru. It has in its district seven public chapels, within four leagues distance. 
|AGENAGATENINGA, a river of the pro vince and country of the Amazonas, in the Portu guese territory. It rises in the country of the Anamaris Indians, runs n. and enters the abundant stream of the Madera. 
|AGIQUA, a river of N. Carolina, which runs n. w. and afterwards turning to the w. enters the Cherokees. 
|AGNALOS, a nation of infidel Indians, of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, inhabiting the moun tains n. of the river Apure. 
|AGNAPURAS, a chain of mountains, or a cordilhra of the kingdom of Peru, which run for leagues from n. to s. without termination, and separate the Taucas from the Chizuitos Indians. 
|AGOMISO, an island of Hudson s bay, near its w. coast; n. n. e. from Albany fort. 
|AGONICHE, a river of Nova Scotia, running from s. to e. between 4 the rivers Mechicor and St. John, and entering the sea at the mouth of the bay of Fundy. 
|AGRATUMATI, a river of the province and government of Darien, in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. It rises in the mountains of the if. and enters the sea by the Little Beech, opposite Calidonia. 
|AGREDA, or NUEVA MA LAGA, a city of the province and government of Popayan, in the king dom of Quito, founded by Geronimo Aguado in J54I. It is small, and of a hot temperature, but abounds in gold mines. Forty-five leagues s. w. of its capital, 42 from Quito, and 37 to the e. of the S. sea. 
|AGRESINAS, a settlement founded by the Portuguese fathers of the Carmelite order, in the country of the Amazonas, situate on the shores of the river Amazonas. 
|AGRIAS, a nation of Indians of the province and government of Santa Marta, to the w. of the Cienega Grande. It was formerly very numerous, but at present considerably reduced. 
|AGUA, Port of, on the n. coast of the island of St. Domingo, between Point Rabel and the Bay of Marques. 
|AGUA, a small island, situate near the w. coast of the island of Vaca, in the channel formed by the island of St. Domingo, in front of the bay of Mesle. 
|AGUA, also OJGS DE AGUA, two springs or fountains of the province and corregimiento of Cuyo, in the kingdom of Chile, near the lake of Inca, from whence the river Quillota takes its source. 
|AGUA BLANCA, a settlement of the province and government of Venezuela, situate between the rivers Sarare and Acarigua, to the e. of the town of Araure. 
|AGUA BUF.NA Y DULCE, or FRESH WATER, a bay of the strait of Magellan, near the bay of La Gente. . 
|AGUA-CALIENTE, a settlement of the kingdom of Guatemala. 
|AGUA-CLARA, a river of the province and government of Paraguay. It runs e. and enters the Parana on the w. side. 
|AGUA COLORADA, a river of the same province and government as the former, which runs e. and enters also the large river of Parana. 
|AGUA DE CULBBRA, SAN FRANCISCO XAVIER DE LA, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Venezuela, a reduction of Indians of the Capuchin lathers ; but the place is also inha bited by some Spanish families. It belongs to the district and jurisdiction of the city of San Felrpc ; and in its vicinity dwell a great number of people in tiie estates belonging to it, and which produce abundance of cacao, plantains, ywo?s, and other vegetable productions. 
|AGUA-DULCK, CALETA DE, or Creek of, on the s. coast of the strait of Magellan, on the side of the bay of San Martin. 
|AGUA ESCONUIDA, a settlement of the pro vince and government of Sonora in Nueva Espana, situate at the foot of a mountain, and to the n. of Santa Clara. 
|AGUA-VERDE, an island of the gulph of California, or Red sea of Cortes, situate near the coast, between the islands of Carmen and Monserrat. 
|AGUACAGUA, a settlement of the province of Guayana, and government of Cumana, one of those belonging to the missions of the Catalanian Capuchin lathers. It is on the shore of the river Caroni, near the mouth, through which this en ters the Orinoco. Lat. 8 22 n. Lono-. 62* 42 to. 
|AGUACATAL, a settlement of the province and government of Antioquia, situate in the val ley of Pcneo, on the shore of the river Cauca. Lat. 8 n. Long. 75 28 w. 
|AGUACATENANGO, a settlement of the pro vince and alcaldia mayor of Chiapa in the king dom of Guatemala. [Lat. 16 18 n. Long. 91 57 w.l 
|AGUACATLAN, the head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Xala in Nueva Espana. In 1745 it contained 80 families of Indians, who employed themselves in the culture of maize and French beans. It has a convent of the religious order of St. Francis, and lies two leagues s. e. of ils capital. 
|AGUACI1APA, a settlement of the province and government of Nicaragua in the kingdom of Guatemala. 
|AGUADA, a settlement of the island of Portorico ; situate in the bay of its name, between the capes Boriquen and St. Francis. It serves as an inlet for ships going to Tierra Firme and Nueva Espana to take in water. PLat. 18 25 n. Loner. 67 6 a;. 
|AGUADA, the aforesaid bay in the above island. 
|AGUADA, the point on the coast and at the head of the above island, 27 leagues distant from the cape of San Rafael, of the island of St. Domingo. 
|AGUADA, a river near the cape or former point, and in the same island, being a place where ships are accustomed to take in water. 
|AGUADA, a small river of the province and captainship of the Rio Grande in Brazil. It rises near the coast, and runs s. s. e. entering the sea close to the cape of San Roque. 
|AGUADA, a sharp point or small island of the S. sea, near the coast, in the province and corregimiento of Atacama. 
|AGUADA, a point on the coast of Tierra Firme, in the province and government of Cartagena. It is one of those which form the mouth of the gulph of Uraba or Darien. 
|AGUADILLA, a river of the province and kingdom of Tierra Firme. It rises in the moun tains on the s. and enters the large river Chagre very near its mouth, and the castle of this name. Here ships take in water, on account of the conve nience of a bay, for the defence of which there is, upon the shore, a battery belonging to the same castle, which was built under the directions of Don Dionisio de Alcedo, in 1743. 
|AGUADORES, River of the, in the island of Cuba. It runs into the sea on the s. coast of this island, having at its mouth a watch-tower and guard to give notice of vessels which may enter the port of Santiago de Cuba, from whence it is seven leagues distant. 
|AGUAIO, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Sierra Gorda, in the bay of Mexico, and kingdom of Nueva Espana, founded in the year 1748 by the Colonel of the militia of Queretaro, Don Joseph de Escandon, Count of Sierra Gorda. 
|AGUAIO, another settlement, with the dedicatory title of San Miguel, in the new kingdom of Leon, inhabited by Spaniards ; 10 leagues distant from La Punta. 
|AGUAIUS, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Quixos and Marcas in the kingdom of Quito. 
|AGUAGE, a settlement and real of mines of the province and government of Sonora in Nueva Espana. Lat. 29 n. Long. 1 1 1 5 w. 
|AGUAJES, a settlement of the province of Tepeguna, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya, situ ate on the shore of the river of Las Nasas. 
|AGUALEI, a small river of the province and government of Guayana, which rises in the sierras of Usupama, and enters the Caroni on the e. side. 
|AGUALULCO, a settlement and capital of the jurisdiction of Izatlan in Nueva Galicia. It has a convent of the religious order of St. Francis, and in 1745 it contained upwards of 100 families of Indians, including the wards of its district ; 17 leagues w. of Guadalaxara. Lat. 20 44 n. Long. 103 33 w. 
|AGUAMENA, a settlement of the jurisdiction of Santiago de las Atalayas, and government of San Juan de los Llanos, in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, annexed to the curacy of that city. It is of a hot temperature, and produces the same fruits as the other settlements of this province. 
|AGUAMIRO, a settlement of the province and cerregimiento of Huamalies in Peru, celebrated for some medicinal and very salutary baths. 
|AGUAN, a river of the province and govern ment of Honduras, wliich runs into the sea at the gulph of this name. 
|AGUANATO, SANTA MARIA DE, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of Puruandiro, andalcaldia mayor of Valladolid, in the prdvince and bishopric of Mechoacan. It is of a cold tem perature, situate at the foot of the sierra of Curupo, and contains 36 families of Indians, who gain theit livelihood by trading in dressed hides. Sixteen leagues from Pasquaro or Valladolid. 
|AGUANO, a lake of the province and govern* ment of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito. It is formed by an arm or channel of the river Guallaga, and is very near the shore of that river. 
|AGUANOS, SAN ANTONIO DE, a settlement of the province and government of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito ; one of those which belonged to the missions held there by the Jesuits, and thus called from the nation of Indians of whom it is composed. It was founded in 1670 by the father Lorenzo Lucero. 
|AGUANOS, another settlement, with the dedica tory title of San Francisco, in this province, and of these missions. 
|AGUAPAI, a river of the province and go vernment of Paraguay. It rises between the Pa rana and the Uruguay, near the settlement of San Carlos, runs s. forming a curve, and returning e. enters the last of the above rivers not far from the settlement of La Cruz. 
|AGUAPAI, another river of the same province and government, which runs w. and enters the Parana close to the Juan Gazu. 
|AGUAPEI, a river of the same province and government as the two former. It is very small, and rises in the mountains of Nuestra Senora de Fe ; runs from n. tos. and enters the Parana. 
|AGUARAU, a river of the proyince and go vernment of Paraguay, which runs w. and enters the Parana between the Inau and Piray. 
|AGUARICO, SAN PEDRO DE, a settlement of Indians, converted by the missions of the Jesuits, in the province and government. of Mainas; situ ate on the shore of the river Napo. 
|AGUARICO, another settlement oftbe same pro vince, and belonging to the same missions, and bearing the dedicatory title of San Estanislao. 
|AGUARICO, a river of the same province and government, being one of those which enter the Napo by the n. side. At its mouth, or entrance, begins the large province of the Ericabellados ; and here it \vas that the Portuguese attempted to establish themselves in 1732, invading it with a certain number of Piraguas, (small vessels), which came from Para. They were, however, through the well-timed precautions of the president of Qui to, forced to retire without attaining their object. This river contains much gold in its sands, and its body is much increased by other streams, such as those of the Azuela, Cofanes, Sardinas, and Duino. It descends from the grand Cordillera of the Andes, near the town of San Miguel de Ibarra, washes the territory of the Sucumbios Indians, and enters the Napo in lat. 123 s. 
|AGUARINGUA, an ancient and large settle ment of the nation of the Taironas Indians, in the province and government of Santa Marta. 
|AGUARO, a river of the province and goTernment of Honduras. It enters the S. sea to the e. of Aguan. 
|AGUARO, CANO DE, a river of the province and government of Venezuela. It enters the Guarico, and is famous for abounding in fish, particularly a kind called pabon, which has a circular spot of sky-blue and gold upon its tail, resembling 1 an eye, and which is much esteemed for its excellent fla vour. 
|AGUAS, a small river of the province and government of Paraguay. It runs n. n. w. and enters the Uruguay close to the Juipa. AGUAS-BLANCAS. See YAGUAPIIU. AGUAS-BELLAS, a small river of the pro vince and government of Paraguay. It runs e. and enters the Parana. 
|AGUAS-CALIENTES, an akaldia mayor of the the kingdom of Nucva Galicia, and bishopric of Guadalaxara, in Nueva E*paiia. Its jurisdiction includes four head settlements of the district, and two large estates called the Pavellon, as also the estate Del Fuerte, in which quantities of grain and seed are cultivated. The principal settlement is the town of the same name, of a moderate tempera ture, its inhabitants consisting of 500 Spanish fa milies, as also of some of Mustees and Mulattoes; and although some Mexican Indians are to be found here, they merely come to traffic with the productions of the other jurisdictions. It con tains three convents ; one of the bare-footed Fran ciscans, a sumptuous and well-built fabric ; one of the Mercenarios; and a third of San Juan de Oiosj with a well-endowed hospital ; not to mention several other chapels and altars in the vicinity. It is 140 leagues n. n.w. of Mexico, and 35 of Guadalaxara. Long. 101 51 30* w. Lat. 22 & n. 
|AGUAS-CALIENTES, another settlement in the province and government of Venezuela, of the kingdom of Ticrra Firme, situate upon the coast. 
|AGUASTELAS, SAN MIGUEL DE, a settle ment of the head settlement of the district of San Andres of Acatlan, and akaldia mayor of Xalapa, in Nueva Espana. It is but lately established, and is one league s. of its head settlement. 
|AGUATEPEC, SANTA MARIA DE, a settle ment of the head settlement of the district and akaldia mayor of Tecali in Nueva Espana. It contains 48 families of Indians. 
|AGUATLAN, the head settlement of the dis trict of the akadia mayor of Izucar in Nueva Es pana. It was formerly a separate jurisdiction; but on account of its smallness, and the ill-fa voured and craggy state of its soil, it was incorpo rated with another close to it. It contains 46 Indian families, and is 12 leagues e. of its capital. 
|AGUATUBI, a settlement of the province of Moqui in Nuevo Mexico. 
|AGUATULCO, a river of the province and akaldia mayor of Tegoantepec in Nueva Espana. It runs e. and enters the S. sea near the Capolita. 
|AGUEDA, MONO DE SANTA, a mountain of the n. coast of the straits of Magellan, in the Sierra Nevada (snowy sierra). 
|AGUEDA, a point or cape near the above moun tain. 
|AGUGA Cape, on the coast of Peru, S. Ame rica, lies s. of Puira, in the 61 of s. lat. and in the 8Pofo&gt;. long. 
|AGUI.JO, SAN MIGUEL DE, a settlement of the new kingdom of Leon. 
|AGLJILA, VILLA GUTIERREZ DE LA, atowii of the akaldia mayor of Xerez in Nueva Espana. It was formerly very considerable, and had a nu merous population of Spaniards, when it was made a fortress against the Tepehuanes and Taraumaras Indians. It is an akaldia may or , but its jurisdiction is consolidated with another, on ac count of its being a place of little consideration, and its population being very scanty, and living in some small wards and estates in its district, ft lies at the e. entrance of the province of Nayarith, and is the boundary of the kingdom of Nucva Gulicia, being nine leagues c. of Xerez. 
|AGUILA, a very lofty mountain of the province and government of Darien, near the . coast, and thus called from an eagle with two heads, which was caught here in 1608, and which was sent to the queen, Dona Maria-Ana of Austria, mother of Philip III. At its skirt is a bay, or swampy ground, which is round, and has a very narrow inlet. Forty-five leagues from Cartagena. 
|AGUILA, a point or cape of the larger island of the Maluinas or Falkland isles ; thus named from having been discovered by the French frigate, the Aguila, or Eagle. It is one of those which form the great bay or port. 
|AGUILUSCO, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of Arantzan, and alcaldia mayor of Valladolid, in the province and bishop ric of Mechoacan. It contains 32 families of Indians, who employ themselves in sowing seed, cutting wood, manufacturing vessels of fine earthen-ware, and saddle-trees for riding. 
|AGUIRRE, a river of the province and go vernment of Venezuela. It rises by the side of the city of Niiira, runs s. passes through the town of San Carlos, and enters the Sarara. 
|AGUIRRE, some pastures for young horses in the province and corregimiento of Coquimbo, of the kingdom of Chile, between the rivers Ramos and Mamas. 
|AGUJA, Point of the, on the coast oPTierra Firme, and of the province and government of Santa Marta, between this city and Cape Chichibacoa. It is the part of land which projects far thest into the sea. 
|AGUJA, Point of the, another point on the coast of the S. sea, and of the province and corre gimiento of Piura in Peru. 
|AGUJA, Point of the. See article EGUILLE. 
|AGUR, FRANCISCO, a settlement of the pro vince and captainship of Espiritu Santo in Bra zil, situate near the coast and the bay of Espiritu Santo. 
|AGUSTIN, SAN, a capital city of the pro vince and government of E. Florida, situate on the e. coast, in a peninsula, or narrow strip of land. It has a good port, which was discovered by Ad miral Pedro Menendes de Aviles, on St. Augustin s day in the year 1565, which was his reason for giving the place this title, which has, however, been twice changed. He also built here a good castle for its defence. The city has a very good parish church, and a convent of the Franciscan order ; and, as far as relates to its spiritual con cerns, it is subject to the bishop of Cuba, who has at various times proposed the erection of an abbey, but has not obtained his wish, although it had been approved by the council of the Indies. It has two hospitals, one for the garrison troops, and another tor the community ; it has also an hermitage, with the dedicatory title of Santa Bar bara. It was burnt by Francis Drake in 1586; by Captain Davis, with the Bucaniers, in 1665 ; but it was immediately afterwards rebuilt. In 1702 it was besieged by the English, under the command of Colonel Moore, who, failing in his attempts to take the castle, which was defended by the governor, Don Joseph de Zuniga, exhibited his revenge by burning and destroying the town. In 1744 the English returned to the siege, under the command of General Oglethorp, who was equally unsuccessful, in as much as it was most valiantly defended by the governor, Don Manuel de Montiano, who defied the bombardment of the enemy. This fort has a curtain of 60 toises long ; the parapet is nine feet ; and the terrace, or horizon tal surface of the rampart, is 20 feet high, with good bomb-proof casemates, and mounted with 50 pieces of cannon, having also, on the exterior, an excellent covered way. The city, although it is encompassed by a wall, is not strong, and its de fence consists in 10 projecting angles. It was ced ed, with the whole of the province, to the English by the King of Spain, in the peace of Versailles, in 1762 ; and it remained in their possession till 1783, when it was restored by the treaty of Paris. The breakers at the entrance of the harbour have formed two channels, whose bars have eight feet of water each. Long. 81 40 . Lat. 29 58 . 
|AGUSTIN, SAN, a settlement and real of mines, of the province of Taraumara, in the kingdom of Nueva Yizcaya, which was formerly a population of some consequence, and wealthy withal, from the richness of its mines, which have lately fallen into decay, and thereby entailed poverty upon the inhabitants. It is 26 leagues s. of the town of S. Felipe de Chiguagua. 
|AGUSTIN, SAN, another small settlement or ward of the head settlement of the district of Zumpahuacan, and alcaldia mayor of Marinalco, in Nueva Espafia. 
|AGUSTIN, SAN, another settlement of the head settlement of the district of Nopaluca, and alcaldia mayor of Tepcaca, in Nueva Espafia. It contains 20 families of Indians, and is distant a little more than a league from its head settlement. 
|AGUSTIN, SAN, another, in the head settlement of the district of Pinoteca, and alcaldia mayor of Xicayan. It contains 70 families of Indians, who trade in grain, seeds, and tobacco. Four leagues n. of its head settlement. 
|AGUSTIN, SAN, another settlement of the dis trict of Guilapa, and the alcaldi* mayor of Quatro Villas. It contains 34 families of Indians, who cultivate and trade in grain, pulse, coal, and the bark of trees. A little more than two leagues to the w. with a slight inclination to the s. of its head settlement. 
|AGUSTIN, SAN, another setttlement of the pro vince and government of Tucuman in Peru ; si tuate on the shore of the river Tercero (third river.) 
|AGUSTIN, SAN, another settlement of the pro vince and alcaldia, mayor of Vera Paz in the king dom of Guatemala. 
|AGUSTIN, SAN, another of the province and government of Popayan in the kingdom of Quito. 
|AGUSTIN, SAN, another of the province and government of Buenos Ayres in Peru, on the shore of the river Ibiquay. 
|AGUSTIN, SAN, another of the province and alcaldia mayor of Culiacan in Nueva Espana, situate near the town of Rosario. 
|AGUSTIN, SAN, a point or cape of the coast, of Brazil, in the province and captainship of Pernambuco, between the port Antonio Vaz and the river Tapado. One hundred leagues from the bay of Los Muertos ; [300 miles n. e. from the bay of All Souls. Lat. 8 38 s. Long. 35 11 w.l 
|AGUSTIN, SAN, another point or cape of the coast of the province and government of Rio de Hacha, and kingdom of Tierra Firme, close to the lake of San Juan, on the e. side. 
|AGUSTIN, SAN, a river of the province and government of Antioquia, in the new kingdom of Granada. It runs from 5. to n. and afterwards, with a slight inclination to the w. enters the river S. Juan, of the province of Choco. 
|AGUSTIN, SAN, a small island of the gulph of California, or Red Sea of Cortes ; situate in the most interior part of it, and near upon the coast of Nueva Espana, opposite the bay of San Juan Baptista. 
|AGWORTII, a township in Cheshire county, New Hampshire, incorporated in 1766, and con tains 704 inhabitants; eight miles e. by w. from Charlestown, and 73n.w. by w. from Portsmouth. 
|AHOME, a nation of Indians, who inhabit the shores of the river Zuaque, in the province of Cinaloa, and who are distant four leagues from the sea of California : they were converted to the Catholic faith by father Andres de Rivas, a Jesuit. Their country consists of some extensive and fer tile plains, and they are by nature superior to the other Indians of Nueva Espana. Moreover, their Heathenish customs do not partake so much of the spirit of barbarism. They abhorred polygamy, and held virginity in the highest estimation : and thus, by way of distinction, unmarried girls wore a small shell suspended to their neck, until the day of their nuptials, when it was taken oft" by the bride groom. Their clothes were decent, composed of wove cotton, and they had a custom of bewailing their dead for a whole year, night and morning, with an apparently excessive grief. They are gentle and faithful towards the Spaniards, with whom they have continued in peace and unity from the time of their first subjection. The prin cipal settlement is of the same name, and lies at the mouth of the river Fuerte, on the coast of the gulph of California, having a good, convenient, and well sheltered port. 
|AHORCADOS, Point of the, on the shore of the large lake of Los Patos, of the province and captainship of Rey in Brazil. 
|AHORCADOS, some small islands or points on the coast of the S. sea, in the district of Santa Elena, of the province and government of Guay aquil, close to the mouth of the river Colonche. 
|AHUACATEPEC, SAN NICOLAS DE, another settlement of the above head settlement and alcal dia mat/or. 
|AHUACATES, SANTA MARIA DE, a branch of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Cuernavaca in Nueva Espana. 
|AHUACATLAN, SANTA MARIA DE, a settlement* of the head settlement of the district of San Francisco del Talle, and alcaldia mayor of Zultepec, in Nueva Espana. It is of a cold tem perature, inhabited by 51 families of Indians, and distant three leagues s. of its head settlement. 
|AHUACATLAN, another settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Zochicoatlan in Nueva Espana. It is of a cold temperature, si tuate on a small level plain, surrounded by hills and mountains. It contains 13 families of Indians, and is seven leagues to the n. of its capital. 
|AHUACATLAN, with the dedicatory title of SAN JUAN, the head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Zacatlan in Nueva Nspana. Its inhabitants are composed of 450 families of Indians, and .60 of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattoes, including the settlements of the district. Five leagues from its capital, and separated by a mountainous and rugged road, as also by a very broad river, whose waters, in the winter time, in crease to such a degree as to render all communi cation between the above places impracticable. 
|AHUACATLAN, another, of the head settlement of the district of Olinala, and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa, in the above kingdom. It contains 160 families of Indians, who trade in chia, (a white medicinal earth), and grain, with which its territory abounds. It lies n. w. of its head settlement, 
|AHUACAZALCA, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of San Luis de la Costa, and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa, in Nueva Espaiia. It contains 56 families of Indians, whose com merce consists in rice and cotton. Three leagues n. e. of its head settlement. 
|AHUACAZINGO, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of Atengo, and alcaldia mayor of Chilapa, in Nueva Espana. It contains 46 families of Indians, and is ten leagues c. of its head settlement. 
|AHUALICAN, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Tixtlan in Nueva Espaiia ; of a benign and salutary temperature, as it is fanned bj the??. breezes. It lies three leagues n. of its head settle ment, which is Oapan ; and contains 36 families of Indians. 
|AHUATELCO, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Izucarin Nueva Espana, situate on the skirt of the volcano of the same name. In its district are eight settlements, inhabited by 289 families of Indians, and 11 of Muste.es and Mulattoes, who live in some temporary habitations for labourers. It is situate on a cold, rough, and barren soil, but is nevertheless fertile in wheat, and abounds in water and cattle. Eight leagues n. w. of its capital. 
|AHUATEMPA, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of Santa Isabel, and alcaldia mayor of Cholula, in Nueva Espana. It contains 39 familiesof Indians, and is two leagues s. of its capital. 
|AHUATEPEC, a settlement of the head settle ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa in Nueva Espana. It contains 32 families of Indians, and is two leagues n. of its capital. 
|AH U AT LAN, SAN PEDRO DE, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of San Juan del Rio, and alcaldia mayor of Queretaro, inNueva Espana ; annexed to the curacy of the former place, and lying ten leagues n. w. of the latter. 
|AHUEHUEZINGO, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of Chietlan, and alcaldia mayor of Izucar, in Nueva Espana. 
|AHUEZITLA, a settlement of the head settle ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa in Nueva Espana. It contains families of Indians, and abounds in cA/a, (a white medicinal earth), grain, and earthen- ware. It is nine leagues w. n. w. of its capital. 
|AHVVAHHAWAY, a race of Indians, who differ but very little in any particular from the Mandans, their neighbours, except in the unjust war which they, as well as the Minetares, prosecute against the defenceless Snake Indians. They claim to have once been a part of the Crow Indians, whom they still acknowledge as relations. They have resided on the Missouri as long as their tradition will enable them to inform. 
|AIABACA, a settlement of the province and cor regimiento of Piura in Peru. 
|AIACASI, a settlement of the province and cor regimiento of Chumbivilcas in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Belille. 
|AIACOA, a small river of the province and go vernment of Guayana, or Nueva Andalucia. It rises to the w. of the Sierra Maiguatida, runs e. and enters the Orinoco near the rapid stream of the Marumarota. 
|AIACOCHA, a settlement of the pr &lt;ind corregimiento of Huanta in Peru, situate in the island Tayacaja. 
|AIAHUALTEMPA, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of Zitlala, and alcaldia mayor of Chilapa, in Nueva Espana. It contains 36 fa milies of Indians, and is three leagues to the s. of its head settlement. 
|AIAHUALULCO, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of Ixlahuacan, and alcaldia mayor of Xalapa, in Nueva Espana, which, in the Mexican language, signifies a small river. It abounds in the best fruits of its jurisdiction, such as pears and other sorts of fruit highly esteemed at Vera Cruz. It contains only three families of Spa niards, 22 of Mustees and Mulattoes, and 70 of Indians. In its district are several temporary habi tations for labourers, and pastures for breeding cat tle, which reach as far as the district of Tepcaca, in the lofty eminence of Xamiltepec, 16 leagues distant from Xalapa. It includes also within its administration the cultivated estates extending as far as the place called Puertezuelo, where this juris diction approximates to that of San Juan de los Llanos on the w. s. w. side ; and in the culture of the above estates many Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattoes, are employed. One league s. w. of its head settlement. 
|AIAHUALULCO, another settlement of the head settlement of the district of Zitlala, and alcaldia mayor of Chilapa, in the kingdom of Xalapa, and annexed to the curacy of this place, from which it is three leagues distant, being nine to the s. of its head settlement. It contains 42 families of Indians, including another small settlement incorporated W 7 ith it. 
|AIAHUASA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Aimaraez in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Pachaconas. 
|AIAMARCA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Castro Virreyna in Peru, an* nexed to the curacy of Cordova. 
|AIANABE, a settlement of Indians of S. Caro lina, situate on the shore of the river Uuflle-noir. 
|AI APANGO, the head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Chalco in Nueva Es pana. It contains 100 families of Indians, and is annexed to the curacy of Amccameca, at two leagues to the 5. of its capital. 
|AIAPATA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Carabaya in Peru, and very opulent, on account of its silver mines. The sands on the banks of the rivers here have been known so richly impregnated with this metal, that lumps of it have been at different times picked up. It is the most considerable population in the province, and the temperature is so salutary, that it is very com mon to meet with persons of 90 years of age, and many also of 100. 
|AIAPEL, a town of the province and govern ment of Antioquia, iu the new kingdom of Gra nada, situate on the bank of a large lake or swamp of the same name, and which is formed from the waters of the rivers Cauca, San Jorge, and others. In its district are the laxaderos, or washing places for gold, of La Cruz, San Mateo, Thuansi, Can, Ure, Man, San Pedro, and La Soledad. 
|AIARANGA, a settlement of the province and c-orregimiento of Chancay in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Paccho. 
|AIARI, a settlement of the province and corre gimiento of Huanta in Peru, annexed to the cu racy of Mayoc. 
|AIATA, a settlement of the province and cortcgimiento of Larecaja in Peru. 
|AIATASTO, a large river of the province and government of Tucuman, in the district and juris diction of the city of Salta, on the banks of which arc some pasture grounds of the same name, upon which are fed 40,000 head of neat cattle, arid 6000 of horses for breeding. 
|AIATEPEC, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of Atitlan, and alcaldia mayor of Villalta, in Nueva Espana. It contains 45 fami lies of Indians, and is 17 leagues from its capital. 
|AIAUI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Castro Virreyna in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Huaitara. 
|AIAUIRI, a settlement of the province and cor regimiento of Lamoa in Peru. In its vicinity are some forts, which were built by the Indians in the time of their gentilism, and now in a state of great dilapidation. There is a lake of warm water here, the bottom of which has never yet been found. The water always keeps at one height, so that it is presumed that it finds its way out through some subterraneous channel. There is also another warm 
water spring at two leagues distance, "which is very noxious, and, as it runs, has the property of petri fying, in like manner as the spring of water in Guancavelica. 
|AIAUIRI, another settlement of the province and corregimienlo of Yauyos in Peru. 
|AIAUTLA, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Teutila iu Nueva Espana, of a warm temperature, and inha bited by 100 Indian families, who support them selves by cultivating and selling the vat/?iil/a plant. Nine leagues s. of its capital. 
|AICAROPA, a small river of the province and government of Guayana,or Nueva Andalucia. It rises in the country of the Armocotos Indians, runs from e. to w. with a slight inclination to the s. and enters the Caura. 
|AICHES, a settlement of Indians of the province and government of Las Texas, in Nueva Espana, sitzate in the way which leads to Mexico. 
|AICIACHI A, a settlement of the missions which belonged to the Jesuits, in the province of Taraumara and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya, 40 leagues w. s. w. of the town and real of the mines of Chiguagua. 
|AIECTIPAC, a settlement of the head settle ment of the district of Yxteapan, and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa, in Nueva Espana. It contains 21 Indian families, and is three leagues e. of its head settlement. 
|AIENCAS, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Cuenca, in the kingdom of Quito, annexed to the curacy of Paccha. 
|AIGA, a settlement of the province and corre gimiento of Huailas in Peru. 
|AIGAME, a settlement and real of mines of the province and government of Sonora in Nueva Espana. 
|AILES, a river of the province and government of Louisiana. It runs s. e. between the rivers Canot and Noyre, and empties itself into the Mississippi. 
|AIMARAEZ, a province and corregimiento of Peru, bounded n. w. and w. by the province of Andahuailas, of the bishopric of Guamanga, s. by Parinacocha of the same, s. e. by Chumbivilcas, and e. by Cotabamba. It is 40 leagues in length from n. to s. and 26 in width from e. to w. includ ing in its figure on the w. side the last mentioned province. It is one of the most uneven soils in the kingdom, being full of lofty sierras and snowy mountains. It is on this account that its climate is very cold, excepting, however, in some vallies, where it is more temperate, and where, on some small sloping grounds, the inhabitants sow seed and grain, and cultivate fruit trees and cane plantations, 
from which they are enabled to make sugar. It is intersected by three rivers, which are of no use whatever to it, being too low in their beds ; but they unite and form the Pachachaca, which enters the province of Abancay, and has more than 40 bridges of wood and cord thrown over it in different parts. There are innumerable veins of gold and silver orein this province, which are not worked, from the want of energy, and from the poverty existing among the inhabitants ; and thus only some tri fling emolument is now and then derived from one or the other. It was otherwise in former times, but these mines are now almost all filled with water. Some mines of quicksilver have been discovered, but the working of them has been forbid. Here is little of the cattle kind, and no cloth manufac tures peculiar to the country are made here, with the exception of a sort of thick quilt, which they call Chuces ; and a kind of grain is gathered here, known by the name of Maino. This province was united to the empire of Peru by Capac Yupanqui V. Emperor of the Incas. The language of the natives is the same as that which is most universal throughout the kingdom. The capital formerly consisted of a large and well ordered settlement, which was called Tintay, but which is at present but thinly inhabited, on account of the scarcity of water, and from a plague, in which almost all its inhabitants perished. The number of souls in the whole of the province may amount to 15,000. It contains 50 settlements within its jurisdiction. The yearly tribute received by the corregidor used to amount to 800,100 dollars, and the duties paid upon the akavala, (a centage on goods sold), to 688 dollars. 
The settlements of its jurisdiction are: 
Chaluanca. Ayahuasa. 
Colca. Huancaray. 
Mollebamba. Sabaino. 
Carabamba. Catarosi. 
Matara. Ant ill a. 
Antabamba. Iluaquirca. 
Oropesa. Pocoanca. 
Totora. Tapairihua. 
Traparo. Chalvani. 
Chacoche. Caypi. 
Caleauzo. Caracara, 
Viri. Sanaica. 
Pampamarca. Huaillaripa, 
Silco. Pichihua. 
Atuncama. Amoca. 
Chacna. Yanaca. 
Capaya. Saraico. 
Muitu. Subyunca. 
Pachaconas. Lucre. 
Sirca, Chuquingft, 
Pichurhua. Ancobamba. 
Colcabamba. Pampayacta. 
Soraya. Chapinmrca, 
Huairahuacuo. Lambraraa. 
Toraya. Pairaca. 
|AIMAKAPA, a small river of the province and colony of Surinam, in the part of Guayana pos sessed by the Dutch. It is one of those which en ter the Cuyum near where it joins the Esquivo. 
|AINACA, a settlement of the province and r-orrfginiiento of Caxatarnbo in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Cochamarca. 
|AINACOLCA, a gold mine of the province and corregimiento of Arequipa in Peru. It is famous for the excellent quality of this metal, but it is very difficult to be worked, on account of the hardness of its stone. 
|AIO, a settlement of the province and corregi miento of Condensuyos de Arequipa in Peru, an nexed to the curacy of Chichas. 
|AIOAIO, a settlement of the province and cor regimiento of Sicasica in Peru, eight leagues from its capital. 
|AIOCUESCO, SANTA MARIA DE, the head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Antequera, in the province and bishopric of Mechoacan in Nueva Espana. It is of a hot tem perature, contains a convent of the religious order of Santo Domingo, and 400 Indian families, who carry on some commerce in the cochineal, (the plant producing which they cultivate), and a very considerable one in the manufacture of Ptdgues, on account of the abundance of Magueyes which are found here. Seven leagues s. of its capital. 
|AIOTITLAN, the head settlement of the dis trict of the alcaldia mayor of Amola in Nueva Espana, immediately upon the coast of the S. sea, and situate between two deep ravines. Its tem perature is very hot and troublesome to live in, on account of the various venomous animals and in sects that abound in its territory. It contains 76 Indian families, whose trade consists in making troughs and trays very finely painted. This settlement, in which there is a convent of the order of St. Francis, is beautifully surrounded with plantations. Fifteen leagues distant from its capital. AIONANTOU, a settlement of Indians of New France, situate in the county of Canahoque, on the shore of one of the salt marshes that are found there. 
|AIOZINAPA, a settlement of the head settle ment of Oliuala, and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa, in Nueva Espana, of a hot and moist temperature, and abounding in cochineal, fruit, and pulse, with. 
24, A I U 
which the inhabitants trade. These are composed of 34 Indian families. It is a little more than three leagues from its head settlement. 
|AIOZINGO, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Chalco in Nueva Espana, situate on the shore of the lake of Mexico, with a good port, at which are embarked the fruits of many provinces for the supply of that capital, (Chalco), which is within eight or ten hours sail from hence. It has a good convent of S. Augustin, where a most beauti ful image of the virgin is reverenced, and sup posed to be wonder-working. Its inhabitants con sist of 120 Indian families and some Spanish. It is distant one league s. s. e. from its capital. 
|AIQUILE, a settlement of the province of Mizque in Peru. 
|AIRICOS, a nation of Indians who inhabit the plains of Cazanare and Meta, of the new kingdom of Granada, to the e. of the mountains of Bogota, on the borders of the river Ele. It is numerous, and feared by all its neighbours, on account of its valour and dexterity in the use of arms. 
|AIRICOS, with the dedicatory title of SAN FRANCISCO XAVIER, a settlement which belonged to the Jesuits, and founded in 1662 by father An tonio de Monteverde, and composed of some of those Indians who were thus reduced to the Catho lic faith. 
|AIRIHUANCA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Cotabamba in Peru. 
|AIRS, a small city of the province and colony of New Jersey, in the county of Burlington. 
|AIUDA, NUESTRA SENORA DE LA, a village and settlement of the Portuguese, in the province and captainship of Pernambuco in Brazil, situate upon the sea-coast, and on the shore of the river S. Miguel. 
|AIUDA, another settlement in the province and captainship of Puerto Seguro, situate upon the coast on the shore of the port. 
|AIUILA, a river of the province and alcaldia mayor of Soconusco, in the kingdom of Guate mala. It runs into the S. sea between the settle ment of Suchitepec and the river Coatlan. 
|AIUINOS, a nation of Indians of the province and government of Cinaloa in Nueva Espana, converted to the faith by father Francisco Olinano, of the abolished society of the Jesuits, in 1624. They live towards the n. of the above province, and in the times of their heathenism they dwelt in the lofty mountains, in order that they might de fend themselves from the other nations with whom they were at war. They are docile, well-inclined, and of good habits. 
|AIUN, or IUMERI, a river of the province and 
viceroy/aft
 of Buenos Ayres. It runs s. and enters the Rio Negro. 
|AIUNGIIA, PAGO DE, a settlement of the pro vince and government of Tucuman, in the district and jurisdiction of the city of Santiago del Estero, from whence it is 22 leagues distant. It is situate on the shore of the river Dulce. 
|AIUTLA, the head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mm/or of Villalta in Nueva Espana. It is of a cold temperature, containing 187 Indian families, and a convent of the religious order of S. Domingo; distant 13 leagues to the e. of its capi tal. 
|AIUTLA, another settlement in the head settle ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Autlan of the sanie kingdom, with 23 Indian families, wh* have large stores of pulse and fruit, so rich and fer tile is their country. It is annexed to the curacy of Tenamaztlani, from whence it lies one league s. 
|AIUA, a small town of the island of St. Domin go, situate in the line which divides the Spanish territory from the French. It was the inhabitants of this town who chiefly contributed to ensure the victory which was gained against the Spaniards in the plain of Pucrfo Real, by the president Don Francisco de Segura y Sandoval, in 1691. 
|AIX, PALMARDE, a large beach on the coast of Florida, within the channel of Bahama, near the point of Canaveral ; memorable for the ship wreck of 22 vessels, composing the fleet of Nueva Espana, which took place in 1715, being under the command of Don Antonio de Ubila ; memorable also for the loss of two galleons from Tierra Firme, commanded by Don Antonio de Echevers ; the loss of the one and the other amounting to nearly 20 million dollars. 
|AIX, a river of the same province, which runs into the sea very near the Palmar. 
|AJOIANI, a settlement of the province and cor regimiento of Carabaya in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Coaza. 
A JOS, a parish situate on the foot of the moun tains which separate the rivers Paraguay and Pa rana, about 24 leagues e. of Asuncion. Lat. 25 26 34" s. Long. 56 30 a?. 
|AJOUES, a settlement of Indians of the pro vince and government of Louisiana, in which the French held a garrison and fort for its defence, on the shore of a lake near the Missouri. 
|AJOUES, another settlement of the same province and government, situate on the shore of the river Missouri. 
|AKANCEAS, a nation of savage Indians of N. America, who live at the conflux of the rivers Mississippi, and another abundant stream of its 
|ALA 
name. The religion of these idolaters is very sin gular, for they acknowledge a supreme being, who, they imagine, manifests himself to them in the figure of some animal which feeds in their fields ; and when this dies, they substitute another, after having signified very great demonstrations of re gret for the fate of the one which is lost. 
|AKANKIA, a river of the province and go vernment of Louisiana. It is an arm of (he Mis sissippi, which runs s. s. e. and enter* the lake of Maurepas. 
|AKANSA, a settlement of Indians of the pro vince and government of Louisiana. It has a fort built by the French, and it is near the mouth of the river of its name, where it enters the Missis sippi. 
|AKANSA, another settlement in the same pro vince, situate also on the shore of the aforesaid river, and distinguished by the name of Petit Akansa. 
|AKANSA, a river of the above province and government. It rises in the country of the Ozaques Indians, runs many leagues s. e. as far as the town of Satovis, when, turning to the s. it enters by two mouths into the Mississippi, being through out subject to large cataracts. 
|AKOUKA, a settlement of the province of La Guayana, in the Dutch possessions, or colony of Surinam ; situate on the shore of the river Little, just before it enters the Marawin. 
|ALABAHA, a considerable river in E. Flo rida. Also said to be the name of a branch of St. Mary s river. 
|ALABAHA, a considerable river of Georgia, which pursues a s. course to thegulph of Mexico, 100 miles w. of the head of St. Mary s river. Its banks are low, and a trifling rain swells it to more than a mile in width. In a freshet the current is rapid, and those who pass are in danger of being entangled in vines and briars, and drowned ; they are also in real danger from great numbers of hun gry alligators. The country for nearly iOO miles on each side of this river, that is to say, from the head of St. Mary s to Flint river, which is 90 miles zo. of the Alabaha, is a continued soft, miry waste, affording neither water nor food for men or beasts ; and is so poor indeed, as that the common game of the woods are not found here. The country on the w. of Alabaha is rather preferable to that on the ej 
|ALABAMOUS, an old French fort, in the t&gt;. part of Georgia ; situate between Coosa and TaUapOQse rivers, and not far from their conflu ence. 
|ALABAMA, an Indian village, delightfully 
|VOL. I. 
|ALA 35 
situated on the banks of the Mississippi, on several swelling green hills, gradually ascending from the verge of the river. These Indians are the remains of the ancient Alabama nation, who inhabited the e, arm of the Great Mobile river, which still bears their name, now possessed by the Creeks, or Muscogulges, who conquered the former, 
|ALABAMA River is formed by the junction of the Ooosa or Coosee, or High Town river, and Tallapoosee river, at Little Tullasee, and runs in a s. w. direction, until it meets Tombigbee river from the n. w. at the great island which it there forms, 90 miles from the mouth of Mobile bay, in thegulph of Mexico. This beautiful river has a gentle current, pure waters, and excellent fish. It runs about two miles an hour, is 70 or 80 rods wide at its head, and from 15 to 18 feet deep in the driest season. The banks are about 50 feet high, and seldom, if ever, overflowed. Travellers have gone down in large boats, in the month of May, in nine days, from Little Tallasee to Mobile bay, which is about 350 miles by water. Its banks abound w ith valuable productions in the vegetable and mineral kingdoms. 
|ALABASTER, or ELEUTHERA, one of the Banama or Lucayo islands, on which is a small fort and garrison. It is on the Great Bahama bank. The soil of this island and Harbour island, which lies at the n. end of it, is better than Providence island, and produces the greatest part of the pine apples that are exported ; the climate is very healthy. Lat. 24 40 to 26 30 n. Long. 7G 22 to 76 56 w. 
|ALACHUA Savannah is a level green plain, in the country of the Indians of that name in E. Florida, situate about 75 miles w. from St. Augustine. It is about 15 miles over, and 50 in circumference ; and scarcely a tree or bush of any kind to be seen on it. It is encircled with high sloping hills, covered with waving forests, and fragrant orange groves, rising from an exube rantly fertile soil. The ancient Alachua town stood on the borders of this savannah ; but the Indians removed to Cuscowilla, two miles distant, on account of the unhealthiness of the former site, occasioned by the stench of the putrid fish and reptiles, in the summer and autumn, driven on shore by the alligators, and the noxious exhala tions from the marthes of the savannah. Though the horned cattle and horses bred in these meadows are large, sleek, sprightly, and fat, yet they are subject to mortal diseases ; such as the water rot, or scald, occasioned by the warm water of the sa vannah ; while those which range in the high forest* are clear of this disorder. E 
26 ALA 
|ALACLATZALA, a branch of the head settlement of the district of S. Luis, of the coast and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa in Nueva Espana. It contains 125 Indian families, and is one league from the settlement of Quanzoquitengo. 
|ALACRANES, some islands, or rather some hidden rocks, of the N. sea, in the bay of Mexico, opposite the coast of Yucatan. Those who navi gate these parts arc accustomed to pass round be yond them for fear of venturing amongst them, al though there are some good channels among them, and withgood soundings. They are for the most part barren, producing nothing beyond a herb called ?20row,and deficient in fresh water ; neither do they produce any animal except the mole, which is found here in prodigious numbers. There are, however, a quantity of birds, of three distinct sorts, each forming a community of itself, and entirely separated from the other two ; and it has been observed, that if one party may have fixed upon any place for building their nests, the others never think of disturbing them, or driving them from it ; but the noise these birds make is so great, that one cannot pass near them without suffering consider ably from their united clamours. 
A LAD AS, a parish situate about 14 leagues s. e. of Corrientes, in Lat. 23 15 20" s. Long. 58 30 rr.~) 
|ALAHUIZTLAN, SAN JUAN DF, a branch of the head settlement of the district of Escateopan, and alcaldiamayor of Zaqualpa, in Nueva Espana. (t contains 270 Indian families. 
|ALAIN, a river of the province and govern ment of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito. It rises in the country of the Locamas Indians, runs from r. to n. and turning to the n. n. f. enters the Pucare. 
|ALAMEDA, a settlement of the missions be longing to the religious of St. Francis in Nuevo Mexico. 
|ALAMILLOS, a settlement of the province of Taraumara and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya ; one of the missions which belonged to the religious of St Francis. It is close to the town and real of the mines of Santa Eulalia. 
|ALAMO, a settlement of the province and government of the new kingdom of Leon, situ ate 15 leagues to the s. e. of the Point. 
|ALAMOS, REAL DE Los, a settlement and real of the mines of the province of Sinaloa in Nueva Espana. It is situate s. e. of the Sierra Mad re, and surrounded by rich silver mines, which would produce abundantly but for want of labourers. There are in its district five estates that are fertile in maize, French beans, and sugar cane. The spiritual concerns of all these parts 
|ALA 
are under the direction of a curate, whose jurisdic tion extends as far as the river Mayo, which flows down from the sierra. It is 20 leagues distant from the town of Tucrtc, and between these lies the valley of Maquipo. [Population 7900 souls. 
|ALAMOS, with the dedicatory title of S. JORGE, a town of the province and captainship of Para in Brazil, founded by Jorge del Alamo, who gave it his name, in a place called La Vigia. It has a magnificent parish church, with the title of Nuestra Senora de Nazareth , with a large and good fort, and well furnished with artillery. Also, at the dis tance of a league and an half from the settlement, is a house of charity belonging to the religious order of the Capuchins of La Piedad. 
|ALAMOS, another town of the province and go vernment of Sonora, in the line that divides the confines of this jurisdiction and the province of Ostimuri, between the rivers Hiaqui and La Sonora. 
|ALAMOS, another settlement of the same pro vince and government as the former, situate to the s. of the garrison of Coro de Guachi. 
|ALAMOS, another of the missions belonging to the abolished society of Jesuits, in the province of Taraumara and kingdom of Nueva V izcaya. It is 27 leagues 5. w. and a quarter of a league s. of the real of the mines and town of S. Felipe de Chiguaga. 
|ALAMOS, another settlement and real of the silver mines of the province and government of Cinaloa. 
|ALANGASI, a settlement of the kingdom of Quito, in the district of the corregimiento of the Cinco Leguas de la Capital. In its territory is a fountain of hot medicinal waters. 
A LANG AST, a river of the above corregimiento y and rising in the desert mountain of Sincholagua ; over it there is a large bridge, composed of a single arch, but so strong, that when, in 1660, a part of the mountain fell upon it, and precipitated one half of it into the stream, the other half still re mained firm and immoveable. This bridge is built of mud and stone. 
|ALANIS, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Maracaibo, in the district of the city of Merida, situate in the way which leads from this city to the new kingdom of Grenada. 
|ALANGI, SANTIAGO DE, a city and head settlement of the district of the province of Chiriqui and government of Santiago de Veragua, in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. It is small, but abounding in fruits and cattle ; in which a regular trade is carried on for supplying the city of Pa nama. This trade consists principally in pigs, 
|ALA 
mules, poultry, cheese, and salt meats. It has likewise some mines in its district, which are not altogether neglected, though the advantages de rived from them would be immensely increased, if the number of labourers were greater. It is go verned by a lieutenant nominated by the governor of Santiago de Veragua. ["Lat. 8 12 n. Long. 80 40 w.~\ 
|ALAQUES, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Tacunga in the kingdom of Quito. 
|ALAQUINES, a branch of the head settle ment of the district of Tamazunchale, and akaldia mayor of Valles, in Nueva Espana, situate on the shore of a large river which divides this jurisdic tion from that of Guadalcazar. 
|ALARA, a river of the province and govern ment of Antioquia in the new kingdom of Gra nada. It rises at the foot of the sierra of Guamoco, and s. of the town of this name ; runs a?, and enters the Cauca. 
|ALASKE, a long peninsula on the n. w. coast of America, formed by Bristol bay and the ocean on the n. w. and n. and by the ocean and the waters of Cook s river on the s. and s. e. At its extremity are a number of islands, the chief of which, in their order westward, are, Oonemak, Oonalasha, and Ocutnnak, which form part of the chain or cluster of islands called the Northern Archipelago. Captain Cook, on his return in 1779, passed through the channel e. of Oonemak island. Sec NORTH-WEST COAST OF AMERICA. 
|ALATAMALIA, a large river of the province and government of Florida. It runs nearly due e. and enters the sea opposite the Gcorgean isles. This river, which is navigable, is more properly of Georgia. It rises in the Cherokee mountains, near the head of a western branch of Savannah river, called Tugulo. In its descent through the mountains it receives several auxiliary streams ; thence it winds, with considerable rapidity, through the hilly country 250 miles, from whence it throws itself into the open flat country, by the name of Oakmulgee. Tkence, after meandering for 150 miles, it is joined by the Oconee, which likewise has its source in the mountains. After this junction it assumes the name of Aiatamaha, when it becomes a large majestic river ; and flow ing with a gentle current through forests and plains 100 miles, discharges itself into the Atlan tic by several mouths. The n. channel glides by the heights of Darien, about 10 miles above the bar, and after several turnings, enters the ocean between Sapelo and Wolf islands. The s. chan cel, which is esteemed the largest aad deepest, 
|ALB 27 
after its separation from the n. descends gently, taking its course between M Intosh.and Broughton islands, and at last by the w. coast of St. Simon s sound, between the s. end of the island of that name, and the ;?. end of Jekyl island. At its confluence with the Atlantic it is 500 yards wide. 
|ALAUSI, a province and small corregimiento or district of the kingdom of Quito ; bounded w. by the province of Riobamba, n. w. by Chimbo, s. by Cuenca, w. by the district of Yaguache, and e. by that of Macas. It is watered by the rivers Uzogoche, Gussuntos, Pinancay, Alausi, and others of less note. It abounds in mountains, the most lofty of which are toward the w. ; the country is pleasant, and yields liberally every kind of fruit and grain that are common either to America or Europe. It contains many sugar mills, and the sugar is the best in the kingdom. The air here is mild and healthy, and the climate cannot be said to be inconveniently hot. It is governed by the corregidor, who resides in the capital. 
|ALAUSI, the capital of the above province. If has in its district some mineral fountains of hot water, established with suitable conveniences by some families of consideration residing there. Its trade consists in cloths, baizes, and cotton gar ments, which are wrought in its manufactories. It has a very good parish church, and a convent of the order of St. Francis. [Lat. 2 12 n. Long. 78 39 a&gt;. 
|ALBANS, ST. a township in Franklin county, Vermont, on lake Cham plain, opposite N. Hero island, with 256 inhabitants. 
|ALBANIA, or ALBANY, a county of the pro vince and colony of New York. It contains a certain number of plains fertile ingrain, in which, and in planks of pine, its principal commerce con sists. The winter is extremely cold, and the river Hudson is generally frozen for 100 miles, so as to bear immense burthens. The great quantity of snow that falls at this season is useful, not only because it covers the grain, and keeps it from pe rishing by the frost, but because, when it melts, it so increases the waters of the river, as to facilitate thereby the transportation of the productions of the country. 
|ALBANY County lies between Ulster and Saratoga; its extent 46 miles by 28. By the slate census, Jan. 20, 1796, the number of elec tors in this county were 60S7, and the number of towns 11. 
|ALBANIA, or ALBANY, the capital of the above county, founded by the Dutch in 1608, together with that of Orange, on the shore of the E 2 
28 A L I&gt; 
river Hudson. It is small, but has a great trade from the contiguity of the Iroquese Indians. It contains 350 houses, built afterthe Dutch fashion ; and that of the magistracy, which consists of a mayor, six aldermen, and a recorder, is very beautiful. The city is defended by a regular fort with four bastions, the rest of the fortification con sisting of palisades. Here the treaties and alli ances have been made with the Indians. It was taken by Robert Car in 1664, and added to this province by Colonel Dongan. [It is 160 miles n. of the city of New York, to which it is next in rank, and 340 s. of Quebec. This city and suburbs, by enumeration in 1797, contained 1263 buildings, of which 863 were dwelling houses, and 6021 inha bitants. Many of them are in the Gothic style, with the gable end to the street, which custom the first settlers brought from Holland ; the new houses are built in the modern style. Its inhabit ants are collected from various parts of the world, and speak a great variety of languages, but the English predominates ; and the use of every other is gradually lessening. Albany is unrivalled for situation, being nearly at the head of sloop navi gation, on one of the noblest rivers in the world. it enjoys a salubrious air, and is the natural em porium of the increasing trade of a large extent of country y&gt;. and n, a country of an excellent soil, abounding in every article for the W. India market; plentifully watered with navigable lakes, creeks, and rivers ; settling with unexampled rapid ity ; and capable of afford ing subsistence to millions of inhabitants. The public buildings are, a low Dutch church, of ancient and very curious construction, one for Episcopalians, two for Presby terians, one for Germans or High Dutch, and one for Methodists ; an hospital, city hall, and a hand some brick jail. In the year 1609, Henry Hudson, whose name the river bears, ascended it in his boat to Auraniaj the spot on which Albany now stands. The improvements in this city have, of late years, been very great in almost all respects. Wharfs have been built on the river, the streets have been paved, a bank instituted, a new and handsome style of building introduced. One mile w. ofthis city, in its suburbs, near the manor-house of lieutenant-governor Van Renssalaer, are very ingeniously constructed extensive and useful works, for the manufacture of Scotch and rappee snuff, roll and cut tobacco of different kinds, chocolate, mustard, starch, hair-powder, splitpease, and hulled barley. These valuable works are the property of Mr. James Caldwell, who un fortunately lost a complete set of similar works by re, in July 1794, with the stock, valued at 
|ALB 
37,500 dollars. It is a circumstance worthy of remark, and is evincive of the industry and eaterprise of the proprietor, that the whole of the pre sent buildings and machinery were begun and completed in the short space of eleven mouths. These works are decidedly superior to any of the kind in America. All the articles above enume rated, even to the spinning of tobacco, are manu factured by the aid of water machinery. For the invention of this machinery, the proprietor has obtained a patent. These works give employ ment and subsistence to 40 poor boys, and a num ber of workmen. Long. 73 42 w. Lat. 4S 40 n. lim.&lt;v 
|ALBANIA, or ALBANY, a large river of New France, which takes its rise from the lake Christinaux, runs n. e. and enters the sea at Hudson s bay. 
|ALBANIA, or ALBANY, a fortress in New South Wales, N. America. [Lat. 52 17 n. Long. 81 51 w.~ 
|ALBARICOQUES, Point of the, a cape on the n. coast, in the head settlement of the island of Santo Domingo, and in the French territories. It lies between the Trou d Enfers and Cape Bombo n. 
|ALBARRACIN, Desert of, a very, lofty mountain, always covered with snow, in the new kingdom of Granada. 
|ALBARRADA, a settlement of Indians of the kingdom of Chile, situate on the shore of the river Cauchupil. 
|ALBARRADA, another settlement, with the dedi catory title of San Miguel, in the head settlement of the district of Mitla, and alcaldia mai/or of Tentitlan, in Nueva Espana. It contains 22 Indian families, and is seven leagues n. of its head settlement. 
|ALBARREGAS, a large and abundant river of the new kingdom of Granada, which descends from the mountains of Bogota, irrigates the coun try and the city of Merida, running n. of this city until it enters the lake Maracaibo. 
|ALBEMARLE, a county of the province and colony of N. Carolina, and that part of it which is most agreeable, fertile, and salutary. It pro duces various sorts of fruits and pulse, and the winter is very temperate. This colony was esta blished in J670 by the lords and proprietors of it, who equipped, at their own expeuce, three ships, and a considerable number of persons, with provi sions for 18 months, and an abundance of merchan dize, tools, and arms fit for the new establishment; to which they sent resources yearly, in the pro portion required, until it appeared to be in a fit 
|ALB 
state to maintain itsdf. Thus the colonisfs lived for some years, and in time the productions in which their commerce consisted, increased to such a degree as tcr have caused them to excel all the other English colonies. 
|ALBEMARLE, another county or part of Vir ginia, washed by the river Fluvana on the s. \rhieh divides itself into several branches, and adds much to the fertility of the country. It is bounded e. by the county of Goochiand, a ! . divided by a chain of mountains of Augusta, and by that of Louisa on the n. [It contains 12,585 inha bitants, including 5579 slaves. Its extent, about 35 miles square. 
|ALBEMARLE, a strait, which is the mouth or entrance into the sea of the river Roanoke. 
|ALBERTO, a small settlement or ward of the head settlement of the district of Tlazintla, and alcaldia mayor of Ixmiqnilpan, in Nueva Espana. 
|ALBION, NEW, the name given by Sir Francis Drake to California, and part of then, w. coast of America, when he took possession of it. A large uncertain tract of the n, w. coast is thus called. Its limits, according to Mr. Arrowsmith s chart, are between 27 12 and 41 15 n. lat. Humboldt asserts, that, agreeably to sure historical data, the denomination of New Albion ought to be limited to that part of the coast which extends from the 43 to the 48, or from Cape White of Martin de Aguilar, to the entrance of Juan de Fuea. Besides, he adds, from the mis sions of the Catholic priests to those of the Greek priests, that is to say, from the Spanish village of San Francisco, in New California, to the Russian establishments on Cook river at Prince William s bay, and to the islands of Kodiac and Unalaska, there are more than a thousand leagues of coast inhabited by free men, and stocked with otters and Phocae ! Consequently, the discussions on the extent of the New Albion of Drake, and the pre tended rights acquired by certain European na tions, from planting small crosses, and leaving inscriptions fastened to trunks of trees, or the burying of bottles, may be considered as futile. The part of the coast on which Capt. Cook landed on the 7th of March 1778, and which some desig nate as New Albion, is in n. lat. 44 33 . e. long. 235 10 , which he thus describes : The land is full of mountains, the tops of which are covered with snow, while the vallies between them, and the grounds on the sea-coast, high as well as low, are covered with trees, which form a beautiful prospect, as of one vast forest. At first the natives seemed to prefer iron to every other article of 
commerce; at last they preferred brass. They were more tenacious of their property than any of the savage nations that had hitherto been met with ; so that they would not part with wood, water, grass, nor the most trifling article without a compensation, and were sometimes very unrea sonable in their demands." Sec CALIFORNIA, NEW. 
|ALBOR, a small island of the N. or Atlantic sea, one of the Bahamas, between those of Neque and S. Salvador. 
|ALBUQUERQUE, SAN ROSA DE, a settle ment and real of the silver mines of the alcaldia mayor of Colotlan in Noeva Espaaa. It is 19 leagues s. w. of the head settlement of the district of Tlaltenango. 
|ALBUQUERQUE, a town of New Mexico, situate on the shore of the Rio Grande (large river) of the N. [opposite the village of Atrisco, to the w. of the Sierra Obscura. Population 6000 souls. 
|ALBUQUERQUE, a small island, or low rocks, of the N. sea, near that of S. Andres. 
|ALCA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Condensuyos of Arequipa in Peru. 
|ALCALA, a settlement ot the province and alcaldia mayor of Chiapa, and kingdom of Gua temala, in the division and district of that city. 
|ALCAMANI, a branch of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Igualapa in Neuva Espana, and two leagues to the n. of the same. 
|ALCANTARA, S. ANTONIO DE, a town of the province and captainship ofMaranam in the kingdom of Brazil. It has been frequently invaded by the infidel Indians, who destroyed its work shops, so that its inhabitants have been much seduced. 
|ALCANTARA, S. ANTONIO DE, another settle ment in the province and district of Chanco, in the kingdom of Chile, near the shore of the river Mataquino. 
|ALCARAI, a small river of the province and government of Buenos Ayres. It runs e. and enters the river La Plata between those of Lay man and Gomez. 
|ALCATRACES, Island of the, one of (hose which lien, of St. Domingo, between the s. point of the Caico Grande, and the Panuelo Quadrado, (square handkerchief). 
|ALCHICHICA, S. MARTIN DE, a ward of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Izucar in Nueva Espana, belonging to that of Santa Maria de la Asuncion. 
|ALCHIDOMAS, a settlement of the province of the Apaches in N uevo Mexico, situate on the 
30 
|ALE 
shore of the Rio Grande Colorado, (large coloured river), or of the North. 
|ALCO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Chumbivilcas in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Libitaca. 
|ALCOHOLADES, a nation of Indians of the province of Venezuela. They are of a docile and affable disposition, and live upon the borders of the lake Maracaibo. Their numbers are much diminished, from the treatment they received from the German Weltzers, who, through a covetousness to possess the gold of these people, killed the greater part of them. 
|ALCOZAUCA, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Tlapa in Nueva Espana. It contains 104 families of Spaniards, Mulattoes, and Mustees; not a single Indian dwells in it. It is of a mild temperature, and in its district were the once cele brated mines of Cayro, which were crushed in and destroyed, having been almost unparalleled forthe quantity of silver that they produced. Eight lea gues from its capital. 
|ALDAS, a small settlement or ward of the head settlement of the district of Santa Ana, and alcaldia mayor of Zultepec, in Nueva Espana. 
|ALDEA, DEL ESPIRITU SANTO, a settlement of the province and captainship of Tondos Santos in Brazil, situate on the coast, at the mouth of the river Joana. 
|ALDEA, DEL ESPIRITU SANTO, another settle ment of the province and captainship of Seregipe, in the same kingdom, situate on the shore, and at the entrance of the river Real. 
|ALDEN, Fort, in Cherry Valley, in the state of New York. 
|ALDWORT, a settlement of the island of Barbadoes, in the district and parish of Santiago, on the a&gt;. coast. 
|ALEBASTER, or ELEUTHERA, an island of the channel of Bahama. See ALABASTER. 
|ALEGRE, a settlement of the province and captainship of S. Vincente in Brasil, situate s. of the settlement of Alto. 
|ALEMPIGON, a small lake northward of lake Superior.! 
|ALEXANDRIA, a city of Virginia, [formerly called Belhaven, and situated on the southern bank of the Patowmac river, in Fairfax county, about five miles s: w. from the Federal city, 60 s. to. from. Baltimore, 60 n. from Fredericksburgh, 168 n. of Williamsburgh, and 290 from the sea; 38 54 n. lat. and 77 10 w. long, its situation is elevated and pleasant. The soil is clayey. The original settlers, anticipating its future growth and importance, laid out the streets 
on the plan of Philadelphia. It contains about 400 houses, many of which are handsomely built, and 2748 inhabitants. This city, upon opening the navigation of Patowmac river, and in conse quence of its vicinity to the future seat of the federal government, bids fair to be one of the most thriving commercial places on the continent. Nine miles from hence is Mount Vernon, the celebrated seat of the late General Washington. 
|ALEXANDRIA, a township in Grufton county, New Hampshire, containing 298 inhabitants, in corporated in 1782. 
|ALEXANDRIA, a township in Hunterdon coun ty, IVew Jersey, containing 1503 inhabitants, inclu sive of 40 slaves. 
|ALEXANDRIA, a small town in Huntingdon county, Pennsylvania, on the Frankstown branch of Janiatta river, 192 miles n. w. of Philadel phia. 
|ALEXO, S. an island of the N. sea, near the coast of Brazil, in the province and captainship of Pernambuco, between the river Formoso and Cape S. Agustin. 
|ALFARO, S. MIGUEL DE, a settlement of the province and government of the Chiquitos Indians; situate on the shore of the river Ubay. It has a good port, from whence it is also known by the name of Port of the Chiquitos. It is, however, at present destroyed, % and the ruins alone remain. 
|ALFAXA I UCA,* a settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Kilotepec in Nueva Espana. It con tains 171 Indian families, and is seven leagues e. n. e. of its capital. 
|ALFEREZ, Valley of the, in the province and corregimiento of Bogota in the new kingdom of Granada. 
|ALFEREZ, a river of the province and captain* ship of Rey in Brazil; it runs n. and enters the lake of Mini. 
|ALFORD, a township in Berkshire county, Massachusetts, containing 577 inhabitants ; 145 miles w. from Boston. 
|ALFORDSTOWN, a small town in Moor county, North Carolina. 
|ALGARROBO, a settlement of the province and government of Antioquia in the new kingdom of Granada ; situate on the bank of an arm of the river Perico, in an island which it forms in the serranias of Guamoca. 
|ALGODON, Island of the, one of those which are in the N. sea, between the s. point of the Cayco Grande and the Panuelo Quadrado. 
|ALGODON, a settlement of the same name. See BIEZMK.T. ALGODONALES, a settlement of the province 
and correrrimiento of Atacama in Peru, situate on 
M 
the coast. 
|ALGONQUINENSES, or ALGONQUINS, a nation of savage Indians, who inhabit a part of Canada: they are continually at war with the Iroquees. Their idiom may be looked upon as the mother tongue of all the other nations of that country, and differs very slightly from the rest, so that any one speaking it would be able to travel in any other nation in these parts. They border on the north side of lake Huron; and although inhabiting the whole of the coast of lake Superior, their number, according to Mackenzie, does not exceed 150 families. 
|ALGONQUINS, of Rainy Lake, Indians of N. America, of the precise limits of whose coun try we are not informed. They live very much detached in small parties. The country they inhabit is but an indifferent one ; it has been much hunted, and the game, of course, nearly exhaust ed. They are well-disposed towards the whites. Their number is said to decrease. They are ex tremely addicted to spirituous liquors, of which large quantities are annually furnished them by the n. w. traders, in return for their bark canoes. They live wretchedly poor. 
|ALGONQUINS, of Portage de Prairie, Indians of N. America, who inhabit a low, flat, marshy country, mostly covered with timber, and well stocked with game. They are emigrants from the lake of the Woods, and the country e. of it ; who were introduced some years since by the n. w. traders, in order to hunt the country on the lower parts of Red river, which then abounded in a variety of animals of the fur kind. They are an orderly, well-disposed people, but, like their relations on Rainy lake, addicted to spirituous liquors. Their trade is at its greatest extent. ALGUILGUA. See article SANTA MONICA; ALHUE, a settlement of the province and corregirniento of Rancagua in the kingdom of Chile, annexed to the curacy of San Pedro. 
|ALHUE, a large lake of the same province and kingdom. 
|ALIATANS, Snake Indians, of N. America, a numerous and well disposed people, inhabiting a woody and mountainous country ; they are divided into three large tribes, who wander at a considerable distance from each other, and are called by themselves So-so-na, So-so-bubar, and I-a-kar : these are again subdivided into smaller, though independent bands, the names of which we have not yet learnt : they raise a number of horses arid mules, with which they trade with the Crow Indians, or which are stolen by the nations on the e. of 
31 
them. They maintain a partial trade with the Spaniards, from \vhora they obtain many articles of clothing and ironmongery, but no warlike im plements. 
|ALIATANS, of La Playes, Indians of N. Ame rica, who inhabit the rich plains from the head of the Arkansas, embracing the heads of Red river, and extending, with the mountains and high lands, e. as far as it is known towards the gulph of Mexico. They possess no fire arms, but are warlike and brave. They are, as well as the other Aliatans, a wandering people. Their coun try abounds in wild horses, beside great numbers which they raise themselves. These people, and the West Aliatans, might be induced to trade on the upper part of the Arkansas river. The Alia tans do not claim a country within any particular limits. 
|ALIATANS, of the West, Indians of N. Ame rica, who inhabit a mountainous country, and sometimes venture in the plains e. of the rocky mountains, about the head of the Arkansas river. They have more intercourse with the Spaniards of New Mexico than the Snake Indians. They are said to be very numerous and warlike, but are badly armed. The Spaniards fear these people, and therefore take the precaution not to furnish them with any warlike implements. In their pre sent unarmed state, they frequently commit hos tilities on the Spaniards. They raise a great many horses. 1 
|ALLANTE, a volcano of the kingdom of Chile, in the province and country of Arauco ; in 1640 it burst, the mountain opening in two places, and throwing out large shapeless masses of lava, with so great a noise as to be heard at many leagues distance : the mischief it did was very considerable. 
|ALIBAMONS, or ALIBAMIS, a nation of Indians of Louisiana, dwelling n. of the Apaches. It is very numerous, and is on terms of amity with the French ; so that they never have communica tion with the English, but from necessity. The former, when they first established themselves in this country, carried on a large trade here, but it afterwards declined, on account of the distance of the place. [These Indians are from West Florida, off the Allibami river, and came to Red river about the same time as the Boluxas and Appalaches. Part of them have lived on Red river, about sixteen miles above the Bayau Rapide, till lately, when most of this party, of about 30 men, went up Red river, and have settled themselves near the Caddoques, where, we are informed, they have lately raised good crops of corn. The Cad
32 A L K 
tlos are friendly to them, and have no objection to their settling there. They speak the Creek and Chactaw languages, and Mobilian; most of them French, and some of them English. There is another party of them, whose village is on a small creek in Apelousa district, about 30 miles &gt;? w. from the church of Appclousa. They consist of about 40 men. They have lived at the same place ever since they came from Florida ; are said to be increasing a little in numbers for a few years past. They raise corn, have horses, hogs, and cattle, and are harmless, quiet people. 
ALICHE, commonly pronounced EYEISH, Indians of N. America, who live near Nacog doches, but are almost extinct as a nation, there not being more than twenty-five souls of them remain ing. Four years ago the small-pox destroyed the greater part of them. Some years since they were a considerable nation, and lived in a spot which bears their name, which the road from Natchitoch to Nacogdoches crosses, about twelve miles &. of Sabine river, on which a few French and American families are settled. Their native language is spoken by no other nation, but they speak and understand Caddo, with which people they are in amity, often visiting one another. 
|ALINA, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of Pinzandaro, and alcald ut mayor of Tancitaro, in Nucva Espana. It contains 20 fami lies of Indians, who engage themselves in the commerce of maize and wax, and is seven leagues s. of its head settlement. 
|ALIS, a settlement of the province and corrcgimiento of Yauyos in Peru, annexed to the cu racy of Laraos. 
|ALISOS, FARALLOX DE LOS, an island of tlie N. sea, on the coast of California. 
|ALITATIS, a small island of the coast of Brazil, opposite the island of Marajo, and between those of Yurua and Nova. 
|ALJARACA, a river of the province and correginnento of Sicasica in Peru. It rises in the Cordillera, e. of its capital, runs n. e. inclining to the n. n. e. and enters the Chuquiabo. 
|ALJOJUCA, a settlement of the head settle ment of the district of Tlalchico-mula, and alcaldia mayor of Tepeaca, in Nueva Espana ; situate on the bank of a great lake, the waters of which are somewhat brackish ; and its depth being 70 fa thoms, has never been found to vary. It contains 172 families, and is seven leagues n. of its head settlement. 
|ALKANSAS, a nation of savage Indians of Canada or New France, situate in 33ofw. lat. 
|ALL 
on the w. side of the Mississippi. See ALKANSAS River. 
|ALLAUCA, a settlement of the province and corrcgimiento of Yauyos in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Tanripampa. 
|ALLBURGII, a township in Franklin county, Vermont, containing H(j inhabitants, situated on Missisquc bay. 
|ALLCA, an ancient povincc of the kingdom of Porn, to the s. of Cuzco. These Indians made a great and vigorous stand against Manco Capac, the fourth emperor of the Incus, and called the conqueror; being much favoured by tlieruggedness of the country, which abounds in woods, moun tains, and lakes, as also in gold and silver mines. 
|ALLEGHANY,a county in Pennsylvania, ex tends from the junction of the river of that name with the Ohio, where its chief town, Pittsburgh, is situated, to the New York line. It contains 10,309 inhabitants, including 159 slaves. 
|ALLEGHANV is the most western county in Maryland, and has Pennsylvania on the n. The windings of the Patowmac river separate it from Virginia on the 5. and Sideling-hill creek divides it from Washington county on the e. It con4809 inhabitants, including 258 slaves. Cum berland is its chief town. J 
|ALLEGHANY Mountains, between the Atlantic ocean, the Mississipi river, and the lakes, are a long and broad range of mountains, made up of a great number of ridges, extending n. e. and s. w nearly parallel to the sea coast, about 900 miles in length, and from 60 to 150 and 200 miles iu breadth. Mr. Evans observes, with respect to tliat part of these mountains w r hich he travelled over, viz. in the back parts of Pennyslvania, that scarcely one acre in ten is capable of culture. 
This, however, is far from being the case in all parts of this range. Numerous tracts of fine arable and grazing land intervene between the ridges. The different ridges which compose this immense range of mountains, have different names in the different states, viz. the Blue Ridge, the North Mountain, or North Ridge, or Devil s Back-bone, Laurel Ridge, Jackson s Mountains, and Kittatimy Mountains; w : hich see under these names. All these ridges, except the Alleghany, are broken through by rivers, which appear to have forced their way through solid rocks. This principal ridge is more immediately called Alle ghany, and is descriptively named the Back-bone of the United States. From these several ridges proceed innumerable branches or spurs. The general name of the whole range, taken collective
|ALL 
Jy, seems not yet to have been determined. Mr. Evans calls them the Endless Mountains ; others have called them the Appalachian Mountains, from a tribe of Indians who live on a river which pro ceeds from this mountain, called the Appalachieola ; but the most common name is the Allegheny Mountains, so called, probably, from the princi pal ridge of the range. These mountains are not confusedly scattered, rising here and there into high peaks, overtopping each other ; but run along in uniform ridges, scarcely half a mile high. They spread as you proceed ,&lt;?. and some of them terminate in high perpendicular bluffs: others gradually subside into a level country, giving rise to the rivers which run s. into the Gulph of Mexico. 
|ALLEGHANY River, in Pennsylvania, rises on the&gt;o&gt;. side of the Alleghany Mountain, and after running about 200 miles in a s. zv. direction, meets the Monongahela at Pittsburgh, and both united form the Ohio. The lands on each side of this river, for J50 miles above Pittsburg, consist of white oak and chesnut ridges, and in many places of poor pitch pines, interspersed with tracts of good land and low meadows. This river, and the Ohio likewise, from its head waters until it enters the Mississippi, are known and called by the name of Alleghany river, by the Seneca, and other tribes of the Six Nations, who once inhabited it. 
|ALLEGUIPPES, a settlement of the province and colony of Virginia, in the county of Hamp shire, situate on the shore of the river Yauyaugani, and at the mouth which enters the Monangahela. 
|ALLEMAENGEL, a small Moravian settlement on Swetara river, in Pennsylvania. 
|ALLEMAND, a river which falls into the Mississippi from the s. e. about 43 miles s. of the Natch es.1 
|ALLEMANDS, a settlement of the province and government of Louisiana, on the shore of the river Mississippi, between this river and the lake Ovachas. 
|ALLEN-TOWN, in Pennsylvania, North ampton county, on the point of land formed by Jordan s creek and the Little Leheigh. It con tains about 90 houses, and an academy. 
|ALLENSTOWN, a town in New Jersey, in Monrnouth county, 15 miles n. e. from Burling ton, and 13 s. by e. from Princeton. 
|ALLENSTOWX, a township in Rockingham county, New-Hampshire, containing 254 inha bitants; situated on the e. side of Merrimack river, 25 miles n. w. of Exeter, and 40 from Ports mouth. 
|VOL. I. 
|ALLHEGENI, or rather ALLEGiiANY,a town of the province and colony of Pennsylvania, in which the English had an establishment and fort. It is on the shore of the Ohio, which is also called the Vieslle. 
|ALLIGATOR, Bay of, on the 5. coast of the island of Jamaica. 
|ALLIGATOR, a river of N. Carolina, in the division of Hyde ; It runs n. and enters the sea at the sound of Albemarle. 
|ALLIUITAS, a settlement of the island of Cuba, on the n. coast, between the settlement of Matanillas and Manati. 
|ALLOWAY Creek, in Salem county, New Jersey, emptier into the Delaware. It is navi gable 16 miles, interrupted, however, by several draw-bridges. 
|ALL-SAINTS, islands near Guadaloupe island in the W r est Indies. 
|ALL-SAINTS, a parish in George-town district, South Carolina, containing 2225 inhabitants, of whom 429 are whites, and 1795 slaves. It sends a member to each house of the state legislature. 
|ALL-SAINTS Bay. See SANTOS. 
|ALMACEN, DEL REY, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Canete in Peru, situ ate on the coast, opposite the islands of Chincha. 
|ALMAGRO, SANTIAGO DE, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Canete in Peru 3 founded by the conqueror Diego de Almagro, in 1536, in the valley of Chincha ; owing to a com petition with Don Francisco Pizarro, who had founded the city of Lima, and out of honour to his native place of this title. It once bore the ap pellation ot a city; but its inhabitants so dwindled away, that it was forced to resign it a short time after. 
|ALMAGUER, a city of the province and go vernment of Popayan, in the kingdom of Quito r founded by Captain Alonza de Fueii Mayor, in 1543, on the top of a small mountain, which is in the middle of a plain called Guachicono. It abounds in wheat, maize, barley, fruits, and some sorts of cattle. Its temperature is mild and pleasant, and in its district are some gold mines. It lies seven leagues s. of Popayan. [Lat. 1 56 n. Long. 
|ALMARIA. See VILLA RICA. ALMAS, REAL DEL Rio DE LAS, a Portuguese settlement and real of gold mines, in the terri tory of the Guayazas Indians, and kingdom of Brazil ; situate on the shore and source of the river Tocantiues. 
|ALMA?, REAL DEL Rio DE LAS, a river of the same kingdom and territory, which rises in the r 
34 A L O 
sierra near Villaboa, to the s. runs e. and enters the Tocantines. 
|ALMENAS, a river of the province and corre gimiento of Arequipa in Peru, close to the point of Chile. 
|ALMERIA, a settlement of the jurisdiction and government of Vera Cruz in Nueva Espana, situate on the coast, at the mouth of the river Noadan. 
|PALMIRA, a town in Mexico. See ANGELOS. 
|ALMIRANTE, a settlement of the province and captainship of Parayba in Brazil, situate on the shore of the river Aracay. 
|ALMIRANTE, a bay on the coast of the pro vince and government of Veragua, in the kingdom ofTierra Firme, and w. of Escudo; thus called from its having been discovered by Admiral Columbus in his fourth voyage. At its entrance are many small islands and hidden rocks, upon which its discoverer had well nigh been wrecked. 
|ALMIRANTE, a river of the province and government of Florida, which runs s. e. and enters the sea in the bay of Panzacola. 
|ALMOLOIA, SAN PEDRO DE, a settlement of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Zultepec in Nueva Espana, situate in a spacious, very pleasant, and well watered plain. Its temperature is mild ; it contains 77 Indian families, and is annexed to the curacy of Temascaltepec. It lies three leagues w. of its capital, and inclining to the s. 
|ALMOLOIA, SAN PEDRO DE, another settlement, with the dedicatory title of San Miguel del Rio, being the head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Metepec in the same kingdom. It contains 156 Indian families, and to its curacy are annexed several others. It lies three leagues n. w. of its capital. 
|ALMOLOLOIAN, the head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Colima in Nueva Espana. It contains 60 families of Indians, 15 of Spaniards and 22 of Mustees and Mulattoes, who occupy themselves in the culture of maize and French beans ; and has a convent of the order of St. Francis, and is a quarter of a league n. of its capital. 
|ALOA, a settlement of the kingdom of Quito, in the corregimiento of the district of the Cinco Leguas de esta Capital. 
|ALOASI, a settlement of the same kingdom and corregimiento as the former. 
|ALOJAMIENTO, a settlement of the pro vince and corregimiento of Copiapo in the king dom of Chile ; situate on the shore, and at the mouth of the river Chiminal. 
|ALP 
|ALONCHE, a settlement of the district of Yaguache, in the province and government of Guayaquil, and in the kingdom of Quito. 
|ALOTEPEC, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of Atitlan, and alcaldia mayor of Villalta, in Nueva Espana. It contains 67 Indian families, and is 19 leagues from its capi tal. 
|ALOZOZINGO, SANTA MARIA DE, a settle ment of the head settlement of the district of San Martin de Temelucan,atid alcaldia mayor of Guejozingo, in Nueva Espana, having in it 110 families of Indians. 
|ALPABAMBA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Parinacocha in Peru, an nexed to the curacy of Colta. 
|ALPAMARCA, a settlement of the province and government of Canta in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Atabillos Altos. 
|ALPACIA, a settlement and asiento of the mines of the province and corregimiento of Condesuyos in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Andary. 
|ALPAIACU, a small river of the province and government of Quijos and Marcas in the king dom of Quito. It runs from n. to s. and enters the Llucin. 
|ALPARGATON, a settlement of the province and government of Venezuela, situate near the coast, in the bay of Burburata, to the w. of Port Cabello. 
|ALPARGATON, a river in the same province and government, which rises in the Serrania, opposite the coast, and runs to the w. of Port Cabello. 
|ALPIZAGUA, a settlement of the head settle ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Culiacan in Nueva Espana. It contains 36 families of Indians. Its district abounds in the various fruits of that region, and also in some maize. It is five leagues e. of its capital. 
|ALPOIECA, a settlement of the head settle ment of the district of Atengo, and alcaldia mayor of Chilapa, in Nueva Espana, in which there are 42 families of Indians. It is one league distant from its head settlement. 
|ALPOIECA, another settlement of the head settlement of the district of Ixcateapan, and alcal dia mayor of Tlapa, in the same kingdom. It contains 115 families of Mistecos Indians, and is two leagues e. of its head settlement. 
|ALPOIECAZINGO, a settlement of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa in Neuva Espana. It contains 140 fami lies of Indians, and is four leagues s. e. of its capital. 
|ALT 
|ALPONECA, SAN ANTONIO DE, a settlement of the had settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor (*f Jochimilco in Nueva Espaiia. Although it is situated within the jurisdiction of that of Tetela, it contains 30 families of Indians, and a con vent of the order of St. Dominic. 
|ALPUIECA, SANTA MARIA DE, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of Huitepec, and alcaldia mayor of Cucnavaca, in Nueva Espaiia. It contains 77 families of Indians. 
|ALSTEAD, a township in Cheshire county, New Hampshire, containing 1111 inhabitants; eight miles s. from Charlestown. 
|ALTA, a lake of the province of Venezuela, and government of Cumana. It lies s. of the valley of Pasqua, and w. of the river Unare, which is very near to and joins it. 
|ALTABOIANO, a settlement of the province and government of Tucuman, in the district and jurisdiction of the city of Cordova. 
|ALTABONITA, a small bay of the island of Cuba, on the n. n. e. coast, and at the e. head, between the bay of Nipe and Port Tanabo. 
|ALTAGRACIA, a city and capital of the pro vince of Sutagaos in the new kingdom of Granada. It was founded in 1540 by the Captains Pedro Ordonez de Cevallos, Juan Lopez de Herrera, and Diego Sotelo. It abounds in wax, honey, and pita, these being the productions in which the na tives trade, as likewise in boats, cut out of the solid trunks of the large trees, abounding in its very craggy mountains. It has at present but a miserably scanty population. 
|ALTAGRACIA, another settlement, with the de dicatory title of Nuestra Senora, in the province and government of Cumana. Its inhabitants en joy a royal privilege of indemnification from the tributes. It is situate on the shore, within a cannon s shot of the capital. 
|ALTAGRACIA, another settlement in the pro vince and government of Tucuman, in the king dom of Peru, of the district and jurisdiction of the city of Cordova, on the shore and at the source of the Rio Segundo. 
|ALTAGRACIA, another settlement in the pro vince of Guayana and government of Cumana. It is one of those which belonged to the missions of the Catalanian Capuchin fathers. 
|ALTAGRACIA, another settlement of the pro vince and government of Gnayana, which is at present separated from that of Cumana. 
|ALTAGRACIA, another settlement in the pro vince and government of Venezuela, in the juris diction of the city of S. Sebastian, and valley of Orituco ; in which district there are many estates of cacffo, esteemed particularly good, and several sugar mills, on either side of the river Orituco. 
|ALT A MIR, a settlement of the province of Barcelona, and government of Cumana, situate on the shore of the river Chivata, to the n. w. of the town of San Fernando. 
|ALTAMIRA, a settlement of the province and government of Sierra Gorda, in the Seno Mexicano, (bay of Mexico), and kingdom of Nueva Espana ; founded by the count of that title, D. Joseph de Escandon, colonel of the militia of the city of Queretaro, in 1750, who gave it this name, from his attachment and friendship towards the Marquis of Altamira, auditor of that royal audi ence, and one of those who were destined by the king to be inspector in the concerns relating to the conquest and the population of that province. 
|ALTAMIRA, another settlement in the province and government of Venezuela, one of those under the care of the fathers of the Capuchin missions. It abounds in large cattle. 
|ALTAR, a town and garrison of the province and government of Sonora. 
|ALTAR, a settlement in the province and go vernment of Venezuela, consisting of Indians con verted to the Catholic faith by the Capuchin fathers ; in the jurisdiction of the town of San Car los, near the river Cojade. 
|ALTAR, a very lofty mountain of the kingdom of Quito, in the corregimiento of Riobamba, to the e. of this town. It is always covered with snow, from whence it is called the snow-mountain. It serves as a boundary to the mountains of the coun try, the other side of this mountain being as yet unknown. From it the rivers Llurin and Min take their rise, which, united, enter the Pastaza, always running e. This mountain is one of those which form the Cordillera called, of Collanes. 
|ALTO, SAN ANDRES DEL, a settlement of the province and government of Mainas in the king dom of Quito ; one of the missions held there by the abolished order of the Jesuits ; situate on the shore of the river Maraiion, and opposite the city of S. Francisco de Borja. 
|ALTO, SAN ANDRES DEL, another settlement in the province and captainship of San Vincente in Brazil ; situate s. of the settlement of Espigon. 
|ALTO, SAN ANDREI? DEL, another settlement in the province and corregimiento of Catamarca in Peru. 
|ALTO, SAX ANDRES DEL, another settlement, with the dedicatory title of San Miguel, in the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tecpatitlan, in the kingdom and bishopric of Nueva Galicia. It is seven leagues e. of its capi tal. 
|ALTO, SAN* ANDRES DEL, another settlement in the province and government of Popayan, of the kingdom of Quito. 
|ALTOBELO, a lofty, sharp- pointed island, near the n. coast of flispaniola, discovered at a great distance, and lying between the point Beata and the island of Vaca. [Long. 71 18 . Lat. 17 38 a). 
|ALTON, a tract of land in Strafford county, New Hampshire, n. e. from Barnstead. 
|ALTOS, a settlement of the province and cap tainship of S. Vincente in Brazil, situate between those of Tributes and Porcon. 
|ALTOS, another settlement in the province and captainship of Rey in the same kingdom, and on the shore of the river Curucay. 
|ALTOS, a river of the province and government of Guanuco in Peru. It is small, runs from s. to n. and forming a curve towards the w. enters the sources of the river Guallaga, opposite the settle ment of Saramajos. 
|ALTOTONGA, a settlement of the head settlemerit of the district of Xalacingo, and alcaldia mayor of Xalapa, in Nueva Espana ; situate in a fertile, beautiful, and spacious valley, from which it takes its name. It is of a mild temperature, abounding in fruits, pulse, and tobacco. Jt con tains 105 Spanish families. The word Altotonga signifies, in the Mexican language, hot and saltish water ; and this comes from a river which has its rise in two hills united to each other, and situate at a league s distance to the s. This river runs into the lake of Alchichica, of the jurisdiction of Tepeaca. It lies a league and a half s. e. of its head settlement. 
|ALVA, SAX Luis DE LAICACOTA DE, an establishment of silver mines, celebrated for their riches, in a mountain of this name, which signifies enchanted lake ; there being a lake at the top of the mountain formed by the Indians, who made use of it as a place in which to deposit and conceal their riches. This place was discovered in 1657 by the Colonel Don Joseph de Salcedo, who, having received some vague rumours of its importance, and finding that there was little need of hands for the working the mountain of San Joseph, sent his men hither to work. They ac cordingly opened the ground, and having suc ceeded in finding some metals of a superior quality, contrived to let off the lake, so as to come to the principal vein. Here they discovered an imensc quantity of silver, which they dug out at a trilling cxpence. They also found the mouths of other mines ; namely, of those of Las Anirmis and Laicacota Baxa, which were contiguous, and equally rich. From the last of these, Salcedo took, in one night, 93 casks full of silver, valued at a hundred thousand dollars, also a massy lump of silver, which weighed seven arrobas. The me tal was, moreover, so fine and pure, that, after paying the quinto or duty to the king, it was coined into money without any previous refine ment. From these riches the disgraces of Salcedo took their origin ; it was from them that arose the bickerings and party spirits which appeared among the Andaluces and Criollos on one side, and the mountaineers and the Viscainos on the other. A battle was the consequence, and the plain was covered with dead bodies. The plain bears the same name (Alva), and is, to this day, strewed with whitened bones. This disastrous affair induced the viceroy, the Count of Lemos, to come in person to put a stop to these differences ; and he, upon his arrival, ordered the settlement, which consisted of upwards of 300 houses, to be laid waste ; and finding a pretext for the removal of the Colonel Salcedo, caused him to undergo his sentence in the city of Lima, in 1686 ; but, as the sentence was about to be put into execution, it happened, and, as it is believed, by the decree of heaven, which would bear testimony to his inno cence, that the mine became inundated ; so that it could never after be emptied ; and although vast sums have been employed upon this work, no sil ver has ever since been extracted. 
|AL VAttADO, a very abundant river of Nueva Espana, forming itself from one which descends from the sierras of Zongolica and Misteca. All these three unite near the settlement of Cuyotepeque, in the alcaldia mayor of Cozamaloapan, and collecting the streams of many others, which swell it to an immense size, it enters the sea at the mouth of its name, 12 leagues from Vera Cruz. It was anciently called Papaloapan, and was the first that was discovered by Herrian Cortes. It has a battery at its entrance, guarded by a detach ment from V era Cruz. 
|ALVARADO, a settlement of the jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor of Vera Cruz in Nueva Espana. It is of a hot and dry temperature, inhabited by 60 families of Spaniards and Mulattoes, whose commerce consists in fish ; as the land, although naturally fertile, yields no productions by which their commerce might be enlarged. They have a church, iu which the image of our Lady of Conception is revered, on account of the miracles wrought by it ; and according to tradition, it was said to have been found shut up in a chest, lying upon the sea-shore on the coasts of Goazacoalco. Fourteen leagues from Vera Cruz, n. w. and 88 from Mexico. 
|ALVARO, SIERRA DE MAESTRO, or Lunar Sierra, a cordillera of the mountains of the coast of Brazil, in the province and captainship of Espiritu Santo, between the point of Tiburon and the island of Reposo. 
|A L VERNE, MOUNTAIN OF, a settlement composed of Indians, converted by the missions of the order of St. Francis, in the district of the alcaldia mayor of Gaudalcazar. It contains 30 families, and is 12 leagues n. of the settlement of Sta. Rosa. 
|ALZ, MANUEL DE, a river of the kingdom of Brazil. It rises between those of La Palma and Tocantines, runs nearly s. and, forming a curve towards the w. enters the latter river in 10 s. according to the map of Cruz, and 11 18 s. ac cording to Arrowsmith, [which refutes the opinion of Mr. De Lisle, who places it in 7. 
|A LZOUJ, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of San Luis, of the coast and alcaldiamayorof Tlapain Nueva Espana. It contains 190 fami lies of Indians, who are very industrious in tilling and cultivating the ground, which produces, in abundance, maize, cotton, French beans, and rice. 
|AMA, a settlement of the province and govern ment of Canta in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Huamanga. 
|AMACACHES, a nation of Indians, of the kingdom of Brazil, and province and captainship of Rio Janeiro, inhabiting the woods and moun tains towards the 5. It is very numerous, and much dreaded, on account of the incursions which they have made upon the Portuguese establish ments. Amongst them are to be found some canni bals. Their weapons are darts and macanas, a sort of club, composed of a very heavy and solid wood ; and they use in their wars a very active poison, with which they anoint the points of their arrows and lances. 
|AMACHURA, a river of the province and go vernment of Cumana. It runs n. and enters the sea in the principal mouth of the Orinoco. 
|AMACORE, a large river of the province and government of Guayana, which descends from the W.Cordillera, and running towards the e. waters many parts unknown, or at least inhabited by some barbarous Indians. Its banks are covered with beautiful and umbrageous trees. After collecting in its course the waters of several other rivers, it empties itself into the N. sea. 
|AMACU, a lake of the province of Guayana; in that part which is possessed by the Dutch. 
|AMACUICA, a settlement of the head settle ment of the district of Xonacatepec, and alcaldia mayor of Cuernavaca, in Nueva Espana. 
|AMACUITLAPILCO, a settlement of the same head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Xonacatepec. 
|AMACURO, a settlement of the province and government of Cumana in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, situate in the interior of the Serrania. It is one of those missions belonging in that province to the fathers of the Aragonese Capuchins, at the point of Paria, and on the interior coast of the gulph Triste. 
|AMACURO, a river in the same province, which runs towards the n. and joins the Orinoco at its large mouth, called De Navios. 
|AMADEA, a river of the province and govern ment of S. Juan de los Llanos in the new kingdom of Granada. It rises to the n. of its capital, and joins the Meta very near to its source. 
|AMAGUAJES, S. ANTONIO DE, a settlement of the province and corregiwiento of Pastes in the kingdom of Quito, situate on the shore of a small river, which enters that of S. Miguel. 
|AMAGUANA, a settlement of the kingdom of Quito, in the corregimiento of the district of the Cinco Leguas de su Capital. 
|AMAGUANA, a river of the same province and kingdom, which rises from the n. summit of the Paramo, or desert of Elenisa, and running w. collects all the waters which take their course from that cordillera, and from the mountains of Ruminavi and Pasuchua. It afterwards joins the river Ichubambato the n. at a small distance from the settlement of Conocoto ; and being increased by the streams which flow in abundance from the &. part of the cordillera t it changes its name to Guaillabamba ; and then, receiving also the waters of another, called Pisque, takes the denomination of Alchipechi, following a ;i. course till it enters the river of Esmeraldas ; which is so large, that near the settlement of S. Antonio, in the corregimlento of Quito, it is necessary to cross it en taravita, its width not admitting of its being passed by a ford, or by a bridge. 
|AMAGUNTICK, a stagnant water, or lake, of New France, on the confines of New England. 
|AMAIA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Chayanta, or Charcas, in Peru. 
|AMAIALUI, a settlement and asiento of the gold mines of the province and corregimiento of Chayanta, or Charcas, in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Chayantacas. 
|AMAIUCA, a small river of the province and country of the Amazonas. It rises in (he territory lying between the Payaguas and the Cobachis Indians ; runs with an inclination to the s. s. c. and enters the Mazanon, very near the mouth of the large river Napo . 
|AMAJUNO, a small river of Florida, which runs w. and enters the sea opposite the island of Anclote. 
|AMAMAZOS, a nation of barbarous Indians, o the n. of the city of Ganuco in Peru ; bounded by the nation of the Panataguas, and s. w. by the cordillera real of the Andes. 
|AMAMBAI, CORDILLERA DE, a sj emzofthe province and government of Paraguay. It extends many leagues from the n. n. w. to the s. s. e. and its mountains abound in the herb Paraguay. 
|AMAMBAI, CORDILLERA DE, a river ot the same province, which rises in the territory of the Monteses Indians. It runs s. and enters the Parana, opposite the large island of Salto. 
|AMANA, a settlement of the province of Bar celona, and government of Cumana, situate on the shore of the river of its name, to the n. of the Table-land of Guampa. 
|AMANA, a river in the same province and government, which rises at the foot of the mountains of Bergantin ; runs e. and enters the Guarapiche. 
|AMANALCO, S. GERONIMO DE, the head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Metepeque in Nueva Espafia. It contains 1224 families of Indians. 
|AMANIBO, a river of the country of the Ama zonas, or Guayana, in the Dutch possessions. It runs n. making several windings, and enters the sea near the lake of Iracubo. 
|AMANIBO, a town on the coast of Guayana, between Paramaribo, and Cayenne. 
|AMANIQUE, a river of the province and government of Mainas in the kingdom of Qui to. It rises in the territory of the Plateros Indians, runs from e. to w. and enters the river Perene, or ancient Maranon. 
|AMANTANE, SAN MIGUEL DE, an island of the great lake Chucuito, belonging to the pro vince of Paucarcolla, on the lofty plains of which were established some settlements of note, but which have, by lapse of time, fallen into decay. The houses were somewhat peculiar, having been built entirely of stone, and the roofs of the rooms having been vaulted with the same ; forming edi fices altogether handsome and well-constructed. This island, which is three leagues in circumfe rence, is full of orchards and gardens, producing fruits, herbs, and flowers. 
|AMANTARA, a small island of the lake Titicaca, belonging to the province and government of Chucuito, near the strait of Capachica. 
|AMAUTATA, a river of the province and corregimiento of Carabaya in Peru. It rises in the valley of Inaguana, to the s. of the settlement of Cuyocuyo, and runs n. forming a curve to enter the source of the river Inambari. 
|AMAZONAS, SAN FELIPE DE, a settlement ot the province and government of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito. It is on the shore of the river Nanai. 
|AMAPAES, a barbarous nation of savage Indians in Nueva Andalucia, to the w. of the river Orinoco, and near the mountain of Paria. They inhabit the territory between the rivers Catury, Cayari, and Meta, and are bounded by the Isaperices, with whom they are continually at war. They are valiant and hardy, sincere and faithful ; they live by the chase, and by fishing, and their arms are bows and arrows, which are tipped with a very active vegetable poison. The territory is caJled Amapaya, and is comprehended in the pro vince of Paria. 
|AMAPALA, a settlement of the. province and government of Nicaragua in the kingdom of Gua temala, situate upon a strip or narrow point of land "running into the S. sea, at the distance of four leagues from the town of San Miguel, and 220 miles s. c. of Guatemala. [Long. 87 55 w. Lat. 13 12 . 
|AMAPILCAN, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Tlapa in Nueva Espafia, containing 15 Indian families. 
|AMACUCHO, alias TAMBERIA, a settlement of the province and cor regimiento of Cajamarca in Peru. 
|AMARETE, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Larecaja in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Charazani. 
|AMARGOS, an island of the coast of Chile, at the mouth or entrance of the river Valdivia ; where there is also a castle of the same name. 
|AMARGOSO, a river of the province and cap tainship of Rio Grande in Brazil. It rises near the coast, runs n. and enters the sea by a wide mouth, between the point of Tiburon and that of Mello. 
|AMARILLO, a river of the province and cor regimiento of Loja in the kingdom of Quito. It rises at the foot of the sierra, near the settlement of Saraguro ; runs w. and enters the Tumbez. 
|AMARISCOGGIN, a river of the district of Maine. See ANDROSCOGGIN. 
|AMARO, JUAN, a town of the province and captainship of the bay of Todos Santos in the kingdom of Brazil, founded in the year 1668 by a Portuguese gentleman of this name, in virtue of the concession of proprietorship made by King Don Pedro, and as a reward for the services of the former in its conquest. The same gentleman im mediately sold it to Colonel Manuel Araujo de Aragon, whose descendants are in possession of it at the present day. Its population and commerce are equally scanty. It is situate near the river Longoribo, [or Panuaca. Lat. 13 17 n. Long. 40 14 w. 
|AM ABO, JUAN, a settlement, also called Mina de Luis Amaro, in the territory of Guayazas, of the same kingdom , situate on the shore of a river which enters the Tocan tines. 
|AMARO, JUAN, another settlement of the pro vince and captainship of Puerto Seguro in the same kingdom ; situate at the port of the capital. 
|AMARO, JUAN, another settlement of the pro vince and captainship of Pernambuco, situate at the source of the river of Antonio Grande, to the n. n. e. of the settlement of San Sabastian Novo. 
|AMARO, JUAN, another settlement, called Sari Amaro el Velho, or Viejo, in the same province and captainship as the former. 
|AMARO, JUAN, another town of the province and captainship of San Vincente in the same kingdom, situate on the shore of the bay of this name. 
|AMARO, JUAN, a small island near the coast of this last mentioned province, where the Portuguese have a fort or castle, with the name of La Cruz. It is on the side of the bay of San Vincente. 
|AMARUCA, a settlement of the province of Guayana and government of Cumana ; one of those belonging to the missions held there by the Catalanian Capuchin fathers. It lies s. of the city of Santo Tomas. 
|AMARUMAIU, a large river of the king dom of Peru, which rises in the cordillera of the Andes, in 13 30 s. lat. It passes through the province of Mojos, after a long course of many leagues through unknown parts ; and after fre quently changing its name, it enters into the Maranon, in 4 36 . s. lat. 
|AMASARENDO, a settlement of the province and captainship of Parayba in Brazil, situate near the coast. 
|AMATENANGO, a settlement of the pro vince and alcaldia mayor of Chiapa in the king dom of Guatemala. 
|AMATEPEC, a settlement of the head settle ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Zultepec in Nueva Espana, situate on the top of a moun tain. It is of a cold temperature, and its population consists of 80 Indian families. It lies 12 leagues s. e. of of its capital. 
|AMATEPEC, another settlement of the head settlement of the district of Totontepec, in the alcal dia mayor of Villalta. It is of a cold temperature, contains 15 families of Indians, and lies a little more than seven leagues to the e. of its capital. 
|AMATICLAN, S. Luis DE, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of Huitepec, and alcaldia mayor of Cuernavaca, in Nueva Espana. It contains 43 families of Indians. 
|AMATINCHAN, a settlement of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa in Nueva Espana. It contains 62 families of Indians, and lies two leagues n. e. of its capital. 
|AMATIQUES, a sea-port town at the mouth of Guanacos river, which empties into the Amatique gulf, or gulf of Honduras, in the province of Vera Paz, Mexico. The inhabitants are chiefly logwoodcutters, and on the s. of the gulf is a tract of land called Amatique land. Lat. 15 23 . Long. 89. 
|AMATITLAN, SAN CHRISTOBAL DE, a settlement of the kingdom of Guatemala, si tuate in the valley of Mixto, or of Pinola. In the Mexican tongue it signifies the city of letters, from a custom which the natives have of writing upon the bark of trees, and thus forming tablets, which they send to a great distance. It has some excellent medicinal baths, renowned for the cure of several infirmities. A great commerce is carried on from the salt which is collected every morning from the shores of a lake, and which they purity. It has a large market-place, with a magnificent church, and a convent of the order of St. Domi nic, being one of the richest establishments main tained by this order throughout that kingdom. It is said to be famous for having made the dis covery of curing the cancer by eating raw lizards. The Indians used this remedy from the time of their gentilism, and it was first tried by the Eu ropeans in 1780, as appears by testimony and in formation transmitted by the provisional viceroy of New Spain, Don Martin de Mayorga ; the same information having been passed, by order of the King, to the tribunal of the first physician of this court. 
|AMATITLAN, SAN CHUISTOBAL DE, another settlement of the same province, distinct from the former. 
|AMATLAN, SANTA ANA TE ? a settlement of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tanzitaro in Nueva Espana, situate on the skirts of the sierra of this name. It is of a cold temperature, inhabited by 60 families of Indians, 29 of Spaniards, and 12 of Ahistees and Mulattoes. So great is its commerce, and so abundant is it in fruits and grain, that it could maintain, with ease, double its present number. It has a convent of Monks, of the order of St. Francis ; in whose church, an image of Christ cru cified, and which image also bears the title of Milagro, or miracle, is held in particular reve rence. It is said to have obtained this title from a miracle well authenticated among the people of this settlement. Fourteen leagues s. of its capital. 
|AMATLAN-, SANTA ANA DK, another settle ment, with the dedicatory title of San Luis, of the head settlement of the district and akaldia mayor of Mialniatlan in the same kingdom. It contains 380 families of Indians, including those of its wards ; and here, as in the former settlements, is found a fruit something like a filbert, which they call coatecos, or tcpexilotes which is veryjiard, and of which are made beads and rosaries, ornamented and painted with different ciphers of Jesus, Mary, and Joseph, or sentences of the Magnificat, which are so permanent that it has been thought by some that the trees produced them in this state : they arc not unfrequently carried to Spain in little boxes. It is two leagues to the n. of the capital. 
|AMATLAN, SANTA ANA DE, another settle ment belonging to the missions of the order of St. Francis, in the akaldia mayor of Tuchipila, at a short distance from the large river of Guadalaxara. Ten leagues n. W. of its capital. 
|AMATLAN, SANTA ANA DE, another settlement of the head settlement of the district Tepoxtlan, and akaldia mayor of Cuernavaca. 
|AMATLAN, SANTA ANA DE, another settle ment, which is the head settlement of the district of the akaldia mayor of Cordova, annexed to the curacy of La Punta. It contains 220 Indian families, who, from the fertility the ground ac quires from the waters of the rich stream of the Truchas, arc eabled to cultivate large quantities of fruits and pulse. Two short leagues s. of its capital. 
|AMATLA.V, SANTA ANA DE, another settlement, with the dedicatory title of San Joseph, the head settlement of the district of the akaldia mayor of Zacatlan. In this settlement, and in the wards of its district, the families of Indians are estimated at 248. 
|AMATLAN, SANTA ANA DE, another settlement (with the dedicatory title of San Pedro) of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Cozamaloapan. It is of a hot temperature, situ ate on the shore of a large river of the same name, and was formerly the capital. It contains 150 families of Indians, and is two leagues e. of its capital. 
|AMATLAN, SANTA ANA DE, another settlement of the head settlement of the district and akaldia mayor of Izatlan. It is 12 leagues from Aqualulco, which is the capital. 
|AMAZONAS. See the article MARANON. 
|AMBALEMA, a settlement of the jurisdiction of Tocarima, and government of Mariquita, in the new kingdom of Granada, situate on the shore of the large river Magdalena. It produces in abund ance the fruits peculiar to its climate, which is excessively hot : these are sugar-cane, maize, yucas, and plantains. It is much infested with Moschettoes, moths, and serpents ; and its in habitants may amount to about 100. It lies 12 leagues s. w. of Santa Fe. 
|AMBANA, a settlement of the province and corregimicnto of Caxatambo in Peru. 
|AMBAR, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Larccaja in Peru. 
|AMBARGASTA, a settlement of the province and government of Tucuman, in the district and jurisdiction of the city of Santiago del Estero ; front whence it is distant 52 leagues. 
|AMBATO, ASIENTO DE, the division and district of the province and correimiento of Riobamba, part of which is in the kingdom of Quito. Its temperature is very mild and healthy, the air is good, and the earth so fruitful that it is no un common thing to see the husbandman sowing, reaping, and threshing, all in the same day. The crops are abundant, and of the best quality. It has many plantations of sugar-cane, from which is procured a sugar superior to any produced by the estates of the contiguous provinces : it has also many delicate and exquisite fruits, and an abund ance of cochineal, which they employ for dyeing, and of which a much larger quantity might be procured. The capital bears the same name, and is founded upon a rugged spot on the banks of a large river. Its temperature is benign and salu brious ; it abounds in all kinds of flesh, and choice productions; the edifices are beautiful: besides the parish-church, which is very good and large, it has two parish-chapels of ease, and a convent of Franciscans. In the year 1698 it was entirely de stroyed, from an eruption of the volcano of Cotopaxi, which is near to it; and, at the same time, the snowy-mountain, or desert of Carguairaso, throwing up a river of mud or lava, which inun dated the whole country near, ruined the crops, and killed the cattle, which in vain endeavoured to avoid the destructive deluge. The monuments of this misfortune are still visible, and various chinks or chasms are still remaining, especially one, about four or five feet wide, and running from n. to s. nearly a league in length, towards the s. point of the town ; but nevertheless, owing to the fertility and extensive commerce of the town, it has become already more considerable than it was formerly. In several houses they make a sort of fancy bread, so white and of so exquisite a flavour as far to sur pass any sort of biscuit ; this article is exported largely, even to the most distant settlements, since in no other has it ever been imitated with success, although the very flour and water have been car ried hence for the experiment. It is 18 leagues from Quito, and four from Tarunga. [Lat. 1 14 w. Long. 78 25 . 
|AMBATO, ASJENTO BE, a river of the province and corregimiento of Riobamba, near the former capital. It runs with such violence, and with such a tremendous stream, that it is impossible to pass it otherwise than by a very strong built bridge : it has one of wood, braced with thick links of iron. This river afterwards joins others, and these together form a large river, called Patate. 
|AMBATO, ASIENTO DE, a mountain of the pro vince and government of Tucuman in Peru, in the jurisdiction of the city of Catamarca, to the w. of the jurisdiction. It is large, and renowned not so much for its considerable mines, of which vestiges are yet apparent, as for the rumbling noises caused in it by the air, which seem occasionally to pro duce a kind of slight earthquake. 
|AMBER Bay, on the peninsula of Yucatan in the bay of Honduras, lies n. of ASCENSION Bay, which see. 
|AMBERGREESE Key, an island in Hanover bay, on the e. side of the peninsula of Yucatan, in the bay of Honduras. It runs along the mouth of the bay, is 70 miles long, but very narrow. See ASCENSION Bay. 
|AMBOCAS, SAN LUCAS DE, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Loja in the king dom of Quito. 
|AMBOL, SAN, a small river of the province and government of Buenos Ayres. It runs w. and enters the Plata near the town of Santa Lucia. 
|AMBOY. See PERTH AMBOY. 
|AMBROSE, ST. an island in the S. Pacific ocean, on the coast of Chile, four or five leagues due &\ from St. Felix island. At first view, it appears like two small islands ; but after a nearer approach, it is found they are joined by a reef. It lies in Lat. 26 17 40" s. and Long. 79 8 35" &. from Greenwich. There is a large rock four miles to the n. of the island, called, from its appearance, Sail Rock. Captain Roberts, who was here in 1792, found St. Felix island inacces sible. On St. Ambrose island, his crew killed and cured 13,000 seal skins, of the best quality, in seven weeks. The island has little else to recom mend it. Fish and craw fish abound. The best season for sealing is from the 1st of April to the 1st of August. The island has the appearance of having had volcanic eruptions. 
|AMBROSIO, SAN, a small settlement or ward of the head settlement of the district of Ocula, and alcaldia mayor of Tocuyo ; thus called by Ambrosio de Alfinguer, who wns the first who en tered it in 1529. In its vicinity are the Barbarian Indians, the Xuruaras, and the Corominos. The territory is level, fertile, and abounding in maize, and in all sorts of grain ; also in cotton and sugar cane, which, however, being very watery, will not admit of being made into sugar. The climate is hot and unhealthy, and it has to the e. the cordillera of the mountains of San Pedro, and to the w. the cordillera of those of Bogota. 
|AMBUQUI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of the town of Ibarra in the king dom of Quito, situate on the shore of the river Mira-cerca, of the settlement of Pimampiro. 
|AMEALEO, a settlement of the head settle ment of the district of San Juan del Rio, and alcal dia mayor of Queretaro, in Nueva Espana, an nexed to the curacy of Santa Maria of Tequisquiapan. It contains 58 families of Indians. 
|AMECA, a head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Autlan in Nueva Espana. It contains 40 families of Spaniards and Mustees, and 43 of Indians, who trade in seeds and swine, hav ing enough of them for the supply of the jurisdic tion. In its district are many herds of large cattle, with some goats. Thirty leagues to the n. of its capital. 
|AMECA, another settlement of the head settle ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tala in the same kingdom. It is ot a moderate tempe rature, fertile in all kinds of seed, fruit, and pulse. In its vicinity, towards the w. is the great estate of San Nicolas, and to the e. that of Cabejon, besides many others on the shore of the river, which runs to the town of La Purificacion. Eight leagues w. s. w. of its capital. 
|AMECAMECA, a head settlement of the dis trict of the alcala ia mayor of Chalco in Nueva Espana, situate at the skirts of a mountain which leads up to the snowy volcano, on which account it is of a very cold temperature. The whole of its district is full of very fertile estates, and in one of these was born the famous Sor Juana Ines de la Cruz, the Mexican poetess, and who was baptized in the parish church of this settlement. It con tains 570 families of Indians, and some of whites. Three leagues between the e. and s. of its ca pital. 
|AMECAQUK, a settlement of the head settle ment of the district of Calpa, and alcaldia mayor of Atrisco, in Nueva Espana. It contains 275 families of Indians, and is five leagues s. w. of its capital. 
|AMELIE, or AMF.LIA, a county of the pro vince and colony of Virginia in North America. It lies between several rivers, and is bounded on the n. by the county of Cumberland, on the e. by that of Prince George, and s. and w. by that of Lunemberg. [Amelia, including Nottaway, a new county, contains 18,097 inhabitants, of whom 11,037 are slaves. 
|AMELIE, or AMELIA, an island, situated seven leagues n. of the city of S. Agustin, on the e. coast of Florida. It is nearly two miles wide and thirteen long, and one league distant from the river of St. Juan. [It is fertile, and has an excellent harbour. Its . end lies opposite Cumberland island, between which and Amelia isle, is the entry into St. Mary s river, in Lat. SO 41 40" n. Long. 81 34 40" w. 
|AMKLIE, or AMELIA, a settlement of the same province, situate on the shore of the river Con ga n
|AMELINS, ECOUA, is a s. e. head branch of \\abash river, whose mouth is nine miles w. e. from the mouth of Salarnine river, and 45 miles s. zv. from the Miami village and fort. 
|AMENGOACA, a river of the province and go vernment of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito ; it rises in the territory of the Uniguesas Indians, runs from re. to e. and afterwards turning n. enters the Ucayale. 
|AMERICA, the Indies, or the New World, one of the four parts of the Universe, and the largest. It Mas richer and better peopled in the time of the Indians, and more fertile and abound ing in the necessaries and comforts of life. It is, as it were, surrounded by the sea, and is indeed a continent as far as the Arctic Pole, where its boun daries have not been discovered. This immense country, nearly 2000 leagues in length, was un known to the ancients, until it was discovered by Christopher Columbus, a Genoese, in the service of their Catholic Majesties, Don Fernando V. and Dona Isabel, in four following voyages. In the first voyage he departed from the port of Palos dt- Moguer, with three small vessels and ninety meu, in the year 1491, and hud to contend with incredible difficulties, as well in combating the prejudices of the Spaniards, who opposed his ideas, holding his attempt as something chime rical, as in preserving the crews of the vessels that accompanied the expedition ; many of whom, depressed and tired with the labours and hard ships of so long a voyage, endeavoured to put an end to their existence. It is improperly called America, from the celebrated pilot Horentin Americo Vespucio, who discovered the continent to the 5. of the equinoctial line : others will have that it was before discovered by Sancho de Huelva, who was driven there in a storm in the year 1484. The English assert, that in 1170, or 1190, it was discovered by a man of the name of Madoc, or Madocro, son or brother of Ousen Quisneth, prince of Wales, who, in two voyages to Virginia, Florida, Canada and Mexico, founded English colonies ; but this is a mere fable. This country has produced, and yet produces gold, silver, and other precious metals, in prodigious quantities, an infinite variety of herbs, plants, fruits, roots, fish, birds, and animals unknown, and such as had never heretofore been seen ; an astonishing variety of exquisite woods, some of the trees being of an enormous size. Its natives, though, on account of the innumerable nations and provinces of which it is composed, differ entirely amongst each other, were nevertheless all idolaters. The greater part of this immense country, which is, from its size, as it were unpeopled, is possessed by the Spaniards, who were its discoverers and conquerors ; but after this, the French, invited by its riches, established themselres in different parts, as also did the En glish, the Portuguese, the Dutch, and the Danes. America is divided into North and South by the isthmus of Panama, or Ticrra Firme. TheN. part, known at the present day, extends from 11 to 70 de grees of latitude, and comprehends the kingdoms of Nueva Espana, California, Louisiana, Nuevo Mexico, Virginia, Canada, Newfoundland, Florida, and the islands of St. Domingo, Cuba, Jamaica, Puertorico, and the other Antilles. The Meri dional or 8. part extends itself from 12 degrees n. lat. to 60 .s\ comprehending Tierra Firme, Darien, the new kingdom of Granada, Nueva Andalucia, Peru, Chile, Paraguay, Quito, the country of the Amazonas, Brazil, and the Tierras Magallanicas, or of the Patagones. Its largest mountains are those of the great chain, or Cordillera of the Andes, which run from n. to s. from the isthmus of Pa nama to Cape Horn. The mountain Chimborazo is the loftiest of any known in the world at the pre sent day; and others, especially those in Quito, are of an extraordinary height, and always covered with snow. America is also watered by the largest rivers in the universe ; such are those of the Amazouas, Orinoco, Magtlalcna, Atrato, La Plata, Esmeraldas, Jeneyro, Negro, Coca, Ucayale, Cauca, Putumayo, Beni, Madura, Napo, Pa rana, Pilcomayo, Mississippi, St. Lawrence, &c. The barbarous nations belonging to it are innu merable, and scattered over all parts, living in the most savage slate in the mountains, forests, and lakes, without any head, government, or laws ; some of them are cannibals, and they all gain their livelihood, in general, by fishing and the chase. Their languages are as various as their different nations ; nevertheless the mo-st universal dialect that is spoken in Peru is the Quechuan and the Aymaran, and in Nueva Espaiia the Mexican. Of religions, the most common are, idolatry among the barbarians, and the Catholic religion in those countries which have been subdued. Some of the idolaters worship the sun, moon, and the stars ; but they confess, and are sensible of a superior Being, who created them, and who preserves them. They believe in the immortality of the soul, the rewards and punishments of another world, and in the common enemy, whom they call Zupay ; in the universal deluge, and many other truths, although even these are enveloped in a thousand errors, and disfigured with accounts and fables which have been handed down to them by their ancestors ; others, more savage, adore nothing, or at least pay but little respect to their idols, which they choose from among plants, serpents, and quadrupeds. It is evident they have, all of them, some confused sort of light, impressing them with something that they cannot understand, but which they respect and fear. The greater part of them are given to polygamy, and they are not without their ceremonies in matrimony, and at their funerals ; but they are all, without excep tion, much addicted to drunkenness, arid have different sorts of strong drinks, which they make of herbs, roots, fruits, &c. They are, for the most part, robust, moderate, liberal, faithful, com passionate, patient, and silent ; but revengeful, jealous, luxurious, and stupid : of an obscure colour, with hair long and black, with round faces, being of a sad countenance, beardless, and of a good stature and person. There are some that are of a good colour, with a cheerful and noble coun tenance ; and grace and pleasantness are not want ing amongst the women. Besides these Indians, America is inhabited by the Europeans, who have established themselves here since the times of its conquest, also by the sons of those, who are known by the name of Creoles, those of Peru being called Chapetones, and those of Nueva Espana Cachupines. The Negroes, who are brought from the coast of Africa in considerable numbers, and who are sold as slaves to work in the sugar-cane &lt; states, and in the mines of gold or silver, and other ser vile capacities, are the authors of a race called Castas, or peculiar breeds : thus the Mustees are the offspring of the Spaniard and the Indian, and the Mulattoes of the Spaniard or White and of a Negro or other woman ; the names of such off spring being Zambo, Cholo, Puchuela, Salta Atras, Tente en el Ay re, Quarteron, Quinteron, &c. This country abounds in gold, silver, copper, quick-silver, iron, antimony, sulphur, nitre, lead, load-stone, and marbles of every sort and colour ; in diamonds, rubies, emeralds, amethysts, gra nites, alabaster, rock-crystal, and all kinds of precious stones and minerals, besides its pearlfisheries, which are carried on in many parts. Its fields produce every kind of grain, fruit, pulse, herbs, plants, and flowers, native to Europe, be sides an infinite variety of others peculiar to this climate ; such as the cacao tree, the cinnamon, pepper, sarsaparilla, xaynilla, scarlet dye, to bacco, balsams of a thousand kinds, Brazil and log-wood, bark, sassafras, aloes, vu\& azibar ; fine smelling incense, gums, barks, resins, and medi cinal herbs. The number of cattle is incredible, and the breed of European horses and mules de serves particular estimation. Its woods are filled with tigers, leopards, and bears ; its rivers, witli lizards, alligators, and thousands of different kinds of fish ; in its fields are found numbers of vipers and snakes, differing, to a surprising degree, in their powers, qualities, forms, and colours ; also other insects and venomous animals. The climate is various, and is changed according to the situ ation of the country, or of the different places. In the valleys and plains, and on the shores of the sea, it is commonly very hot ; upon the slopes or skirts of mountains, and in the country which lies more lofty, the temperature is most commonly mild and pleasant. The copious rains that are frequent under the equinoctial line, are not the only cause of the mildness of temperature experienced in those parts, but this is effected in no small degree by the winds and snows of the neighbouring moun tains, from which proceeds an excessive degree of cold. The part possessed by the King of Spain, and which is the larger, is governed by four Vice roys, established in Lima, Buenos Ayres, Mexico, aud Santa Fe ; an account of which governments will be found under their articles, and for a deso 2 criptiou of which we have referred to the Chroni cles of Antonio de Herrera, as being the most punctual and complete. In what regards those who first peopled, and who were the ancient inhabitants of this hemis phere, and from whence they came, we leave this problem to be answered by the numerous cele brated historians and philosophers who have writ ten so much upon this subject ; observing only, that the opinion which, at the present day, most generally obtains, is, that America was peopled in the n. part, from Kamtchatka. 
|AMERICA is one of the four quarters of the world, probably the largest of the whole, and is, from its late discovery, frequently denominated the New World, or New Hemisphere. This vast country extends from the 56th degree of s. lat. to the north pole, and from the 55th to the 165th de gree of w. long, from Greenwich. It is nearly 10,000 miles in length. Its average breadth may be about 1800 or 2000 miles. It has two sum mers and a double winter, and enjoys almost all the variety of climates which the earth affords. It is washed by two great oceans. To the e. it has the Atlantic, which divides it from Europe and Africa. To the w. it has the Pacific, or Great S. sea, by which it is separated from Asia. By these it carries on a direct commerce with the other three parts of the world. America is divided into two great continents, called North and South America, by an isthmus about 500 miles long, and which, at Darien, about lat. 9 n. is only 60 miles over ; other writers say 34 miles. This isthmus, with the n. and s. continents, forms the Gulph of Mexico, in and near which lie a great number of islands, called the West Indies, in contradistinction to the eastern parts of Asia, which are called the East Indies. 
In America Nature seems to have carried on her operations upon a larger scale, and with a bolder hand, and to have distinguished the features of this country by a peculiar magnificence. The mountains of America are much superior in height to those in the other divisions of the globe. Even the plain of Quito, which may be considered as the base of the Andes, is elevated farther above the level of the sea than the top of the Pyrenees in Europe ; and Chimborazo, the most elevated point of the Andes, is 20,280 feet high, which is at least 7102 feet above the Peak of Teneriffe. From the lofty and extensive mountains of America, descend rivers, with which the streams of Europe, of Asia, or of Africa, are not to be compared, either for length of course, or for the vast body of water 
which they convey to the ocean. The Danube, the Indus, the Ganges, or the Nile, in the e. hemi sphere, are not of equal magnitude, even with the St. Lawrence, the Missouri, or the Mississippi, in N. America ; and fall far short of the Amazon and the La Plata in S. America. 
The lakes of the New World are no less con spicuous for grandeur than its mountains and rivers. There is nothing in other parts of the globe which resembles the prodigious chain of lakes in N. America, viz. Superior, Michigan, Huron, Erie, and Ontario : they may be properly termed inland seas of fresh water : and even those of the second or third class are of greater circuit (the Caspian sea excepted) than the greatest lake of the ancient continent. 
The luxuriance of the vegetable creation in the New World is extremely great. In the s. pro vinces, where the moisture of the climate is aided by the warmth of the sun, the woods are almost impervious, and the surface of the ground is hid from the eye under a thick covering of shrubs, of herbs, and weeds. In the n. provinces, although the forests are not incumbered with the same wild luxuriance of vegetation, the trees of various spe cies are generally more lofty, and often much larger, than are to be seen in any other parts of the world. 
Notwithstanding the many settlements of the Europeans on this continent, great part of Ame rica remains still unknown. The n. continent contains the four British provinces, viz. 1. Up per Canada; 2. Lower Canada, to which are annexed New-Britain, and the island of Cape Breton ; 3. New-Brunswick ; 4. Nova Scotia, to which is annexed St. John s island. Besides these there are the island of Newfoundland, and the 16 United States. It contains also the Spanish terri tories of E. and W. Florida, Louisiana, New Mexico, California, and Mexico. Besides these there are immense unexplored regions to the w. and n. w. The s. continent has been already delineated. 
America, so far as is known, is chiefly claimed and divided into colonies by three European na tions, the Spaniards, British, and Portuguese. The Spaniards, as they first discovered it, have the largest and richest portion, extending from Louisi ana and New Mexico in N. America, to the straits of Magellan in the S. sea, excepting the large province of Brazil, which belongs to Portugal ; for though the French and Dutch have some forts upon Surinam and Guayana, they scarcely deserve to be considered as proprietors of any part of the s. continent. 
Next to Spain, the most considerable proprietor of America was Great Britain, who derived her claim to N. America from the first discovery of that continent by Sebastian Cabot, in the name of Henry VII. of England, in the year 1497, about six years after the discovery of S. America by Co lumbus, in the name of the king of Spain. The country was in general called Newfoundland, a name which is now appropriated solely to an island on its coast. It was a long time before the English made any attempt to settle in this country. Sir Walter Raleigh, an uncommon genius and a brave commander, first shewed the way, by planting a colony in the s. part, which he called Virginia, in honour of queen Elizabeth, who was unmarried. 
The French, indeed, from this period until the conclusion of the war of 1756, laid a claim to, and actually possessed Canada and Louisiana ; but in that war, they were not only driven from Cana da and its dependencies, but obliged to relinquish all that part of Louisiana lying on the e. side of the Mississippi ; and the British colonies, at the peace of 1763, extended so far as to render it dif ficult to ascertain the precise bounds of the empire of Great Britain in N. America. To the n. Bri tain might have extended her claims quite to the pole. From that extremity, she had a territory ex tending s. to Cape Florida in the Gulph of Mexi co, in n. lat. 25, and consequently near 4000 miles in a direct line ; and to the w. the bounda ries were unknown : but having entered into dis putes with her colonies, she brought on a war, of which she felt the ruinous effects, by the dismem berment of her empire in N. America ; and Bri tish America, at the peace in 1783, was circum scribed within the narrow limits already men tioned. 
A Chronological List of the most celebrated Dis coverers of America : Years. 
1492. Christopher Columbus, a Genoese, who, on the llth October, first discovered the island which is called San Salvador, one of the Lucayas, and afterwards the following : 
1497. The island of Trinidad, coast of Nueva Andalucia. 
1498. The island of Margarita. 
1302. Portobello, Nombre de Dios, the Rio de San Francisco, with the other coasts and islands. This great man, alas ! worthy of a better fortune, died on the 20th May, 1506, in Valladolid ; and having required in his will that his body should be carried em balmed to the island of St. Domingo, one of the Larger Antilles, these lines were inscribed 
Years. 
upon his tomb, and which, for those times, are excellent : Hie locus abscondit prceclarf membra Columbi y 
Cujus prcedarum nomen ad asfra xolat. Non satis unus erat sibi mundus notus, at orbem 
Ignotum priscis omnibus ipse dedit. Divilias summas terras dispcrsit in omnes, 
Atque animas ccelo tradidit innumcras. Intpnit campos ditinis legibus aptos, Pegibus et noslris prospera regna dedit. 
1497. Americo Vespucio discovered, in the month of May, the coast of Paria, and from him the whole of the New World takes its name. 
1498. The Antilles, the coast of Guayana, and that of Venezuela. 
1501, The const of Brazil, the Bay of Todos Santos, and the e. coast of Paraguay. 
1503. A second time the coast of Brazil, the river Curubnta, that of La Plata, and the coast of Los Pampas in Paraguay. 
1498. Vicente Yanez Pinzon, a Spaniard, dis covered Tombal, Angra, the Rio de las Amazonas and its islands, the Para or Maranon, and the coast of Paria and Caribana. 
1501. Rodrigo Galvan de Bastidas, a Spaniard, discovered the islands Verde, Zamba, the city of Calamari, now Cartagena, the Gulph of Uraba, part of the n. coast of Darien and that of Sims. 
151 1 . Juan Diaz de Solis, a Spaniard, discovered part of the course of the river La Plata in Pa raguay. 
1512. Vasco Nunez de Balboa discovered the S. or Pacific sea through the Isthmus of Pa nama. 
Juan Ponce de Leon discovered Florida. 
1514. Gaspar de Morales discovered, in the S. sea, the islands of Las Perlas and those of Rey. 
1515. Pedrarias Davila discovered the coast of Panama, the Cape of Guerra, Cape Blanco, and the a?, coast of Darien, as far as the point of Garachine. 
1517. Francisco Hernandez de Cordova disco vered Yucatan. 
1518. Juan de Grijalba began the discovery of Nueva Espana. 
1519. Hernando de Magallanes, a Portuguese, discovered the port and river of San Julian
 and on the 6th of November of the following year, 1520, the strait to which he gave his name. He also discovered the land of the Patagones, that of Fuego, and the Pacific Sea. He was the first who went round the world from Years. 
the w. to the c. in which voyages he spent three years and 28 clays, returning to Eu rope in the same ship, which was called the Victor j/, and of which it was said, Prhna ego velivolis ambivi curs ib us orbem. Afagelliana worn sub duce duct a f retro*. Ambh i, weritotfue vocor Victoria ; sunt mi 
Vela, alce t prelium gloria, pugna mare. 1522. Gil Gonzalez Davila discovered through Nueva Espana the S. Sea, and Andres Nino 652 leagues of coast in the N. Sea. 
1524. Rodrigo Bastidas discovered Santa Marta. 
1525. Francisco Pizarro, Hernando de Luqne, and Diego de Almagro,. joined company in Panama, and discovered the river of San Juan, the country of Esrneraldas, and the coast of Manta. 
1526. Francisco Pizarro discovered the land of Tumbez. 
Francisco de Montejo discovered Yucatan. 
Sebastian Gobato, a Venetian, discovered the coast and land of Pernambuco, and 200 leagues further on of the river Paraguay, and of that of La Plata. 
1531. Garcia de Lerma, a Spaniard, discovered a great part of the large river Magdalena in the new kingdom of Granada. 
Diego de Ordcz discovered the grand river Orinoco, and the country of the Caribes. 
Nunode Guzman discovered Nueva Galicia, called Xalisco. 
1533. Francisco Pizarro, Marquis of Los Charcas and Atavillos, discovered the island of Puna, Tumbez, Truxillo, the coast of Peru, as far as Guanuco and Caxamarca. 1535. He discovered the river Rimac, Pachacamac, and the coast of Lima. 
1533. Pedro de Alvarado and Hernando dc Soto discovered Cuzco and Chimo. 
1534. Sebastian Venalcazar discovered Quito, the Pastes Indians, and other parts of Popayan. 
1535. Diego de Almagro discovered Atacama and Chile. 
Pedro de Mendoza, a Portuguese, disco vered the rest of the river La Plata, and the famous mountain of Potosi. 
1539. Pedro de Valdivia discovered the rest of the kingdom of Chile, the country of the Araucanos, Chiloe, the land of the Patagones, and the coast of Magellan to the z& 
1540. Gonzalo Pizarro discovered the rivers Napo arid Coca, aud the province of the Canelos. 
Years. 
1540. Panfilo de Narvaez discovered Nuevo Mexico. 
Francisco de Orellana discovered the grand river Maranon, or of the Arnazonas. 1543. Domingo de Irala discovered the rivers 
Paraguay and Guarani. 
1566. Alvarode Mendana discovered the Solo mon Isles. 1576. Francis Drake, an Englishman, discovered 
Cayenne and the coast of Guayana.. 157S. lie discovered the islands of the straits of Magellan, the whole of the coast, of Chile, the islands of Mocha, other islands, and the coast of Peru. 15S5. He discovered the coast of the llio del 
Hacha and of Coro, of which it is said : Quern tlmuit Icevis etiam Neptunus in widis y 
Et rediit toto victor ab oceano, Fcedifragos pellcns pelago prostabit Iberos JDrakius, huic tumulus CKquoris unda fuit. 1601. Juan de Onate discovered the rest of Nu evo Mexico. 
1616. Jacobo de Maire, a Dutchman, discovered the strait which still preserves the name he gave it. 
1617. Fernando Quiros discovered the unknown land to the *. near the Antarctic Pole. 
1619. John More, James Hermit, and John 
Hugo Scapenham, Dutchmen, discovered 
the islands of the Estates, Port Mauritius, 
and the island called Hermit. 
1670. Nicolas Mascardi, a Jesuit, discovered the 
city of Cesares, in the kingdom of Chile. 1764. Byron, an Englishman Islands in Pacific 
Ocean. 
1766. Carteret, an Englishman do. Wallis, an Englishman do. Pages, a Frenchman do. Bougainville, a Frenchman do. 1769. Cook, an Englishman made discoveries 
1771. 
in the Pacific. Surville, a Frenchman do. 
1775. 
Marion and du Clesmeur, Frenchmen do. 
Hearne, an Englishmando. 
Cook, Clerke, and Gore, Englishmen do. 
Carter, an Englishman in N. America. 1789. Mackenzie, an Englishman do. 
Pike, an American in Louisiana. A Catalogue of the Founders of the principal 
Cities of S. America. Years. 
1502. Christopher Columbus Portobelo. 1509. Alonso de Ojeda Buenavista. 
* Probably J reta. 
|AMERICA. 
Years. 
1.5 JO. Diego Nicuesa Nombre de Dios. 
1514. Gabriel de Roxas Acla. 
1517. Caspar Espinosa Nata. 
1518. Pedrarias Davila Panama. 
1519. Pedro Daza Santiago de Atalayas. 
1525. Gonzalo de Ocampo Cordova deCumana. Marcelo Villalobos Margarita. Rodrigo Bastidas Santa Marta. 
1526. Ifiigo Carbajal Curaana. 
1530. Ambrosio Alfinger Maracaibo. 
1531. Francisco Pizarro Piura. 
Pedro de Heredia Cartagena and Tolu. Fraucisco Pizarro- Arequipa. Sebastian Benalcazar Quito. Francisco. Pacheco Puerto Viejo. Nicolas Federman Rancheria. Francisco Pizarro Truxillo, Lima. Pedro de Mendoza Buenos Ayres. Francisco Henriquez Tenerife. Diego dc Almagro Almagro. Alonso de Alvarado Chachapoios. Pedro de Mendoza Buena Esperanza. Sebastian Benalcazar Cali, Popayau. Francisco de Orellana Guayaquil. Pedro de Anasco Timana. Gonzalo Ximenez de Quesada Santa Fe. Sebastian Benalcazar La Plata. Juan Salazar La Ascension. Pedro Anzures Chuquisaca. Francisco Pizarro Huamarga. Juan Gomez Alvarado Guanuco. Lorenzo de Aldana Pasto. Sebastian Benalcazar Plasencia. Martin Galiano Velez. 1510. Geronimo Santa Cruz Mompox. 
Pedro Ordifiez de Cevallos, Lope de Herrera, and Diego Sotelo Altagracia. 
1541. Juan Salinas Valladolid. 
Pedro de V aldivia Santiago de Chile. Geronimo Aguado Malaga. Francisco Henriquez Barbudo. 
1542. Jorge Robledo Antioquia, Anserma, Car
tago. 
Sebastian Benalcazar Arma. Juan de Salinas Loyola 
1543. Alonso Fuenmayor Almaguer* Juan Moreno Caloto. 
Sebast ian Benulcazar -Caramanta. Diego Martinz de Ospina Neiva. THUS Diaz Melgarejo Ontiveros. 
1544. Sebastian Venegas Tocaima. Lorenzo Martin Tamalaincque. Fernando Valdez Soiupallon, S. Miguel 
de las Pulmas, 
Years. J544. 1546. 1547. 
1548. 
1549. 
1535. 
153G. 1537. 1538. 
1539. 
1550. 155 1 . 
1552. 
1553. 1555. 1557. 
1558. 1559. 1560. 1562. 
1563. 
1566. 1570. 1571. 
Pedro de Valdivia Coquimbo, La Serena. 
Alonso Mercadillo Loxa. 
Jacobo Castellon Cadiz. 
Luis Lanchero Muzo. 
Pedro dc Ursua Tudela. 
Francisco Roldan Victoria. 
Alonso Mendoza La Paz, Vilianueva de 
los Infantes. 
Garcia de Mendoza Confines. Juan Nunez de Prado Cordova del Tucu
man, Santiago del Estero. Diego Palomina Jaen. Andres Salinas Salinas. Pedro Mercadillo Zamora. Fernando de Santa Ana Los Reyes. Peel rode Valdivia Villa Rica, La Imperial. Andres Lopez Galarza Ibaque. Francisco Pedroso Mariquita. Pedro Mantilla San Juan Giron. Geronimo Avellaneda S. Juan de los 
Llanos. 
Juan Viliegas Segoria. Pedro de Valdivia Valdivia. Pedro de Alvarado Toro. Juan Lopez de Heredia Caguan. Andres Hurtado de Mendoza Canete. Pedro de Tarita Londres. Adriano de Vargas S. Joseph de Cravo. Gil Ramirez Davalos Cnenca. Miguel de Armendariz Pamplona. Andres Hurtado de Mendoza Osorno. Diego de Paredes Paz de Truxillo. Gil Ramirez Davalos Baeza. Lope Garcia de Castro Castro, or Chiloe. Francisco Faxardo Carballeda. Francisco Rivas Cara. Domingo Fernandez de Solo Caceres. Diego Lopez de Zuniga fca. Juan de los Pinos Merida. Alonso Rangel Salazar de las Palmas. Pedro Centellas Barcelona. Diego Lopez de Zuniga Arnedo. Juan de Salamanca-Carora. Francisco Cuceres San Christobal. Francisco 1 lernandez Ocana. Francisco de Toledo Guancavelica. Martin de Loyola Santa Cruz de Loyola. Miguel de Ibarra Ibarra. Juan Pedro Olivcra Cornuta. Pedro Sarmiento Filipolis, Nombre de Dios. Antoniode los Rios San Jus(ino&gt; Domingo Lozano Buga. Garcia Hurtado de Mendoza 
Mendoza, 48 Years 
1572. Gaillermo de la Mota Villar San Luis 
de Marafion. 
Diego Vaca de Vega Borja. Diego Fernandez de Cordova Moquehna. Juan de Zarate S. Martin del Puerto. Joseph Manso de Velasco Buena vista del 
Callao. Catalogue of the Founders of the principal Cities 
of Spanish N. America. 1494. Bartolomew Columbus St. Domingo. Christopher Columbus Bonao. Christopher Columbus Concepcion de la Vega. 
1502. Juan de Esquivel Higuey. Juan de Esquivel Ceibo. Nicholas de Ovando Puerto de Plata. 
1503. Diego Velasquez Xaragua. Diego Velasquez Salvatierra. Diego Velasquez Maguana. Diego Velasquez Yaquimo. 
1504. Diego Velasquez Azua. Nicolas de Obando Yaguana. Nicolas de Obando Buenaventura. 
1505. Rodrigo Mexica Cotui. 
1506. Juan de Esquivel Salvaleon. 
1509. Juan Esquivel Santiago de los Cabal
leros. Juan de Esquivel Sevilla. 
1510. Juan Ponce de Leon Puertorrico. 1514. Diego Velasquez Santiago dc Cuba. 
Diego Velasquez Baracoa. 
Diego Velasquez Puerto Principe. 
Diego V r elasquez Sancti Spiritus. 
Diego Velasquez Havana. 
Juan de Garay Melilla. 
Juan de Garay Oristan. 1518. Hernan Cortes Segura de Tepeaca. 
Hernan Cortes Vera Cruz. 1520. Gonzalo de Sandoval San Estevan del Puerto. 
1522. Andres de Tapia Medellin. Gonzato de Sandoval Goazacoalco. Gonzalo de Sandoval Colima. 
1523. Juliano Rodriguez de Villafuerte Zaca
tula. 
Francisco Fernandez de Cordova- --Leon de Nicaragua. 
Francisco Fernandez de Cordova Gra nada. 
1524. Francisco Fernandez de Cordova Bru
selas. 
Pedro de Alvarado Santiago de Guate mala. 
Francisco de las Casas Truxillo. 
|AMERICA. 
Years. 
1525. Hernan Cortes Nra. Sra. de Victoria de 
Tabasco, 
1526. Francisco de Montejo Valladolid de Yu} . .catan. 
1528. Diego Mazariegos Villaroel. 
1530. Diego Davila S. Sebastian de Chiametla. Niuio de Guzman S. Miguel de Culia
can. Gabriel de Roxas Gracias a Dios. tmrr
 
1531. Diego Mazariegos Chiapa. Alonso de Carceres Comayagua. Nuiio de Guzman Guadalaxara. Nuno de Guzman Espiritu Santo. Nuiio de Guzman Compostela deXalisco. Nuno de Guzman Purificacion. Christobal de Olid Pascnaro or Mechoa
can. 
1532. Francisco de Montejo Salamanca. Diego Davila San Jorge de Olancho. 
1533. Licenciado Saluieron Puebla de los Ange 
les. 
Nicolas de Obando Monte Christi. 1536. Christobal de Olid Valladolid . Pedro de Alvarado San Pedro. 1538. Alonso de Ojeda Buena V r ista. 1540. Francisco de Montejo S. Francisco de 
Campeche. 
1542. Francisco de Montejo Merida. 1551. Francisco de Ibarra Guadiann. 1560. Juan de Tolosa Zacatecas. 1565. Pedro Menendez San Agustin. 1570. Don Martin Henriquez Concepcion de 
Zelaya. 
1596. Andres de Arriola Panzacola. 1599. Conde de Monterrey Monterrey. 1613. Martin Reolin Lerma. 1618. Diego Fernandez de Cordova Cordova. 1623. Jacobo Castellon Cubagua. 1637. Martin de Zavala Cadereita. 1642. Alvaro de Quinoncs LoreHzana. 1748. Don Joseph Escandon Monclova. 1750. Don Joseph Escandon Altamira. 
|AMESBURY, a flourishing town in Essex county, Massachusetts, on the n. w. bank of Merrimack river, about four miles n. w. of Newburyport, containing 1801 inhabitants. Powaws river divides the township from Salisbury, over which a handsome bridge has lately been erected. A num ber of mills lie on this river round the lower falls. See POWAWS River. 
|AMEWELL is the most populous town in Hunterdown county, New Jersey. It contains 5201 inhabitants, including 283 slaves. 
|AMHERST, a township in Cumberland county, Nova Scotia, situate on Chignecto Bason, on the s. side of La Planch river, and on the rivers Napan and Macon. The navigation of the two last is difficult, on account of shoals. The town was settled by North Irish, Yorkshire, and New England people. 
|AMHERST, the shire town of Hillsborough county, New Hampshire, is a town of some note, formerly Souhegan West, and was originally granted from Massachusetts. It has 2369 inhabi tants, and was incorporated in 1762. The Aurean Academy was founded here in 1790. A few years ago, the township being much infested with wolves, the people, on a day appointed, surrounded a large swamp whicli they frequented, and kept up an in cessant firing of guns and beating of drums the whole day ; which music forced the wolves to de camp the following night with dismal bowlings, and they have never done any mischief in the town since. Amherst lies on a n. branch of Souhegan river, which falls into Merrimack river, and is 60 miles w. of Portsmouth, and 53 n.w. of Boston. Lat. 42 54 n. Long. 71 33 o&gt;. 
|AMHERST, a township in Hampshire county, Massachusetts, containing 1233 inhabitants; 91 miles w. from Boston, and about eight n.e. from Northampton. 
|AMHERST County, in Virginia, lies between the Blue Ridge and the tidewaters, and contains 13,703 inhabitants, including 5296 slaves. It lies on the n. of James river. 
|AMICU, a lake in the province of Cumana, S. America, whose waters run s. through Parima river into the Amazon. 
|AMICURI, a lake of the province and country of th Amazonas, in the part possessed by the Portuguese, formed by a river which enters the Madera. 
|AMILGAMBO, or AMILGANELO, a settlement of the province and government of Tucuman, in the jurisdiction of the city of Rioxa, to the n. n. e. It is now destroyed, and the ruins of it alone re main. 
|AMILPA, a head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Xochimilco in Nueva Espana, situate on the top of a mountain whicli rises near the capital. It has in it a very good convent of the order of St. Francis, with an endowed cathedral for the instruction of the novices in the Mexican tongue. It is surrounded by many wards ; and the number of Indian families amount alto gether to 730, who live by tilling the ground. 
|AMILPAS, two volcanoes in the province of Guatemala in New Spain, near the mountains of Soconusco. 
|AMILTEPEC, a settlement of the head settle ment of the district of Juquila, and alcaldia may or of Xicayan, in Nueva Espana. It contains 14 families of Indians, and is six leagues from its ca pital towards the n. e. 
|AMINE, a river of the province and govern ment of Guayana, which rises in its mountains, and runs from w. to e. until it enters the Guarapiche. AMIRCARE, a small river of the province and government of Guayana, or Nueva Andalucia, which rises near the country of the Caribes Indians, runs from w. to e. and enters the Caroni. 
|AMIT, a river of the province and government of Louisiana, which runs from s. to the side of the Mississippi, and enters the Akankia. 
|AMIXOCORES, a barbarous nation of Indians of the kingdom of Brazil, who inhabit the woods and mountains to the $. of the capital of Rio Janeyro. They are cruel and treacherous, and main tain a continual warfare with the Portuguese. Their territory and their manners are but little known. 
|AMOCO, a settlement of the province and eorregimiento of Ayinaraez in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Pocoanca. 
|AMOENIA, a thriving township in Dutchess county, New York, six miles distant from Sharon in Connecticut. It contains 3078 inhabitants, of whom 383 are electors. 
|AMOGUAJES, SAN ANTONIO DE, a settle ment of the province and government of Quijos Marcas in the kingdom of Quito, situate on the shore of a small river which enters the Putumayo. 
|AMOI, a river of the province and government of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito. It rises in the country of the Simiayes Indians, runs from n. to s. and enters the Tigre, or Pinguera. 
|AMOI A, a river of the new kingdom of Gra nada. It rises behind the desert of Ruiz, and after many turnings enters the river Magdalena. 
|AMOLA, or AMULA, alcaldia mayor and juris diction of Nueva Espana, in the kingdom of Nu eva Galicia, and bishopric of Guadalaxara. In the Mexican tongue it signifies the land of many trees, from its being well stocked with them. The name is now corrupted, and is called Amula. Its jurisdiction is composed of 17 settlements, which, from the coast of the S. sea, form a cordillera to wards the e. as far as the boundaries of Zavula. The capital is the settlement of Tuzcacuezco. 
The settlements of its jurisdiction are : Tuzcacuezco, Cuzalapa, 
Mazatlan, Ton ay a, 
San Gabriel, Tetepam, 
Ayotitlan, Xiquilpa, 
Chacala, 
Copa/a, Cuicatlau, 
San Juan, Z a pot it Ian, 
Chachichilco, Toxin. 
Tollman, 
|AMOLTEPEC, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Teozaqualco in Nucva Espaua. It con tains 96 families of Indians, who gather cochi neal and cultivate some maize. Jt is nine leagues to the .&lt;?. ofifs capital. 
|YMONOOSl CK, an Indian name given to two fivers in New Hampshire ; the one is called Upper Amonoosnck, passing through a track of excellent meadow. Jl rises near the n. end of the White hills, runs n. about 15 miles, where is a carrying place of about three miles to Amariscoggin river. From thence the river runs s. to. and w. nearly 18 miles, and empties into the Con necticut at Northumberland, near the Upper Coos. 
The other is called Great or Lower Amonoosuck, which rises on the w. side of the White mountains. It falls into the Connecticut just above the town of Ilaverhill in Lower Coos, by a mouth 100 yards wide. About two miles from its mouth it receives Wild Amonoosuck, 40 yards wide, from Francoiiia and Lincoln mountains. Two or three hours rain raises the water in this last mentioned river several feet, and occasions a. current so furious as to put in motion stones of a foot in diameter, but its violence soon subsides. 
|AMOPOCAN, a settlement of Indians of the province and corregimietilo of Cuyo in the king dom of Chile, situate on the shore of a river. 
|AMORTAJADO. See SANTA CLARA. 
|AMOTAPE, a settlement of the province and rorrtgimicfilo of Piura in Prtu, immediately upon the coast of the S. sea, and a quarter of a league from, the river of its nnme, which forms itself into pools in the rainy season, which so fertilize the land as to produce abundance of seeds, roo/s, and fruits peculiar to a hot climate. It is in the direct Voad called Vales, which leads to Piura. In its vicinity is a mine of Cope, a sort of black and hard naphtha, resembling ns/iphulla, in which a great commerce is carried on with the ports, Avheie it is used instead of a. quitran, though it is more conunonlv mixed with the latter. [In -4 50 kit. 80 42 w. lung. and 14 leagues from the capital. 
|AMOTAPF, a sierra of the same province and corregimiento, beginning at cape Blanco, arid running in a n. n. c. direction until it becomes in corporated with the sierra of Pachini. 
|AMOTAP. -, a river ef the above province. 
|AMOZAQtJE, a settlement and head settle ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of the Puebla de los Angelos, situate in a hot and diy temperature. It contains, besides the parish church, a convent of the order of St. Francis ; one hundred families of Spaniards, Mulattoes, and Mustees, and 586 of Indians, including those of the wards of its jurisdiction. Three leagues c. of its capital. 
|A MPA LLA, by some authors called AM PALI A, a city and seaport in Guatemala gulf, in that of Mexico, 350 miles s. e. of the city of Guatemala, and carries on a brisk trade in cochineal, cocoa, hides, indigo, &c. 
|AMPARAES, a settlement of the province and corrcgimiento of Paucartambo in Pern, annexed to the curacy of that of Cochabamba. [Lat. 19 12 jr. Long. 67 3 a&gt;. ,,cqH 
|AMPATA, a settlement of the province and government of Tucuman, and of the jurisdiction of the city of Rioja, and to the s. of the same. 
|AMPI, a settlement of the province and rorregimiento of Parinacoche in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Pacca. 
|AMPOLA, a river of the province and colony of N. Carolina, which runs s. and enters the Aldama. 
|AMPONES, a barbarous nation of Indians in the province and government of Paraguay. The natives are small, and inhabit the forests of the Rio de la Plata to the s. It is bounded n. by the Yaperaes, e. by the Mcpones, and s. by the Chimenes. They all form one nation, although they are dirided into several tribes. They are cour teous and valorous, maintain themselves upon wild fruits and fish, which they catch in the.yeigh* bouring lakes, and which they preserve by smok ing. They enjoy a line country and a healthy climate. They have some gold mines, and this metal is also found in the sand of the shores of their rivers; nor are they without some inter course with the city of Concepcion. Some have been converted to the Catholic faith through the zeal and exertions of the Jesuits. 
|AMSTERDAM, a capital town of the island of Cura/ao, with a large bay on the s. coast, op posite the cape of Ilicacos of Tierra Finne. 
|AMSTKHUAM, a new township in Montgomery county, New York. It contains 235 inhabitants, who arc electors. 
|AMSTERDAM, NEW, a city in the province of Guajjfc
ta, and in the Dutch possessions, situate near fl|i$oast. [Lat. 6 n. Long. 57 15 o&gt;. 
AMsk.iiDAM, another city in the province and colony of New England, which belongs to 
|AMU 
(he English, but founded by the Dutch on the shore of the bay and river called Mantrati. See NEW YORK. 
|AMSTERDAM, an island of the S. sea, discovered by the Dutch captain Tasmani, who gave it this name in 1643. It lies for the most part very low, and is subject to inundations of the sea at the flood tides, when the water rises to the height of nine feet. It is inhabited by savages of a docile and affable nature, who have good means of subsist ence. The climate is temperate, and it is seven leagues distant from the other island, which the Dutch call Rotterdam. 
|AMUES, SAN FRANCISCO DE LOS, a settle ment and real of the silver mines of the alcaldia mayor of San Luis de la Paz, and bishopric of Mechoacan, in Nueva Espana. It contains 36 families of Spaniards, 92 of Mustees and Mulattoes, and 43 of Indians, who are all employed in the commerce of the silver that is dug from the mines. Fifteen leagues e. of the capital. 
|AMULALAS, or AMULALS, a settlement of the province and government of Tucuman, called formerly Mataray. It is a population of the an cient Abipones Indians. 
|AMURCAS, a nation of barbarous Indians, descended from the Panches, in the new kingdom of Granada. They live in the forests to the s. of the river Magdalena; but of them little is known. 
|AMUSKEAG FALLI, in New Hampshire, are on Merrimack river, 16 miles below Concord, and seven below Hookset falls. It consists of three pitches, one below the other, so that the water falls about 80 feet in the course of half a mile. The second pitch, which may be seen from the read on the w. side, is truly majestic. In the middle of the upper part of the fall is a high rocky island, on the top of which are a number of pits, made exactly round, like barrels or hogs heads, some of which are capable of holding several tons ; formed by the circular motion of small stones, impelled by the force of the descend ing water. There is a bridge a little below the falls, 556 feet in length, and 20 in breadth, con sisting of 2000 tons of timber, and made passable for travellers 57 days after it was begun. Lat. 42 59 nJ 
|AMU fURI, a large river of the new kingdom of Granada, which runs through the plains of Cazanare, and being united to the river of this name, enters the Orinoco on the n. side. 
|AMUZGOS, a head settlement of the- district of the a/ca/(#a mayor of Xicayan in Nueva Es pana. It is of a hot temperature, and contains three or four families of Spaniards, and 76 of Indians, who carry on a commerce in cotton, bainilla, tobacco, and cochineal, which are its natural productions. It lies 15 leagues between n. and s. of its capital. 
|ANA, STA. a settlement of the government of Mariquita in the new kingdom of Granada. It has more than 200 housekeepers, is of a hot tem perature, but is nevertheless healthy, and abound ing in natural productions, notwithstanding it must be allowed, that the water is apt to cause cotosj or morbid swellings in the throat, an epidemy to which almost all the inhabitants are sub ject. It has been a place of note, in consideration of its silver mines, from whence immense quanti ties of this metal have been extracted, but they are now abandoned. 
|ANA, STA. another small settlement or ward in the district of Ocuila, and alcaldia mayor of Marinalco, in Nueva Espana. 
|ANA, STA. another settlement in the district of Tenanzingo, and of the former alcaldia mayor in the same kingdom, situate on the verge of a deep chasm, which divides this jurisdiction from that of Zaqualpa. It contains 31 families of Indians, is of a moderate temperature, and lies two leagues from its capital. 
|ANA, STA. another settlement and head settle ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Zultepec in the same kingdom. It contains 117 families of Indians, who collect much wax and virgin honey in their district. Seven leagues *. of its capital. 
|ANA, STA. another, in the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Toluca, with 124 families of Indians, and close to its capital. 
|ANA, STA. another, in the head settlement of the district of Isabel, and alcaldia mayor of Cholula. It contains 134 Indian families, and is three leagues s. of its capital. 
|ANA, STA. another, in the province and govern ment of the Chiquitos Indians in Peru, reduced by the missions held there by the Jesuits. In the head settlement of the Rio Capivari. 
|ANA, STA. another, in the province and govern ment of Cartagena, and kingdom of Tierra Firme, of the district of Mompox, situate on the shore of the large river Magdalena. 
|ANA, STA. another, of the missions that were held by the Jesuits in the province and govern ment of Paraguay, situate on the *hore oft Jie river Parana, between the settlements of San Cosine and Loreto. 
|ANA, STA. another, of the province and canH 2 tainship of Para in Brazil, situate on the shore of the river Xingu, in the country of the Guaiapis Indians. 
|ANA, STA. another, of the island of Curac,oa, and colony of the Dutch, situate on the s. coast, and opposite that of Tierra Firme. 
|ANA, STA. another, of the province and govern ment of Buenos Ayres, situate to the s. of San Joaquin. 
|ANA, STA. another, of the province of Taraumara in Nueva Espana, a reduction of the mis sions held here by the Jesuits. It is 15 leagues from the real of San Felipe de Chiguaga. 
|ANA, STA. another, of the province of Cinaloa, a reduction of the missions of the abolished society of the Jesuits. 
|ANA, STA. another, in the kingdom of Nueva Mexico, a reduction of the missions of the order of St. Francis. 
|ANA, Si A. another, in the province and corregimiento of Castro Vireyna in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Pilpichaca. 
|ANA, STA. another, of the province and corregimiento of Lucanas in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Pucquin. 
|ANA, STA. another, of the province and corre~ gimiento of Porco in the same kingdom. 
|ANA, STA. another small settlement or ward of the district and jurisdiction of Valladolid, in the province and bishopric of Mechoacan. 
|ANA, STA. another,in the head settlement of the district of Yautepec, and alcaldia mayor of Nexapa, in Nueva Espana, situate on the top of a bill. It contains 18 Indian families, who employ themselves in the culture of grain ; and it lies to the s. of its bead settlement. 
|ANA, STA. another, of the head settlement of the district of Mitla, and alcaldia mayor of Tentitlan. It contains 25 families of Indians, is of a cold and moist temperature, and lies a little more than four leagues from its head settlement. 
|ANA, STA. another, of the head settlement of the district of Amaqueca, and alcaldia mayor of Zayula, situate between two lofty hills to the s. of lake San Marcos. It is of a benign and healthy temperature, enjoys pure and delicate waters, contains 70 Indian families, and its dis trict abounds in maize, wheat, and fruits. Five leagues n. e. of its head settlement. 
|ANA, STA. another, of the corrtgimiento and jurisdiction of Velez, in the new kingdom of Gra nada, annexed to the curacy of Chitaraque. It is of a hot temperature, abounding in the same fruits as that place, and from whence it is but at a small distance. It contains 250 housekeepers. 
|ANA, STA. another, of the province and corregimicnto of Angaraes in Peru. 
|ANA, STA. another, of the head settlement of the district of Tepecpan, and alcaldia mayor of Theotihuacan, in Nueva Espana. 
|ANA, STA. another, which is the real of the mines of the alcaldia mayor of Guanajuato, in the same kingdom and province, and bishopric of Mechoacan. 
|ANA, STA. another, of the head settlement of the district of Huchuetlan, and alcaldia mayor of Cuicatlan. It contains 149 families of Indians, and is two leagues and a half to the ;/. of its head settlement. 
|ANA, STA. another, of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tlajomulco. It contains a convent of the order of St. Francis. 
|ANA, STA. another, of the missions held there by the Jesuits, in the province of Tepeguana and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya: situate on the shore of the river Florido, near the settlement and real of the mines of Parral. 
|ANA, STA. another, of the province and go vernment of Maracaibo, in the kingdom of Tierra Firme; situate on the shores of the lake of this name, and at the part opposite to the entrance of the same. 
|ANA, STA. another, of the same province and government as the former, situate in the peninsula formed by the cape of San Roman, of that coast, and in the w. part. 
|ANA, STA. another, of the province of Barce lona, and government of Cumana, in the kingdom of Tierra Firme; one of those held in charge by the missionaries of Peritu, and followers of St. Francis ; situate on the top of a mountain, towards th s. and a quarter of a league e. of the town of San Fernando. 
|ANA, STA. another, of the province and govern ment of Cumana, situate to the e. of the city of Cumanagoto, and near the settlement of Aracagua. 
|ANA, STA. another, of the province and go vernment of Moscos in the kingdom of Quito ; situate on the shore of the river Yacume, between this and that of Marmore. 
|ANA, STA. another, of the province and country of the Amazonas, in the territory of Matagroso ; situate near the river Senere, between this and the Itenes. 
|ANA, STA. a mission and real of mines of the province of Old California, celebrated on account of the astronomical observations of Velasquez. 
|ANA, STA. another settlement and parish 01 the island of Guadaloupe, situate in the part of the Gran Tierra and s. coast, in front of the Diamond isles. 
|ANA, STA. another, which is the real of the gold mines belonging to the Portuguese, in the territory and country of the Araes Indians in Bra zil, situate on the shores of the port and river of that name. 
|ANA, STA. another, which is a parish of the English in the island of Jamaica, in the n. part. 
|ANA, STA. a town of the province and govern ment of Venezuela, founded in the peninsula of Paraguana, very near the w. coast. 
|ANA, STA. another, in the n. part of the island Margarita, of the Guayqueries Indians, who are indemnified by the king from all contributions. They employ themselves in fishing, and in the years when the rain is abundant they have plenty of maize. They manufacture very fine hats of straw,* and cords of the same, which they use in ornamenting their lances, and for other pur poses. 
|ANA, STA. a small river of the province and government of Buenos Ayres, which runs into the sea near the cape of San Antonio of the Rio de la Plata. 
|ANA, STA. another, in the province and alcaldia mayor of Tabasco in Nueva Espana, which runs into the sea between the river Topliquillos and Dos Bocos, in the bay of Mexico. 
|ANA, STA. another, of the province and country of tile Amazonas, in the territory of Matogroso. It rises in some mountains near the road that leads to Villaboa, runs from n. to s. making several windings, and enters the river Prieto, just pre vious to its entering upon the confines of Para guay. 
|ANA, STA. another, also called \acuma, in the province and government of Moxos of the kingdom, of Quito. It rises near lake Rogacuelo, runs towards the s. s. e. and afterwards directing its course to the e. enters the river Marmore. 
|AN A, STA. another, of Hispaniola or St. Domingo, in the part possessed by the French. It runs w. and enters the sea by the coast in this direction, between the settlement of San Luis and the river Tuerto. 
|ANA, STA. another, on the coast which lies between the river La Plata, and the straits of Magellan. 
|ANA, STA. islands of the N. sea, near the coast of Brazil, in the bay of San Luis de Marauans. Of these there are three, but they are all deserted. They abound in thick woods, in which are found large birds, called by the Indians faux, from suf fering themselves to be easily taken. [Long. 43 44 . Lat. 2 SO 7 . 
|ANA, STA. another small island of the same kingdom of Brazil, on the coast of the province and captainship of Maranan, also called Dos Macomes by the Portuguese, between the point of Arboles Secos (dry trees) and the canal of Buen Fondo. 
|ANA, STA. another, in the straits of Magellan, on the n. coast, near the entrance of the S. sea. 
|ANA, STA. a bay of the island of Curazao, op posite the cape or point of Hicacos. 
|ANA, STA. a mountain of the province and go vernment of Venezuela, called El Pan de Santa Ana, in the peninsula of Paraguana. 
|ANA, STA. a point of land on the w. coast of the straits of Magellan, between the bay of Agua Buena and that of La Gente. 
|ANA, STA. another, on the same coast and strait, in the bay of Buena Pesca. 
|ASA, STA. another river, with the additional title Maria, in the province and government of Buenos Ayres. It runs w. and enters the Parana between the rivers of Potre and Antonio Tomas. See ANNA and ST. ANN. 
|ANAHUAC, the ancient Indian name of Now Spain, or Mexico, including all the parts of New Spain lying between the 14th and 21st degrees oT latitude. 
|ANAICA, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Canta in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Arahuay. 
|ANAIRAHI, a settlement of the province and captainship of Para in Brazil, situate on the shore of the river Xingu, in the country of the Guayapls Indians. 
|ANALCO, the akaldia mayor and jurisdiction of Nueva Galicia in Nueva Espana, of the bishop ric of Guadalaxara. It is much reduced, and extends to only as far as three other settlements, but enjoys the title from being governed by ah ordinary alcalde, who appoints annually one bf those of Guadalaxara. The productions of ifs territory are wheat, maize, seeds, and various sorts of fruit peculiar to that region. The princi pal settlement bears the same name. It is of a cold temperature, and inhabited by 16 families of Spaniards and Mustees, and 40 of Indians. It lies a little more than a league to the e. of Guada laxara, and 80 w. of Mexico, with a slight incli nation to the n. 
|ANALCO, another, with the dedicatory title of San Juan, the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Teocuilco in the same kingdom, of a moderate temperature. Close to it runs the large river of the same name, in which, at certain seasons of the year, trout are found. With its waters they irrigate and fertilize the land for cultivating several fruits ; but the principal emolu ment of the inhabitants, who are cpmposed of 182 families of Indians, consists in cochineal. Four teen leagues to thew. with some inclination to the w. of its capital. 
|ANALOG, another, with the dedicatory title of San Pedro, in the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Juchipila, annexed to the curacy of Atemanica, from whence it is two leagues arid an half distant. 
|ANALCO, another, in the kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya, situate somewhat more than a quarter of a league to the s. of the capital of Ouadiana. 
|ANALOG, another, with the dedicatory title of San Antonio, in the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Cumavnca. 
|ANA PVCUSI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Angaraes in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Acoria, situate on the shore of the river I.ruchnca. 
|ANANDIVA, or ANADINVA, a river of the province and captainship of Marauan in Brazil. 
|ANANEA, a settlement of the province and corregimietito of Asangaro in Peru, annexed to the curacy of the capital. 
|ANANEO, a mountain of the corrcgitnicnlo and province of Asangaro in the kingdom of Peru, where there are some rich gold mines, which pro duce five or six thousand castellanos [an old Spanish coin, the fiftieth part of a mark of gold, a year. Formerly it yielded abundantly, but the working of it is at present impeded by the snows. 
|ANAPITI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Caxamarquilla in Peru. 
|ANAPOIMA, a settlement of the jurisdiction of Tocaima, and government of Mariquita, in the new kingdom of Granada, situate below the plain of Juan Diaz. It is of a burning and extremely bad temperature, abounding only in ticks or lice, which are very obnoxious and troublesome. It is situate amidst crags and steep mountains. It is a short day s journey from Santa Fe, in the high road which leads to Tocaima. It is very scantily inhabited, scarcely containing a dozen Indian families. 
|ANAPUIA, a large province of Andalucia, abounding in woods, lying to the s. of the moun tains of San Pedro. It extends towards the w. from the river Buria, to the e. from the moun tains of Meta, and to the n. from the district of the province of Venezuela. It is very barren, and its woods are inhabited by some families of the Parimoes, barbarian Indians. 
|ANAQUITO, a valley or entrance to the city of Quito, lying on its n. side, having in it a her mitage or chapel, in which was buried the first viceroy of Peru, Blasco Nunez Vela, who died in the battle fought on this plain between himself and Gonzalo Pi/arro in 1546. It is more than a mile long, and has a lake abounding in fish and aquatic fowl. 
|ANA U AM A, a river of the country of the Amazonas, in the purt possessed by the Portu guese. 
|ANARIQl 1, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Caxamarquilla in Peru. 
|ANASCO, a settlement of the island of Puertorico, situate on the w. coast, on the shore of the bay of its name. 
AN AST ATI A, ST. a small island closS to the coast of E. Florida, situated s. of Mastances inlet, where the river Mastances forms two islands of the same name at its mouth. St. Anastatia island is bounded on the n. by St. Augustine s bar. Here is a quarry of fine stone for building. 
|ANATIGUCHAGA, lakes of the province and government of Maiuas in the kingdom of Quito. They are three in number, upon the banks of the river Maranon, with which they com municate in the territory of the Mainas Indians. 
|ANAURA-PUCU, a river of the province of Guayana, in the Portuguese possessions. 
|ANAUILLANA, a small river of the province and country of the Amazonas, in the Portuguese possessions. It runs from n. to s. and enters the river Negro, close to the settlement of Toromas. 
|ANAUX, a river of the province and govern ment of Venezuela, one of the four which supply with water the city of Caracas. It rises in the serrania which lies between this city and thr port ofGuaira s. and enters the Guaire near the ca pital. 
|ANCA MARES, a nation of Indians who in habit the c. shore of the river Madera, bounded s. by the nation of Guarinumas, and n. by the Hunuriaes. It is a very warlike and robust nation. In 1683 they attacked the Portuguese, and obliged them to give up their intention of introducing themselves to the right of navigating the river. They are divided into different tribes or parts, the most numerous of which are those who form the tribe of the Ancamaris, inhabiting the shores of the river Cayari. 
|ANCA, Point of, on the coast of the king dom of Chile, and district of Guadalubquen, one of the two which form the mouth or entrance of the river of Valdivia. 
|ANCAS, a nation of Indians, who give their name to a large settlement of the province of 
Iluailas in Peru, between that -of Curuay, and that of Yungay. The memory of it alone re mains, it having 1 been overwhelmed by the ruins of a mountain, which burst by an earthquake on the 6th of January, in the year 1725, burying tlie whole of the population, which amounted to 15,000 souls. 
|ANCASTE, a settlement of the province and government of Tucuman, in the jurisdiction of Gatamarca. 
|ANCATATA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Paria in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Challapata. It lies 21 leagues from the town of Oruro. 
|ANCATEMU, a settlement of Indians of the island of La Laxa, in the kingdom of Chile, on the shore of the river {Jiiren. 
|ANCE, GRAND, a settlement and parish of the island of Martinica, a curacy of the religion of .Santo Domingo, situate on the n. coast, be\veen the river Capot and that of Lorrain, oil the shore of the river of its name. 
|ANCE, GRAND, a small river of the above island. It runs n. e, and enters the sea close to that settlement. 
A SICE, GRAND, a large bay and capacious and convenient port of the island of San Christobal, one of the Antillas, in the s. e. extremity, towards the part of the s. w. between the point of Salinas and the Gros-Cap. 
|ANC
, GRAND, another bay, called La Grande del E. in the island of Guadalupe, on the coast which looks to that point, between the point of Vieux-Fort and Los Tres Rios. 
|ANCE, GRAND, another, called Quartel de Petite-Ance, a settlement and parish of the French, in the part which they possess in the island of St. Domingo, oa the n. coast, between those of Morin and Llanos of the N. 
|ANCE, GRAND, another bay of -the coast of the Rio de San Lorenzo, in New France, between the rivers Oville and the Three Salmones. 
.ANCE, GUAND, another river, La PetiteAnce, in the island of St. Domingo, and in the French possessions, it rises near tin? n. coast, runs n, n. w. and enters the sea opposite the shoal La Cocque Y r ieul!e. 
|ANCES, GRANDS, two bays of the island of Guadalupe, on the w. w. coast, at a small distance from each other, between the fort of San Pedro and the point of Gros-Morne, or Gran Morro. 
|ANCliAC, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Iluanta in Peru, situate on the summit of the mountain, and on the opposite part of the river Angoyaco. 
|ANCIIIHUAI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of liuumunga in Peru, annexetk to the curacy of Anco. 
|ANCHO, a river of the province and govern ment of Santa Marta in the kingdom of Tierra Fiirue. It enters the sea from the coast, to the w. of the point of Aguja. 
|ANCLOTE, a small island close to the coast of Florida, between Charles bay and the rrver S. Pedro. [Lat. 29 4 n. Long. 83 41 pj.1 
|ANCLOTE Point, on the peninsula of Califor nia, and coast of the N. Pacific ocean, lies in lat. 29 IT w. and 115 11 w. long.; s. from the town of Vclicata, and n. e. from the small island of Guadalupe. 
|ANCO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Huamanga in Peru, the province of Huanta interposing. It is of a cold temperature, but abounding in the productions peculiar to the mountains of the Andes, in which i(s inhabitants have some estates, where they cultivate cocoa, sugar-cane, maize, and some garden herbs. Its territory is extremely fertile, but much infested by insects and reptiles, such as snakes, vipers, and scorpions, which arc common in every part of the mountains. Here they have plantains, alligatorpears, chirinioyas, guat/abtu- , pines of excellent flavour, oranges, lemons, and other fruit. It has four other settlements annexed to its curacy, and formerly it had also another, called Marocmarca, which was in the valley of this name, within the mountains ; having been depopulated at the be ginning of this century, from the inhabitants re tiring to the other settlements, from dread of the tigers. It contains 1200 souls, including those of the four other aforementioned settlements. Twenty leagues distant from its capital. [Lat. 13 14 s. Long. 73 10 a&gt;. 
|ANCO, another settlement in the province and corrcgimicnto of Omasuios in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Achacache. 
|ANCOBAM BA , a settlement of the province and corre*rir)riento of Amaraez in Peru. 
rANCOCpS Creek, in New Jersey, a water of the Delaware, six miles s.w. from Burlington. It is navigable 16 miles; and considerable quantities of lumber are exported from it. 
A.NCON, a very lofty mountain of the pro vince ami kingdom of Tierra Firme, near to which, and almost at the skirts, is situate the city of Pa nama. It is full of a variety of large trees, dif ferent birds, and animals ; contains several foun tains of very good water, by. means of which the city is supplied with a never-failing stream, which they call Chorrillo, but which is, however, some 
56 A N C 
distance from the city. There was formerly on its summit a telegraph, or watch-tower, supported by the king, to give notice of the vessels which were coming to that port. 
|ANCON, a settlement of the province and cor regimiento of Chancai in Peru, situate upon the coast. 
|ANCON, a point of the coast of the S. sea, in the former province and correginnento. 
|ANCOX, a gulph, with the sirname of Sardinas, in the province of Esmeraldas and kingdom of Quito. It lies very open, and consequently the currents are very rapid. It is somewhat more than tive leagues distant from the mouth of the river of Santiago, and four from the point of Manglares. Its centre is in Lat. 1 25 n. Long. 78 50 w. 
|ANCON, a shoal of the e. coast of the strait of Magellan, with the sirname of South. It is oppo site the bay of Los Gigantes. 
|ANCONES, very lofty mountains on the coast and in the government of Santa Marta, on the skirts of which is a lake, in which are caught botiitos, (sea fish resembling tunnies). They lie between the city and the point of Chichibacoa. 
|ANCOOS, a small river of the province and English colony of New Jersey, in the county of Burlington. It runs n. n. w. and enters the Dela ware. 
|ANCORA, a small island of the coast of Brazil, in the province and captainship of Rio Janeyro, between Bahia-Hermosa, and the river De las Ostras. 
|ANCORAIMES, a settlement of the province and corregimienlo of Omasuyos in Peru, situate upon the e. shore of the lake Titicaca. 
A NCOS, a settlement of the province and cor regimiento of Conchucos in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Llapo. 
|ANCUD, a small settlement of the island of Chiloe, from which the Archipelago derives its name, the number of the islands being 40. The largest of all, in which is the city of Castro, is that of Chiloe, which shuts in the Archipelago on the u\ They abound in wheat, maize, and amber. It is usual to find gold upon the sea shore. This Archipelago is 83 leagues long from n. to s. and 35 wide from e. to w. 
|ANCUIA and ABADES, a settlement of the province and government of Pastos in the king dom of Quito. 
|ANCUMA, CORDILLERA DE, mountains of the kingdom of Peru. They run from n. n. w. to *. s. e. from the province of Asangaro to that of La Paz, on the side of the great lake Titicaca, 
|AND 
dividing the provinces of Asangaro and Oinasuyos from those of Apolabamba, Larecaja, and La Paz. 
|ANCUTERES, a nation of infidel Indians, inhabiting the forests of the river Napo. They are very numerous, savage, treacherous, and incon stant ; have amongst them a people called Santa Maria de los Ancuteres, on the shore of a river. It was a rcducr.ion of the Jesuitical missiona ries of the province of Quito; is bounded on the s. and s.s. e. by the nation of the Congies Indians, and bordering upon those of the Abixiras and Icaquates. 
|ANDABAMBA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Angaraes in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Acobamba. 
|ANDAC, a small river of the province and colony of Nova Scotia. It runs s. and enters the sea at the bay of Fundy. 
|ANDACOLLO, a settlement and seat of the gold mines of the province and corrcgimiento of Coquimbo in the kingdom of Chile. 
In its dis trict is the valley of Las Huigerillas, in which is a convent of the strict observers of the religion of San Francisco; and upon a lofty mountain, where the various ramifications of the cordillera unite, is a celebrated gold mineral. On the summit is a small plain, from whence runs a stream. In its church is reverenced an image of Nuestra Senora del Rosario, before which not only the people of the neighbouring provinces are eager to make their devotions, but also some of the most remote pro vinces. 
|ANDAHUA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Condesuyos ofArequipain Peru. 
|ANDAHUAILAS, a province and corregi miento of Peru, bounded on the n. e. by the pro vince of A bancay and by that ofAimaraez, s. e. by Parinacocha, s. by Lucanas, w. by Vilcas Huaman, and n. e. by the summit of the mountains of the Andes, from whence it is not remembered that the infidel Indians, (who inhabit the interior of those mountains), ever made an incursion upon this province. Its forests are very thick. It is 24: leagues long from n. w. to s. e. and 15 wide. The high road from Lima to Cuzco passes through it. It lias no other river of note than that which runs down from the province of Vilcas Huaman, dividing these provinces, and which is called in this province river of Pampas. The same has a bridge of criznejas or twigs, of 30 yards long, and above one and an half wide, by means of which the cargas pass which are carried from Lima to Cuz co, and also those which pass from the latter place to Lima. This province produces wheat, maize, 
|AND 
seeds, and all kinds of fruit ; and from its having parts in it of a cold temperature, it abounds like wise in the productions which arc natural to a similar climate, but this, indeed, in a decree not more than sufficient to supply its own necessities. The only branch of its commerce is sugar, of which SO or 40 thousand arrobas are manufac tured yearly in several estates. Among the best of these is that of Moiobamba, -which is entailed on the Marquises of that title. The inhabitants of this province should amount to 12,000 souls, divided into 27 settlements. The repartimiento used to amount to 110,500 dollars, and the alcavala, or centagc on goods sold, to 884 dollars. Its capital is the settlement of the same name, in Lat. 13 25 s. and Long. 73 s 4 x. 
|ANDAHUAILAS, a valley of the above province, memorable for a great battle, in which the Inca Viracocha was victorious over the nation of the Chancas, who were commanded by his brother. Thirty leagues from Cuzco. 
AiVDAHUAlLILLAS, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Quispicanchi in Peru . 
|ANDAIMARCA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Castro- Vireyna in Peru, an nexed to the curacy of Huaitara. 
|ANDAJES, a settlement of the province and corregimicnto ofCaxatambo in Peru. 
|ANDALIEN, Valley of, in the province and corregimiento of Puchacay in the kingdom of Chile. Jt lies e. of the city of Concepcion. 
|ANDALIEJ*, a large and navigable river of the same province and kingdom, which traverses and irrigates that valley. It laves the fields of the city of Concepcion, and enters the sea at the bay of this name, between the rivers Maule and Biobio. 
|ANDALGALA, a river of the province and government of Tucuman, on the confines of the kingdom of Chile. 
|ANDALGALA, a lake of that province. 
|ANDALUCIA,NuEVA, a province of the king dom of Tierra Firme, anciently called Serpa ; divid ed into North, or Superior, and South, or Inferior. It comprehends Guayana, or Caribana and Paria. Taking it at its full extent, it is more than 300 leagues from the island of Margarita, to the cape Pinion, or n. shore of the river Maranon, inhabit ed by the barbarous nations of the Caribes, Omiguas, Peritoes, Palenques, Arvacos, Amapaes, Ivarepices, Parimoes, and others. Among the many rivers which lave it, the largest is the Ori noco. Its climate is for the most part hot and un healthy. The ground is rugged, mountainous, 
|VOL, I. 
|AND 57 
covered with forests, and but little known. Its coasts, as well on the n. as e. were first discovered by Columbus in 1497, and afterwards by Ame rica Vespucio, with Alonzo de Ojeda, in May I4S8. It contains mines of gold and other metals, although they are not worked : it has also pearl fisheries, which, although in former times t!vy yielded most plentifully, are at present neglected. It abounds in cattle, and the greatest source of its commerce is in cacao, of an excellent quality. The capital of the province is Cumana. 
Catalogue of the barbarous nations and principal towns of this province. 
Nations. Aquire, 
Acomes, Aricani, 
AmapaeSj Aro, 
Aravis, Aropa, 
Aricaretis, Aruari, 
Aricoris, Atanari, 
Arbacas, Berbis, 
Campagotes, Buria, 
Canuris, Cabomi, 
Carivinis, Caora, 
Chahuas, Capurvaca, 
Cumanaes, Cassipouri, 
Eparagois, Caturi, 
Marones, Cavo, 
May os, Corentin, 
Iflorinies, Coropatuba, 
Omiguas, Coura, 
Palenques, Curiguacuriu, 
Papinis, Demarari, 
Parimoes, Esquebo, or 
Parragotes, Esquibo, 
Peritoes, Europa, 
Saymagoes, Guaveteri, 
Sebayos, Guarepiche, 
Supiayes, Majo, 
Vacuronis, Mahuiri, 
Yaos, Masiacari, 
Vuaripices. Maravin4, 
Cities. Maroni, 
Cadiz Nueva, Macpari, 
Cordova, Moruga, 
Cumana. Orinoco, 
Mountains. Ovarabiche, 
Guanta, Ovetacates, 
Panagara, Pao, 
San Pedro, Paraba, 
Saporovis, Piari, 
Vacarima. Saima, 
Jtivers. Sinamari, 
Amacore, or Surinam, 
Amacuri, Timeraris, 
Amana, Varca, 
i 
58 
|AND 
Varima, Essequeb, 
Via, or Mompatar, 
Uvia, Surinam. 
Vyacopo, or Islands. 
Yacopo, Assapara, 
Vyaricopo. Blanca, 
Promontories. Cayena, 
Caldera, Coche, 
Cepercu, Cubagua, 
Cenobebo, Iracapono, 
De Salinas, Maiparo, 
Oranges, Maraca, 
Pinzon, Marasi, 
Roniata. Margarita, 
Lakes. Ovaracapa, 
Cassipa, Escudo, 
Parirne. Tortuga, 
Fountains. Trinidad. 
A ray a, 
|ANDAMARCA, a town of the province and corregimienlo of Cajamarquilla in Peru. 
|ANDAMARCA, another settlement in the pro vince and corregimiento of Carangas, of the arch bishopric of Charcas, in the same kingdom. 
|ANDAMARCA, another, of the province and corregimiento of Parinacoclias, annexed to the cu racy of Charcana. 
|ANDAMARCA, another, in the provinceand corregimiento of Jauxa, annexed to the curacy of Comas, situate on the frontiers of the infidel Indians of the mountains. 
|ANDAMVRCUS, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Lucanas in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Chacayan. 
|ANDAQUIES, a settlement of the province and government of Popayan in the new kingdom of Granada. 
|ANDARAl, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Condensuyos de Arequipa in Peru. 
|ANDARAPA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Andahuailas in Peru, annexed to 
the curacy of San Geronimo. 
|ANDARIEL, a settlement of the province and government of Darien in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, situate on the n. coast, on the shore of the gulph of Uraba. 
|ANDASTES, a barbarous nation of Indians of Canada, bounded by Virginia. 
|ANDES, CORDILLERA DE LOS, a chain of mountains and most lofty serranias, which extend oyer nearly the whole of America, for the space of more than 1000 leagues, running continually from n. to s. from the province of Santa Marta, where they have their origin, in the Sierra Nevada, of the new kingdom of Granada, through the provinces 
of Peru and Chile, as far as the straits of Magellan and cape Horn, where they terminate. They are divided into two branches : one which passes through the interior of the new kingdom of Gra nada, on the s. part of the plains of San Juan, beginning in Guayana ; and the other which forms various lines and curves, divided in different direc tions, through Cuzco, Tucuman, Tarma, and Pa raguay, and afterwards becomes united with the grand chain of mountains of Brazil. It takes its course through the isthmus of Panama into the kingdom of Nicaragua, passes into those of Gua temala, Mechoacan, and the province of (/inaloa, and continues itself through the unknown countries of N. America. Those mountains are clad with immense forests, and their tops are continually covered with snows, from the melting of which are formed great lakes, and the largest rivers in the world. Their greatest elevation is in the kingdom of Quito, where the lofty Chimborazo rises superbly among the rest; it has many volca noes vomiting fire, and which have caused infinite mischief in the provinces, producing earthquakes, inundations, and scattering, far and wide, mud, bitumen, and burning stones : in its entrails are hid den the greatest treasures of nature, such as gold, silver, and other metals, precious stones, marbles, and mineral earths of the rarest and most esteemed qualities. Almost all the mines in the bosom of these rich mountains are worked, and principally those of Peru and Chile. Besides the name of Andes, they bear others also, given to them by the various settlements in their vicinities. The roads which, upon their account, were made by the Incas, Emperors of Peru, were truly magnificent ; but they are at present destroyed, and those which are used now for the communication of the inte rior provinces, may be called precipices rather than roads, and are only passable on foot, or on mules, which are very tractable and safe. These mountains are inhabited by many barbarous and fierce nations, and they abound in mineral waters of approved medicinal virtues. The greatest width of these mountains is 20 leagues, being in some parts 12 leagues from the sea-coast, and in others approaching to it within five leagues. They abound in vicunas, guanaeosj monkeys, and apes of infinite kinds, tigers, leopards, and swine, who have the navel in the spine and smell of musk, with a multitude of other curious birds and ani mals, altogether unknown in Europe ; such is the condor, in the kingdom of Chile, which is a car nivorous bird of an extraordinary size, having the power to carry with it up into the air animals of considerable weight, such as sheep, and even small 2 
|ANDES. 
59 
calves, making, as it flies, a noise which may be heard at a great distance. The craggy parts abound in cacao., so useful for the Indians, as also in cachalagua. It has been attempted to pass irom Chile to Peru, but this cannot be effected during six months in the winter without imminent risk, since many have been lost who have enga ged in this enterprise. Indeed it is said, that at that time the Cordillera is shut up. 
The lofty chain of the Andes, running along the western coast of America, extends on both sides of the equator to near the 30th degree of latitude. It is of unequal height, sinking in some parts to 600 feet from the level of the sea, and at certain points, towering above the clouds to an elevation of almost four miles. The colossal Chimborazo lifts its snowy head to an altitude which would equal that of the Peak of Teneriffe, though placed on the top of Mount Etna. The medium height of the chain under the equator may be reckoned at 14,000 feet, while that of the Alps and Pyrenees hardly exceeds 8000. Its breadth is proportionably great, being 60 miles at Quito, and J50 or 200 at Mexico, and some districts of the Peruvian territory. This stupendous ridge is intersected in Peru and Nueva Granada by frequent clefts or ravines, of amazing depth ; but to the n. of the isthmus of Panama, it softens down by degrees, and spreads out into the vast elevated plain of Mexico. In the former provinces, accordingly, the inhabitants are obliged to travel on horseback or on foot, or even to be carried on the backs of Indians ; whereas carriages drive with ease through the whole extent of New Spain, from Mexico to Santa Fe, along a road of more than 15,000 miles. The equatorial regions of America exhibit the same composition of rock that we meet with in other parts of the globe. The only formations which Humboldt could not discover in his travels, were those of chalk, roe- stone, grey wakke, the topaz-rock of Werner, and the compound of ser pentine with granular limestone, which occurs in Asia Minor. Granite constitutes, in South Ame rica, the great basis which supports the otber for mations ; above it lies gnesis, next comes mica ceous schist, and then primitive schist. Granu lar limestone, chlorite schist, and primitive trap, often form subordinate beds in the gnesis and mi caceous schist, which is very abundant, and some times alternates with serpentine and sienite. The high ridge of the Andes is every where covered with formations of porphyry, basalt, phonolite, and greenstone ; ami these, being otten divided into columns, that appear from a distance like ruined castles, produce a very striking and pic 
turesque effect. At the bottom of those huge mountains, occur two different kinds of limestone ; the one with a filiccous base, enclosing primitive masses, arid sometimes cinnabar and coal ; the other with a calcareous base, and cementing toge ther the secondary rocks. Plains of more than 600,000 square miles are covered with an ancient deposit of limestone, containing fossil wood and brown iron ore. On this rests the limestone of the Higher Alps, presenting marine petrifactions at a vast elevation. Next appears a lamellar gypsum, impregnated with sulphur and salt; above this, another calcareous formation, whitish and homo geneous, but sometimes cavernous. Again occurs calcareous sandstone, then lamellar gypsum mixed with clay ; and the series terminates with calca reous masses, involving flints and hornstone. But what may perplex some geologists, is the singular fact noticed by Humboldt, that the secondary for mations in the new world have such enormous thickness and elevation. Beds of coal are found in the neighbourhood of Santa Fe, 8650 feet above the level of the sea ; and even at the height of 14,700, near Huanuco in Peru. The plains of Bogota, although elevated 9000 feet, are covered with sandstone, gypsum, shell-limestone, and evea in some parts with rock-salt. Fossil shells, which in the old continent have not been discovered high er than the summits of the Pyrenees, or 11,700 feet above the sea, were observed in Peru, near Micuipampa, at the height of 12,800; and again at that of 14,120, besides at Huancavelica, where sandstone also appears. The basalt of Pichincha, near the city of Quito, has an elevation of 15,500 feet ; while the top of the Schneekoppe in Silesia is only 4225 feet above the sea, the highest point in Germany where that species of rock occurs. On the other hand, granite, which in Europe crowns the loftiest mountains, is not found in the American continent above the height of 11,500 feet. It is scarcely known at all in the provinces of Quito and Peru. The frozen summits of Chim borazo, Cayambe, and Anitsana, consist entirely of porphyry, which, on the flanks of the Andes, forms a mass of 10 or 12,000 feet in depth. The sandstone near Cuen
a has a thickness of 5000 feet ; and the stupendous mass of pure quartz, on the w. of Caxamarca, measures perpendicularly 9600 feet. It is likewise a remarkable fact, that the porphyry of those mountains very frequently contains hornblende, but never quartz, and seldom mica. The Andes of Chile have a distinct nature from those three chains called the ?Jaritime Moun tains, which have been successively formed by th* waters of tiie ocean. This great interior structure 
60 
|AND 
|AND 
appears to be coeval with the creation of the world. It rises abruptly, and forms but a small angle with its base ; its general shape being that of a pyramid, crowned at intervals with conical, and, as it were, crystallized elevations. It is composed of primitive rocks of quartz, of an enormous size, and almost uniform configuration, containing no marine substances, which abound in the secondary mountains. It is in the Cordillera of this part of the Andes, that blocks of crystal are obtained, of a size sufficient for columns of six or seven feet in height. The central Andes are rich, be yond conception, in all the metals, lead only excepted. One of the most curious ores in the bowels of those mountains is the pacos, a com pound of clay, oxyd of iron, and the muriate of silver, with native silver. The mines of Mexico arid Peru, so long the objects of envy and admira tion, far from being yet exhausted, promise, under a liberal and improved system, to become more productive than ever. But nature has blended with those hidden treasures the active aliments of destruction. The whole chain of the Andes is subject to the most terrible earthquakes. From Cotopaxi to the S. sea, no fewer than forty volca noes are constantly burning ; some of them, espe cially the lower ones, ejecting lava, and others discharging the muriate of ammonia, scorified basalt and porphyry, enormous quantities of water, and especially moya, or clay mixed with sulphur and carbonaceous matter. Eternal snow invests their sides, and forms a barrier to the animal and vegetable kingdoms. Near that confine the tor por of vegetation is marked by dreary wastes. In these wide solitudes, the condor, a fierce and powerful bird of prey, fixes its gloomy abode. Its size, however, has been greatly exaggerated. According to Humboldt, it is not larger than the laemmcr geyer, or alpine vulture of Europe; its extreme length being only three feet and a half, and its breadth across the wings nine feet. The condor pursues the small deer of the Andes, and commits very considerable havoc among sheep and heifers. It tears out the eyes and the tongue, and leaves the wretched animal to languish and expire. Estimating from very probable data, this bird skims whole hours at the height of four miles ; and its power of wing must be prodigious, and its pliancy of organs most astonishing, since in an instant it can dart from the chill region of mid-air to the sultry shores of the ocean. The condor is sometimes caught alive, by means of a slip-cord ; and this chaie, termed correr bmtres
 is, next to a bull-fight, the most favourite diversion of the Spanish colonists. The dead carcase of a cow or 
horse soon attracts from a distance crowds of these birds, which have a most acute scent. They fall on with incredible voracity, devour the eyes and the tongue of the animal, and plunging through the anus, gorge themselves with the entrails. In this drowsy plight they are approached by the Indians, who easily throw a noose over them. The condor, thus entangled, looks shy and sullen ; it is most tenacious of life, and is therefore made to suffer a variety of protracted tortures. The most important feature of the American continent, is the very general and enormous elevation of its soil. In Europe the highest tracts of cultivated land seldom rise more than 000 feet above the sea ; but in the Peruvian territory extensive plains occur at an altitude of 9000 feet ; and three fifths of the viceroyalty of Mexico, comprehending the interior provinces, present a surface of half a mil lion of square miles, which runs nearly level, at an elevation from 6000 to 8000 feet, equal to that of the celebrated passages of Mount Cenis, of St. Gothard, or of the great St. Bernard. These remarkable facts are deduced chiefly from barome trical observations. But Humboldt has adopted a very ingenious mode, infinitely superior to any description, of representing at one view the col lective results of his topographical and mineralogical survey. He has given profiles, or vertical sections, of the countries whlcn he visited, across the continent, from Acapulco to Mexico, and thence to Vera Cruz ; from Mexico to Guanaxuato, and as far as the volcano of Jorullo ; arid from Mexico to Valladolid. These beautiful plates are in every way highly interesting. 
|ANDIETUM, asmall river of the province and colony of Maryland. It runs s. and enters the Potowmac. 
|ANDINOS, a small river of the province and country of the Amazonas, in the Portuguese pos sessions, and in the territory of the Natayas Indians. It runs from s. s. e. to n. n. w. and enters the lake Maguegazu. According to the descrip tion of Mr. Bellin, who calls it Andiras, it enters the river Abacachis. 
|ANDOAS, SANTA TOM AS DE, a settlement and reduction of the missions held there by the Jesuits, in the province and government of Mainas, of the kingdom of Quito. 
|ANDO\ /r ER, a large, fertile, and thriving town in Essex county, Massachusetts. It contains 2863 inhabitants, in two parishes. In the s. parish are a paper mill and powder mill, from the latter of which the army received large supplies of gun powder in the late war. There is an excellent aca demy in this town, called Phillip s Academy, 
|AND 
which owes its existence to the liberal benefactions of the family whose name it bears. Andover is under excellent cultivation, particularly that part ivhich is watered by Shawsheen river. It lies about 20 miles &. from Newbury-port, and about 22 n. from Boston. Lat. 42 41 n. Long. 71 8 a?. 
A-NDOVF.R, in Hillsborough, New Hampshire, contains 645 inhabitants, and was incorporated 1779. 
|ANDOVER is the s. w. township in Windsor county, Vermont, has Chester on the e. lies 32 miles n. e. of Bennington, and contains 275 inha bitants. 
AN DOVER, a place in Sussex county, New Jersey, near the source of Pequest river, five miles s. s. t. from New Town, and 16 in the same direc tion from Walpack. 
|ANDRE, BAHIA DE, on the ;?. coast of the straits of Magellan. 
|ANDRE, ST. a town in the kingdom of Leon, in N. America, near the mouth of Nassas river, which falls into the gulf of Mexico. 
|ANDREANOFFSKI Isles, a crescent of isles between Asia and America, discovered in 1760. See BEHRING S Straits, and NORTHERN Archi pelago. 1 
|ANDRES, SAN, a settlement of the head settle ment of the district of Texupilco, and alcaldia may or of Zultepec, in Nueva Esparia, situate on the top of an extensive and craggy elevation, of a hot and moist temperature. It contains 77 families of Indians, and is three leagues to the e. of its capi tal. 
|ANDRES, SAX, another settlement of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Toluca, in the same kingdom, with 134 families of Indians. It is a small distance n, of its capital. 
|ANDRES, SA.V, another, of the head settlement of the district of Tlatotepec, and alcaldia mayor of Tepeacn. It contains 33 families of Indians, and is three leagues from its head settlement. 
|ANDRES, SAN, another, which is the head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Tuxt a. It contains 1 170 families of Indians. 
|ANDRES, SAN, another, of the head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Marinalco, at the distance of one short league from its capi tal. 
AN DUES, SAN, another, of the head settlement of the district of Texpatlan, and alcaldia mayor of Cuernavaca. 
|ANDRES, SAV, another, which is a small ward united to that of Tequiszitlan, in the alcaldia mayor of Theotihuacan. 
|AND 
61 
|ANDRES, SAN, another, in the head settlement of the district of Ahuacathm, and alcaldia mayor of Zacatlan, at more than a league s distance from its head settlement. 
|ANDRES, SAN, another, of the head settlement of the district of Xonotla, and alcaldi i mayor of Tetela, lying one league s.w. of its head settle ment. 
|ANDRES, SAN, another, of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Guejozingo. It contains 15 families of Indians, including those of the ward of San Pedro, which is joined to it, both being tothe s. of their capital. 
|ANDRES, SAN, another, a small settlement or ward of the alcaldia mayor of Guauchinango, an. nexed to the curacy of that of Tlacuclotepec. 
AN DUES, SAN, another, of the head settlement of the district of Papalotipac, and alcaldia mayor of Cuicatlan, with 20 families of Indians. 
|ANDRES, SAN, another, of the head settlement of the district of Hiscontepec, and alcaldia mayor of Nexapa. It comprehends 68 families of Indians. 
|ANDRLS, SAN, another, of the head settlement of the district of Tepehuacan, and alcaldia mayor of Tepee, in which there are reckoned to be 40 fami lies of Indians, employed in cultivating cotton. 
|ANDRES, SAN, another, of the head settlement of the district and ahaldia mayor of Zapatlan and Tuspa. In its vicinity, and upon the shores of the river Amazonas, is an estate called El Tigre a la Raya, (the tiger at bay), and that of Mangtiaro, also upon the shore of the same river. It is four leagues from its capital. 
|ANDRES, SAN, another, of the missions that were held by the Jesuits, in the province of Tepeguana, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya, situate on the shore of the river of Las Nasas. 
|ANDRES, SAN, another, of the mission belong ing to the order of St. Francisco, in the province of Taraumara, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya; 10 leagues distant between the s. e. and e. s. e. of the real of San Felipe de Chiguaga. 
|ANDRES, SAN, another, of the jurisdiction and government of San Juan Giron, in the new king dom of Granada, situate in the most uneven part of \\\G serrania. 
|ANDRES, SAN, another, of the province and government of Cartagena, in the kingdom of Ticrra Firme, situate on the shore of the river Sinu. 
|ANDRI s, SAN, another, of the same province and government as the former, and at a small dis tance from it. 
|ANDRES, SAN, another, of the province and corregimiento of Lucanas in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Pucquin. 
&lt;3 AND 
|ANDRES, SAN, another, of the province and alcaldia mayor of Zacapula in the kingdom of Guatemala. 
|ANDRES, SAN, another, of the missions that belonged to the Jesuits, in the province and go vernment of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito, on the shore of the river Hayai, at a small distance from that of San Juan. 
|ANDRES, SAN, another, of the province and government of Popayan in the kingdom of Quito. 
|ANDRES, SAN, another, of the province and alcaldia mayor of Chiapa in the kingdom of Gua temala. 
|ANDRES, SAN, another settlement and parish of the English, in the island of Jamaica, on the s. side. 
|ANDRES, SAN, another, being a parish and the head settlement of the district of the island of Barbadoes, situate upon the e. coast. 
|ANDRES, SAN, another, of the above island, of the district and parish of St. Thomas. 
|ANDRES, SAN, another, of the province and alcaldia mayor of Vera Paz in the kingdom of Guatemala. 
|ANDRES, SAN, an island of the N. sea, situate in front of the coast of Tierra Firme, and s. of that of Santa Catalina : it is desert. 
|ANDRES, SAN, another island of the N. sea, one of the Lucayas, between the island Larga and that of El Espiritu Santo. 
|ANDRES, SAN, a bay of the province and gorernment of La Louisiana, between the two rivers Incognitos (unknown). 
|ANDRES, SAN, another bay of Florida, in the province of Georgia, between that of Santa Rosa and the river Apalachicola. 
|ANDRES, SAN, a fort of the English, situate in an island of the coast of Georgia. 
|ANDRFS, SAN, a cape, or point of land, on the coast of the Patagones, which lies between the river of La Plata and the straits of Magellan. 
|ANDREW S, ST. a small town in the con tested country between New Brunswick and the United States ; situated in the rear of an island of the same name, on the e. side of the arm of the inner bay of Passamaquoddy, called Scoodick. The town is regularly laid out in the form of an oblong square. The few inhabitants are chiefly employed in the lumber trade. The common tides rise here about 18 feet. 
|ANDREW S, ST. atownship in Caledonia county, Vermont, 100 miles n. e. from Bennington.l 
|ANDREW S, ST. a parish in Charleston district, South Carolina, containing 2947 inhabitants, of whom 570 are whites, and 2516 slaves. 
|ANDREW S Sound, ST. lies s. of Jekyl s island, and is formed by it and a small island at the mouth of Great Sagilla river. The small river opposite this sound separates Camden from Glynri county, in Georgia. 
fANUROS Islands, sometimes called Holy Ghost Islands, are of very considerable magnitude, and have been very erroneously placed in almost every map or chart of the Bahama islands. They extend in a sort of curve, or crescent, upwards of forty leagues in length. There is a passage be tween the northern point of them (at J culler s keys) and the Berry islands, ofditlicult navigation, and not above eight feet deep. Vessels, therefore, proceeding from that quarter to Cuba, should go round the n. end of all the Berry islands, over the Great Bahama bank; which, however, will (not admit ressels drawing more than 12 feet. There arc also several passages, or creeks, (though very shallow), through this chain of islands, particularly towards the s. extremity and Grassy Creek keys. Upon the w. side of Andros islands is the most n. extremity of the Great Bahama bank. On the e. side there are no soundings at any considerable distance from the shore. The most w. point of the principal Andros island lies about 10 or 11 leagues w. n. w. from the w. end of New Provi dence. High Point, which is the most s. part of it, lies about eight leagues s. from the w. end ol the same island. There are few, if any, inhabitants now on Andros island. In the interior of the island, there is a shallow swamp or lake of fresh water, almost the only one which is to be found in the Bahama islands ; and it communicates with the sea by a creek, or lagoone, navigable for flat-bottomed boats. Great quantities of various sorts of timber abound in the interior; but, from the shallowness of the banks, and extreme difficulty of getting any communication to the coast, the trees remain un touched. One part of Andros island extends to the w. very far into the Great Bahama bank, in a s. w. direction from New Providence, towards Salt key and the island of Cuba. In J788 An dros island contained about two hundred inhabi tants, including slaves; and previous to May 1803, lands were granted by the crown, to the amount of 16,025 acres, for the purpose of culti vation. See BAHAMAS. 
|ANDROSCOGGIN,orAMARiscoGGiNRiver, in the district of Maine, may be called the main western branch of the Kennebeck. Its sources are n. of lake Umbagog. Its course is southerly till it approaches near to the White mountains, from which it receives Moose and Peabody rivers. It then turns to the e. and then to the A- . e. in which 
course it passes within two miles -of the sea-coast, and then turning n. runs over Pejepskaeg lulls into Merry- Meeting- bay, \vhere it forms a junction with the Kennebeck, 20 miles from the sea. For merly, from this bay to the sea, the confluent stream was called Sagadahock. The lands on this river are very good. 
|ANEAV, Port of the, on the w. coast of the island of Newfoundland andgulph of St. Lawrence, between cape Raye and the bay of Anguila. 
|ANECUILCO, a settlement of the head settle ment of the district of Tetelzingo, and alcaldia mayor of Coautla, in Nueva Espaila. It contains 20 families of Indians, and at a little more than a league s distance there is the estate of Mapaztlan ; in the vicinity of which is a ranc/ieria, consisting of 22 families ofMtilattoes and Mustees, who have near to this place another estate, in which they grind silver-metals, and which is of the real of the mines of Coautla. It is one league s. w. of its head settlement. 
|ANEGADA, a small island of the N. sea, one of the Antillas, situate to the e. of that of rtiertorico. It is barren, without water, and desert, is dependent on Virgin Gorda. It is about six leagues long, is low, and almost covered by water at high tides. On the s. side is Treasure Point. Lnt. 18 46 n. Long. 61 22 a?. 
|ANEGADA, also a bay of the coast of the straits of Magellan. It is large and capacious, and lies between that of San Matias and the cape of San Andres. 
|ANKGADA, a small island near the coast of Vera Cruz, in the bay or gulph of Mexico, between the Arrecife del Palo, and the island of Cabezas. 
AN EG A DA, a point of land of the 5. coast of the straits of Magellan, close to the cape of Orange, and opposite the bay of La Poses ion. 
AN EGA DA, another bay of the coast of the Patagones, which lies between the river of La Plata and The strait of Magellan. 
|ANECADITOS, a settlement of the island of Cuba, on the ?. const, between port Trinidad and the island Cochinos. 
|ANEGADIZOS, River of the, in the province and government of Choco, of the kingdom of Tierra Firme. It runs almost directly from e. to w. into the S. sea, near the point of Salinas. 
|ANEGADIZOS, SENAS DE i,os, the name of three mountains, which are upon the coast of the S. sea, in the same province and government as the former river. 
|ANEMBI, a river of the province and govern ment of Paraguay in Peru. 
|AUGACIIILLA, a river of the district of Guadalabquen, in the kindom of Chile. It runs o\ and enters the Valdivia near this city. 
|ANGAGUA, SANTIAGO DE, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of Uruapan, and alcaldia mayor of Valladolid, in the province and bishopric of Mechoacan ; situate in the in terior of the serrania. It contains 22 families of Indians, and is distant 10 leagues to the s. of its head settlement, and 15 from the capital. 
|ANGAMARCA. a settlement of the province and corregimienlo of Latacunga in the new king dom of Quito. 
|ANGAMOCUTIRO, SAN FRANCISCO DC, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of Puruandiro, and alcaldia mayor of Valladolid, in the province and bishopric of Mechoacan ; situate on the top of a hill, in the e. part of its capital ; is of a warm and dry temperature ; contains 45 families of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattoes, and 106 of Indians. Twenty-five leagues e. of its capital Pasquaro. 
|ANGARAES, a province and corregimiento of Peru, bounded on the n. by the province of Jauja, on the w. by the Andes, arid joins the province of Castro-V irreynato the s. ; to the c. it is bounded by the island of Tayacaja, of the province oflluanta : 24 leagues in length from e. to w. and 12 in width, having a very irregular figure. Its temperature is for the most part cold, except in one or two hollow uneven parts, which are somewhat tempe rate ; but there is nevertheless no scarcity in wheat, maize, and other seeds. In the temperate parts are cultivated the sugar-cane, some fruits and herbs, and a kind of hay called ichu, serving as fuel for the ovens in which they extract the quicksilver, from which great emolument is de rived, since the miners buy this article at a great price. It abounds in cattle of every kind, and in native sheep, which serve to carry the metals to the ovens. There are also found in this province various coloured earths for painting, such as umber, which they call guancahclica
 oropimente
 ocre almagre, vermillion, and others of different hues. It is watered by the river Sangoiaco, which divides it from the island of Tayacaja, belonging to the province of lluanta, the river Vilcabamba, which also divides it from the province of Tauxa, and the rivers Licay and La Sal, all of which run into the Maranon. It has six curacies or parishes of Indians, and 30 other settlements, dependent upon, or annexed to these. Its reparthniento was 36,422 dollars, of which it paid 1456 of alcumla in five years. The capital is Guancavelica, and the settlements of its jurisdiction are, 
Andabamba, 
Paucara, 
Ilillinca, 
Vechuilluiaillas, 
Iluachocollpa, 
Pata, 
Iluando, 
Palea, 
Anancusi, 
Pallalla, 
Chacapa, 
Iscuchaca, 
Cuenca, 
Moya, 
Vilcabamba, 
Incahuasi, 
Acobambilla, 
Callanmarca, 
Achonga. 
San Antonio, 
San Sebastian, 
Santa Ana, 
Santa Barbara, 
Acobamba, 
Acoria, 
Conaica, 
Lircay, 
Julcarmarca, 
Autarpanca, 
Iluaillas, 
fluancahuanca, 
Congallo, 
San Christoval, 
Asuncion, 
Sacsamarca, 
Huailazuchu, 
Chacllatacana, 
Espiritu Caja, 
Todos Santos, ANGASMAIU, a river of the province and government of Popayan, in the valley of Los Mahteles. It runs from e. to ?. and, alter collect ing the waters of the Tuanambu and the Guaitara, enters the Patia on the s. side, which thus be comes increased by its stream. It then divides the jurisdiction of Quito from that of Popayan, and is the mark of the boundary of the inquisition of Lima, and the point from whence that of Carta gena begins. Its mouth is in Lat. 2 4 n. Long. 78 24 w. 
|ANGASMAHCA, a settlement of the province and government of Tarma in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Parianchacra. 
|ANG ASMARCA, another, of the province and corregimiento of Huamachuco, also in Peru. 
|ANG ASM A RCA, a river of the same province and correginritnfo. It rises to the s. of the capital, and enters the river Santa. 
|ANGEL, SAN, a settlement of the head settle ment of (he district and alcaldia mat/ or of Coyoacan in Nueva Espana, of an agreeable and delightful temperature, and well stocked with houses, gar dens, and orchards, which serve as places of re creation to the people of Mexico. There is a convent of mo;&lt;ks of the order of St. Francis, and another magnificent convent of the bare-footed Carmelites, which is a college of studies. It has some commerce in cloths and baizes, wrought in its manufactories ; is distant somewhat more than a quarter of a league from the zz. of its capital. 
|ANGIX, SAX, another settlement in the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Periban in the same kingdom. It contains 86 jfaniilies of Indians, and six of Muslecs, who ob 
tain a livelihood in making shoes and saddles, as its territory has no productions whatever. It has a convent of the order of St. Francis, and is six leagues to the e. of its capital. 
|ANGEL, SAN, another, of the kingdom of Chile, which is a place of encampment, and a frontier of tiie Arucanian Indians, near the river Biobio. 
|ANGEL, SAN, another, of the province and corngianento of Pasto in the kingdom of Quito, situate in the road which leads down from Po payan. 
|ANGEL, SAX, another, of the province and government of Sonora in Nueva Espana, on the shore of a river which enters into that of Gila, to the a?, of the garrison of Horcarsitas. 
|ANGEL, SAN, another, of the missions held by the Jesuits, in the province and government of Buenos Ayres, on the shore of the river Yui. Here the Portuguese, commanded by Gomez Freirede Andrade, held their head -quarters, in the year 1756, when the lieutenant-general Don Pedro Cevallos, with the Marquis of Valdelirios, was sent over to treat for an exchange of prisoners between the settlement of Paraguay and the crown of Portugal. [It was founded in the vear 1707, in Lat. 28 17 19" n. Long. 54 52 . 
|ANGEL, SAN, another, of the province and corregimiento of Ibarra in the kingdom of Quito, situate at the source of the river of its name. 
|ANGEL, SAN, a large island of the gulph of California, or Red sea of Cortes, situate in the most interior part of it, at a small distance from the coast. 
|ANGEL, SAN, a river of the province and cor~ regimiento of Ibarra in the kingdom of Quito, which rises from the desert of Angel, runs s. s. e. and enters the Mira, a little before the bridge which is across the latter, in Lat. 27 T n. 
|ANGELES, PUEBLA DE LOS, a capital city of the province of Tlaxcala in Nueva Espana, founded in 1533 by the bishop Don Sebastian Ramirez de Fuenleal ; is of a warm and dry temperature, and one of the most beautiful cities of America, being inferior to none in Nueva Espana, save its capital. Its temples are sump tuous, its streets wide, and drawn in a straight line from e. to w. and from n. to s. ; the public squares are large and handsome ; and the ancient edifices of proportionate architecture. The ca thedral is extremely rich, ornamental, and well endowed ; to this is united the magnificent chapel of Sagrario, with two curacies and four assisting parish chapels, which are, the chapel of the Indians, that of Los Dolores, at the bridge of San Francisco, that of Los Cozos, and another, also 
|ANGELES. 
65 
having the name of Los Dolores, contiguous to the convent of Bethlemites, and that of San Mar cos, as suffragan : besides these, it has four other parishes ; that of San Joseph, with five places of visitation, which are those of (he Indians, San Pablo, Santa Ana, San Antonio, and Nuestra Senora de Loreto ; also the parish of Santa Cruz, with four other places of visitation, namely, of Santiago, San Miguel, San Matias, and Guadalupe ; the parish of Santo Angel Custodio with two ; Los Remedies, and San Baltasar, and that of Santa Cruz with three ; namely, of San Juan del Rio, El Santo Christo de Xonacaltepec, and Misericordia. It contains the three following convents : St. Domingo, a large building ; the royal college of San Luis, with public studies and the convent for recluses of San Pablo : and in its vicinity two large chapels, one of the Mistecos Indians, and another of the order of Penitence, to which is an nexed that of La Santa Escuela. It has also a convent of the religious order of St. Francis, and some independent chapels of the order Tercera of Indians ; and without the walls of the city, other churches and hospitals. It has also the college which was formerly of the Jesuits, and contiguous to that, the church of San Miguel, of Indians ; and of San Ildefonso,of barefooted Carmelites, which is a house for novices and for studies ; two colleges of San J uan de Dios, one for novices and the other a hospital, called San Pedro ; the college of San Hipolito de la Caridad, and the convent of Bethlemites, of the La Convalescence, with schools for children ; the church of the Oratorio de San Felipe Neri, and that of the congregation of the ecclesiastics of St. Peter, for the practising of ministers in the duties of the pulpit and the confessional. Its monasteries are those of Concepcion, San Geronimo, Santisima Trinidad, "Santa Catalina, of Dominican nuns ; Santa Ines de Monte Policiano, of the same order ; of Santa Rosa de Maria, of barefooted Carmelites ; of Santa Monica, of the Recoletan Agustines, Ca puchins, and St. Claire. The colleges which adorn this city are, San Pedro and San- Juan, in which is included the Tridentine seminary, where the collegians are taught grammar, the graver sciences, and the Mexican tongue ; also the great college of San Pedro and San Pablo, for studying theology and philosophy ; of San Geronimo, for teaching grammar ; and of San Ignacio, for the graver studies. Here is a college for children, with the title of La Caridad ; another entirely for married women and widows ; that of Jesus Maria, contiguous to that of San Geronimo ; and another female convent, with a magnificent temple and de vout sanctuary of the miraculous image of Nuestra 
|VOL, I. 
Sefiora de la Soledad. Besides these aforesaid temples, there are, without the walls of the city, various chapels and hermitages in the wards of the Indians which encompass it ; and with those who inhabit these wards, and those within the city, the numbers of families amount to 3200 of Mexican Indians, and 15,000 Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattoes. The commerce which they main tain, although it has been upon the decline from the beginning of the present century, with regard to what it was before, consists of cloths and fruits of Spain and of the country, and some cloths from China, besides various effects which find their way hither from the other provinces. It also traffics in soap of various qualities, cotton manufactures, fine earthen ware, resembling that of Talavera, and all kinds of iron and steel work, as plough-shares, chopping-knives, table-knives, spurs, and stirrups ; and, what are held in particular estimation, the white arms, renowned for a singular temper, and not inferior to those of Toledo. It is the seat of the bishop suffragan to the arch bishop of Mexico, established in the year 1526, in the city of Tlaxcala, and translated to this in 1550. Its mitre has had the glory of having adorned the head of the venerable Senor Don Fray Juan de Palafox, whose canonization is no small subject of discussion at the present day. This famed person was the author of many sacred and profound works, and among the rest, those of the turbulent disputes which he maintained with the extinguished society of the Jesuits. 
La Puebla de los Aageles, the capital of the intendancy of its name, is more populous than Lima, Quito, Santa Fe, and Caracas ; and after Mexico, Guanaxuato, and the Havannah. the most consider able city of the Spanish colonies of the new conti nent. La Puebla is one of the small number of Ame rican towns founded by European colonists; for in the plain of Acaxete, or Cuitlaxcoapan, on the spot where the capital of the province now stands, there were only in the beginning of the 16th cen tury a few huts, inhabited by Indians of Cholula. The privilege of the town of Puebla is dated 28th Sept. 1531. The consumption of (lie inhabitants, in 1802, amounted to 52,951 cargas (of 300 pounds each) of wheaten flour, and 36,000 car gas of maize. Height of the ground at the Plaza Mayor, 7381 feet; population, according to Humboldi, 67,800. This city is 22 leagues to the e. of Mexico. Long. 98 3 . Lat. 19. 
Catalogue of the Bishops of La Puebla de los Angeles. 
I. Don Fray Julian Garces, native of Aragon. a Domincan, preacher to the Em ptror Charles Y,. K, 
66 
|ANGELES. 
elected bishop of Tlaxcala in 1527 ; lie died in 1542. 
2. Don Fray Pablo de Tulavera, native of the town of Navalinarquende ; elected in 1543 ; died in 1545. 
3. Don Fray Martin Sarmicnto, native of Ojacastro, a Franciscan monk, commissary-general of India; elected in 1546; died in 1557. 
4. Don Bernardo de Villa Gomez ; elected in 1559 ; died in J570. 
5. Don Antonio dc Ruiz de Morales y Molina, native of Cordova ; elected in 1572; he died in 1576. 
6. Don Diego dc Romann, a native of Valladolid, canon of Granada, inquisitor, founder of the college of the Jesuits of his country ; elected in 1378 he died in 1606. 
7. Don Alonso de la Mota y Escobar, native of Mexico, dean of that metropolitan church ; he founded the college of San lldefbnso, of the Jesuits of this city, endowed it with provisions for 25 nuns ; and under his direction and influence, were founded the convents of Santa Teresa and Santa Ines. 
Also, Don Juan de Santo Matia Saenz de Mafiosca, bishop of Cuba, removed to this, but died before he took possession of it. 
8. Don Gutierre Bernardo de Quiros, native of Tineo in Asturias, inquisitor of Toledo and Mex ico ; elected in 16
6; he died in 1638. 
9. Don Juan de Palafox y Mendoza, native of Ariza in Aragon, treasurer of Tarazona; elected in 1639 ; promoted to the archbishopric of Mexico in 1556. 
10. Don Diego Osorio de Escobar y Llamas, na tive of Coruna, canon of Toledo ; elected in 1556, founder of the convent of LaSantissima Trinidad, of monks of Concepcion ; promoted to the arch bishopric of Mexico in 1667. 
11. Don Manuel Fernandez de Santa Cruz, na tive of La Palencia, mayor collegian of Cuenca, magistral canon of Segovia, bishop of Chiapa and of Gnadalaxara ; promoted in 1667; he founded the colleges of San Pedro and San Pablo, of St. Domingo, that of San Joseph dc Gracia, for children, and that of Santa Monica ; he finished the beautiful tower of the church, erected two gates of marbles, put up the statues, and finished the exchange, which fronts the mart ; he was pro moted to the bishopric of Mexico in 1703, presented to this in 1676 ; he did not accept of the promotion of the bishopric or vice-royalty of Mexico, to which he was invited ; he died in the year 1699. 
Don Fray Ignacio de Urbina, of the order of St. Gerorae, archbishop of Santa Fe, in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada ; he was before presented to this in 1702, but declined it. 
12. Don Garcia Legaspi Altamirano, native of Mexico, archdeacon of that metropolis ; as bishop of this church, promoted in the year 1703, of which he took possession the following year, and in a short time died. 
13. Don Pedro Nogales Davila, native of Zalamea in Estremadura, of the order of Alcantara, inquisitor of Logrono ; he was elected in 1708, and died with the reputation of sanctity in 1721. 
14. Don Juan Antonio de Lardiz-avaly Elorza, native of Segura in Guipuzcoa, mayor collegian of San Bartolome, magistral canon of Salamanca, and professor of sciences in that university ; he was elected in 1722, and was offered the arch bishopric of Mexico in 1735 ; this however he de clined accepting, and died in 1733. 
15. Don Benito Crespo, a knight of the order of Santiago, native of Estremadura, dean of Oaxaca, bishop of Durango ; promoted to La Pnebla in 1734, and died in 173?! 
16. Don Pedro Gonzalez Garcia, native of Tordelaguna ; he was delaying three years and an half in the port of Santa Maria, without daring to embark on account of the war, when he was pro moted to the bishopric of Alvila in Spain, in 1743. 
17. Don Domingo Pantalcon Alvarez de Abreu, native of Canaria, archbishop of St. Domingo ; promoted to this of La Puebla in 1743; he en couraged the foundation of the convent of Santa Rosa, and dedicated the church of Nuestra Seiiora del Refugio, in the small settlement of Las Caleras ; he died in 1763. 
18. Don Francisco Xavier Fabian y Fuero, native of Terzaga, bishop of Siguenga, of which he was magistral collegian in the grand college of Santa Cruz, canon and abbot of Santa Leocadia in the church of Toledo ; elected in 1764, and promoted to the archbishopric of Valencia in 1774. 
19. Don Victoriano Lopez Gonzalo, vicargeneral of the church of La Puebla ; elected in 1774. 
|ANGELES, PUEBLA DE LOS, Intendancy of. This intendancy, which has only a coast of 26 leagues towards the great ocean, extends from 16 57 to 20 40 of n. latitude, and is consequently wholly situated in the torrid zone. It is bounded on the . e. by the intendancy of Vera Cruz, on the e. by the intendancy of Oaxaca, on the s. by the ocean, and on the w. by the intendancy of Mexico. Its greatest length, from the mouth of the small river Tecoyame to near Mcxitlan, is 118 
|ANGELES. 
leagues; and its greatest breadth, from Techuacan to Mecameca, is 50 leagues. 
The greater part of the intendancy of Puebla is traversed by the high cordilleras of Anahuac. Beyond the 18th degree of latitude the whole country is a plain eminently fertile in wheat, maize, agave, and fruit trees. This plain is from 1800 to 2000 metres, or 5905 to 6561 feet, above the level of the ocean. In this intendancy is also the most elevated mountain of all New Spain, the Popocatepetl. This volcano, first measured by Humboldt, is continually burning ; but for these several centuries it has thrown nothing up from its crater but smoke and ashes. This mountain is COO metres, or 1968 feet, higher than the most elevated summit of the old continent. From the isthmus of Panama to Bering s straits, which separate Asia from America, we know only of one mountain, Mont St. Elie, higher than the great volcano of Puebla. 
The population of this intendancy is still more unequally distributed than that of the intendancy of Mexico. It is concentrated on the plain which extends from the eastern declivity of the snowy mountains to the environs of Perote, especially on the high and beautiful plains between Cholula, La Puebla, and Tlascala. Almost the whole country, from the central table-land towards San Luis and Ygualapa, near the S. sea coast, is desert, though well adapted for the cultivation of sugar, cotton, and the other precious productions of the tropics. The table-land of La Puebla exhibits remark able vestiges of ancient Mexican civilization. The fortifications of Tlaxcala are of a construction posterior to that of the great pyramid of Cholula, a curious monument, of which Humboldt promises to give a minute description in the historical account of his travels in the interior of the new continent. It is sufficient to state here, that this pyramid, on the top of which he made a great number of astrono mical observations, consists of four stages ; that in its present state the perpendicular elevation is only 54 metres, or 177 feet ; and the horizontal breadth of the base, 439 metres, or 1423 feet ; that its sides are very exactly in the direction of the meri dians and parallels ; and that it is constructed (if we may judge from the perforation made a few years ago in the n. side) of alternate strata of brick and clay. These data are sufficient for our recog nising in the construction of this edifice the same model observed in the form of the pyramids of Teotihuacau, which that author also de scribes. They suffice also to prove the great analogy between these brick monuments, erect ed by the most ancient inhabitants of Anahuac, 
the temple of Belus at Babylon, and the pyra mids of Menschich-Dashour, near Sakhara in Egypt. 
The platform of the truncated pyramid of Cho lula has a surface of 4200 square metres, or 45,208 square feet English. In the midst of it there is a church dedicated to Nuestra Senora de los Reme dies, surrounded with cypress, in which mass is celebrated every morning by an ecclesiastic of In dian extraction, whose habitual abode is the sum mit of this monument. It is from this platform that we eujoy the delicious and majestic view of the Volcan de la Puebla, the Pic d Orizaba, and the small Cordillera of Matlacueye, which formerly separated the territory of the Cholulans from that of the Tlaxcaltec republicans. 
The pyramid, or teocalli of Cholula, is exactly of the same height as the Tonatiuh Itzaqual of Teotiuhacan, already adverted to ; and it is three metres, or 9. 8 feet, higher than the Mycerinus, er the third of the great Egyptian pyramids of the group of Ghize. As to the apparent length of its base, it exceeds that of all the edifices of the same description hitherto found by travellers iu the old continent, and is almost the double of the great pyramid known by the name of Cheops. Thosewho wish to form a clear idea of the great mass of this Mexican monument, from a comparison with objects more generally known, may imagine a square, four times the dimensions of the Place Vendome, co vered with a heap of bricks of twice tlie elevation of the Louvre ! The whole of the interior of the pyramid of Cholula is not, perhaps, composed of brick. These bricks, as was suspected by a cele brated antiquary at Rome, M. Zoega, probably formed merely an incrustation of a heap of stones and lime, like many of the pyramids of Sakhara, visited by Pocok, and more recently by M. Grobert. Yet the road from Puebla te Mecameca, carried across a part of the first stage of the teocalli, does not agree with this supposition. We know not the ancient height of this extraordinary monument. In its present state, the length of its base is to its perpendicular height as eight to one, while in the three great pyramids of Ghize, this propor tion is as one and six-tenths and one and seven tenths to one, or nearly as eight to five. 
The intendancy of Puebla gratifies the curiosity of the traveller also with one of the most ancient monuments of vegetation, the famous ahahuete, (cupressus disticha. Linn.), or cypress of the village of Atlixco, which is 76.4 feet English in circumference, measured interiorly (for its trunk is hollow) ; the diameter is 16 feet English. This Cypress of Atlixco is, therefore, to within a few K 2 
|ANGELES. 
feet of the same thickness as the baobab (andansonia digitata) of the Senegal. 
The district of the old republic of Tlaxcala, in habited by Indians jealous of their privileges, and very much inclined to civil dissensions, has for a long time formed a particular government. It is indicated in the general map of New Spain as still belonging to the intendancy of Puebla ; but b
 a recent change in the financial administration, Tlaxcala and Guautlade las Hamilpas were united to the intendancy of Mexico and Tlapa, and Ygualapa separated from it. 
There were, in 1793, in the intendancy of Pue bla, without including the four districts of Tlax cala, Guautla, Ygualapa, and Tlapa : 
Males 187,531 souls. 
Fcmaleg m 
2l 
,Males 25,617 
Females 29,363 
iMales 37,318 
 Females 40,590 
Secular ecclesiastics * 585 
Monks 446 
Nuns.. 427 
Indians, 
Spaniards or whites, 
Mixed race, 
Result of the total enumeration, 508,098 souls, distributed into six cities, 133 parishes, 607 vil lages, 425 farms (haciendas), 886 solitary houses, (ranches), and 33 convents, two-thirds of which are for monks. 
The government of Tlaxcala contained, in 1793, a population of 59,177 souls, whereof 21,849 were male, and 21,029 female Indians. The boasted privileges of the citizens of Tlaxcala are reducible to the three following points: 1. The town is governed by a cacique and four Indian alcaldes, who represent the ancient heads of the four quarters, still called Tecpectipac, Ocotelolco, Quiahutztlan, and Tizatlan ; these alcaldes are under the dependence of an Indian governor, who is himself subject to the Spanish intendant : 2. The whites have no seat in the municipality, in virtue of a royal cedula, of the 16th April 1585 : and, 3. The cacique, or Indian governor, enjoys the honours of an alferez real. The progress of the industry and prosperity of this province has been extremely slow, notwithstanding the active zeal of an intendant equally enlightened and respectable, Don Manuel de Flon, who lately inherited the title of Count de la Cadena. The flour trade, formerly very flourishing, has suf fered much from the enormous price of car riage from the Mexican table-land to the Havannah, and especially from the want of beasts of burden. The commerce which Puebla carried on 
till 1710 with Peru, in hats and delft ware, has en tirely ceased. But the greatest obstacle to the public prosperity arises from four-fifths of the whole property ( fined s) belonging to mort-main proprietors ; that is to say, to communities of monks, to chapters, corporations, and hospitals. The intendancy of Puebla has very considerable salt-works near Chila, Xicotlan, and Ocotlan, in the district of Chiautla, as also near Zapotitlan. The beautiful marble, known by the name of Puebla marble, which is preferable to that of Bizaron and the Real del Doctor, is procured in the quarries of Totamehuacan and Tecali, at two and seven leagues distance from the capital of the in tendancy. The carbonate of lime of Tecali is transparent, like the gypsous alabaster of Volterra, and the Phengites of the ancients. 
The indigenous of this province speak three languages totally different from one another, the Mexican, Totonac, and Tlapanec. The first is peculiar to the inhabitants of Puebla, Cholula, and Tlascala ; the second, to the inhabitants of Zacatlan ; and the third is preserved in the environs of Tlapa. Whatever may be the depopulation of the intendancy of Puebla, its relative population is still four times greater than that of the kingdom of Sweden, and nearly equal to that of the king dom of Aragon. The industry of the inhabi tants of this province is not much directed to the workitig of gold and silver mines. Those of Yxtacmaztitlan, Temeztla, and Alatlauquitepic, in the Partido de San Juan de los Llanos, of La Canada, near Tetela de Xonotla, and of San Miguel Tenango, near Zacatlan, are almost aban doned, or at least very remissly worked. 
The most remarkable towns of the intendancy of Pnebla are, the capital of this name, Tlascalla, Cholula, Atlixco, Tehnacan de las Granadas, Tepeaca or Tepeyacac, Huljocingo or Huexotzinco. Population in 1803, 813,300. Extent of surface in square leagues, 2696. Number of inhabitants to the square league, 301. 
|ANGELES, PUFBLA DE LOS, with the dedicatory title of Nuestra Senora, a town of the province and government of Popayan, founded in 1565 by the captain Domingo Lozano. It was large and well peopled ; but it is at present reduced to a miserable state, by the repeated ravages committed in it by the infidel Indians of the frontier. Twenty leagues from Tocaima, and nine from the town of Neiva. 
|ANGELES, PUEBLA DE LOS, an other settlement, with the sirname of Angeles de Roamainas, a reduccion of the missions which belonged to the re gulars of the company of Jesuits, in the province 
and government of Mainas, of the kingdom of Quito, situate on the shore of the river Napo ; founded by the father Lucas Maxano in 1659, from a nation of Indians of its name. 
|ANGELES, PUEBLA DE LOS, another, with the dedicatory title of Santa Maria, in the province and government of Cumana, of the kingdom of Tierra Firme, situate in the middle of the serrania. It is one of those of the mission which is under the care of the Capuchin Catalanian fathers. 
|ANGELES, PUEBLA DE LOS, another, with the dedicatory title of Nuestra Senora, in the district of Chiriqui, of the province and government of Yeragua, kingdom of Tierra Firrae. 
|ANGELES, PUEBLA DE LOS, with the same de dicatory title, a reduction of the missions in Ori noco, held by the regulars of the extinguished order of Jesuits, of the province of the new king dom of Granada, situate on the shore of that river. It is composed of Indians of the nation of Saliva. In 1733 it was destroyed and burnt by the Caribes Indians, who could not, with all their strength, destroy the cross that was in it. 
|ANGELES, PUEBLA DE LOS, another, of the pro vince and government of La Senora in Nueva Espafia; situate on the shore of the river of this name. 
|ANGELES, PUEBLA DE LOS, another, of the district and corregimiento of Bogota in the new kingdom of Granada, near the capital of Santa Fe. 
|ANGELES, PUEBLV DE LOS, a bay on the coast of thegulph of California, or Red sea of Cortes, in the most interior part of it, behind the island of the Angel de la Guardia. 
|ANGELES PUEBLA DE LOS, a port on the coast of the province and alcaldia mayor of Tecoantcpec in Nueva Espana, and in the S. sea. It is the mouth of the river Cayola, between that of La Galera and the settlement of Tanglotango. 
|ANGLOIS, CUL DE SAC, a port of the 5. e. coast of the island of Martinica, very convenient, secure, and well sheltered. It is between the cape Ferre, and the bay of the same name. 
|ANGLOIS, CUL DE SAC, another port on the n. coast of the river Lawrence in New France, to the s. of St. Pancras. 
|ANGOGARD, a settlement of New France, or Canada, situate on the shore of the river St. Law rence, at a small distance from the city of Quebec. 
|ANGOIACO, a river of the province and cor regimiento of Angaraes in Peru. It is the same that afterwards takes the name of the Ancient Maraiion ; some call it Sangolaco. 
|ANGOL, a city of the kingdom of Chile, founded by Pedro de Valdivia, with the name of 
Los Confines. It was afterwards changed by Don Garcia Hurtado de Mendoza to a more open and level spot, eight leagues from the cordillera
 and 20 from La Concepcion, in a soil abounding in fruits, seeds, and vines ; as also in raisins, figs, and other dried fruits. It is surrounded by Cyprus, and is bounded by the river Biobio on the s. and by another small stream on the n. which, running rapidly, might encourage the building of mills upon it. This city was destroyed by the Araucanos Indians, who set fire to it in 1601, putting to death a great number of its inhabitants. It has never yet been rebuilt ; and the ruins of it alone remain a mournful witness of its melancholy catas trophe. 
|ANGOSTO, Port, of the strait of Magellan, discovered by Pedro Sarmiento on the 7th of February 1580. It is one of the parts which this admiral took possession of for the crown of Spain, putting up a cross, when in the night he saw a globe of fire rising from the earth, which afterwards became elongated in the air, so as to represent a lance ; it then took the figure of a half-moon, being of a bright red and whitish colour. This port has a clear bottom at 22 fathoms depth, and is three leagues from the point of San lldefonso. 
|ANGOSTURA, a strait of the river Paraguay, in the province and government of this name, in that part which is entered by the Pilcomayo, and where a redoubt has been thrown up for the defence of that pass. 
|ANGOSTURA, another, in the river Orinoco; it becomes narrowest in the province and govern ment ofGuayana, where was lately built the city of Guayana. 
|ANGRA DE LOS REYES, a city of the pro vince and captainship of the Rio Janeiro in Brazil, situate upon the coast of a small bay, so called, and which gives it its name : it has two churches, a monastery of nuns, and it is garrisoned by a detachment of 20 men. Its fisheries are the only means of its commerce ; it is 36 miles from the river Janeiro. Lat. 23 4 s. Long. 44 11 w. 
|ANGUALASTA, a settlement of Indians of the province and government of Tucuman, and juris diction of the city of Rioja, in Peru. 
|ANGUASSETCOK, a settlement of the Eng lish, in the province and colony of New Hamp shire. 
|ANGUILA, or SVAKE Island, in the N. sea, one of the Small Antilles, inhabited by the English, is 10 leagues in length, and three in width, and takes its name from its figure. Its productions are tobacco, much esteemed for excellent quality, maize, and some sugar. It abounds in cattle, 
70 
which have multiplied in a wild state in the woods ; has only one port or bay of any convenience. I-t was in the possession of the English from the year 1650, when it was but badly peopled ; has been at different times ravaged by the French ; but in the year 1745 these were caused to retire with great loss. N. of the island of San Martin, and s. e. of La Anegada, in lat. 18 12 n. and long. 63 10 w. [It is included amongst the Virgin islands, and of the government of the go vernor general of the Leeward islands. 
|ANGUILA, another, a small island or rock of the coast of the island of Cuba, close to that of Los Roques, between that island and that of San Andres, one of the Lucayas. 
|ANGLJILLE, Cape, a point of land in New foundland island, on the w. side, in the gulf of St. Lawrence, 6 leagues n. from cape Ray, the s. w. extremity of the island, in lat. 47 57 w. 
|ANGUH.LE, a bay on the n. n. e. side of the island of St. John s, in the gulf of St. Lawrence, opposite Magdalen isles, and having St. Peter s harbour on the s. c. and Port Chimene on the n. w.~ 
|ANGUILLE, a point or strip of land of the same coast, and near the former bay. 
|ANGUSTIAS, a settlement of the province and corrcgimicnto of Tunja in the new kingdom of Granada, situate in the district of the city of Pamplona, and valley of Los Locos, on the shore of the river Macio. 
|ANHEIMBAS, a small river of the province and government of Paraguay. It runs e. and enters the Parana. 
|ANIBA, a small river of the province and country of Las Amazonas, in the Portuguese pos sessions, and in the territory of the Urubaquis Indians. It runs from n. to s. and enters the pools there formed by the Maranon, which, according to the description of Mr. Bellin, are a lake called Sarava. 
|ANIBALIS, a barbarous nation of Indians, descended from the Betoyes, in the llanos of Casanare and Meta, of the new kingdom of Granada : they are very numerous, and of a gentle nature, re duced to the Catholic faith by the missionaries of the abolished society of Jesuits in the year 1722. 
AN 1C AN, small islands of the S. sea, near those of Malvinas, or of Falkland, discovered by Monsieur de Bougainville, when he established himself here with the French. 
|ANIL, a river of the province and captainship of Maranon in Brazil. 
ANILORE, a river of the province and country of Las Amazonas. It rises in the Cacao moun tains of the Oreguatos Indians, runs many leagues 
|ANN 
from s. to n. and enters the river Madera, in the terriory of the Unuriaos Indians. 
|ANIMAS, a river of the province and govern ment of Florida. It runs s. and enters the rivers Jordan and St. Philip, and then runs n. 
|ANIMAS, a small island of the gulph of Cali fornia, or Red sea of the Cortes. The interior part is very close upon the shore. It is one of those which is called De Salsiuedes. 
|ANIMAS, another, of the river of Valdivia, in the kingdom of Chile, and district of Guadalab
i 
quen, opposite the city. 
|ANIME, a settlement of the province and go vernment of San Juan de los Llanos in the new kingdom of Granada, situate near the river Ariari. 
|ANN ARUNDEL County, in Maryland, lies between Patapsco and Patuxent rivers, and has Chesapeak bay s. e. Annapolis is the chief town. This county contains 22,598 inhabitants, of whom 10,131 are slaves. 
|ANN, Fort, in the state of New York, lies at the head of batteaux navigation, on Wood creek, which falls into S. bay, lake Champlain, near Skenesborough. It lies six miles and three quar ters s. w. by s. from Skenesborough Fort, 10 e. s. e. from Fort George, and 12 n. e. by . from Fort Edward on Hudson river. Such was the savage state of this part of the country ; and it was so cover ed with trees laid lengthwise and across, and so broken with creeks and marshes, that general Burgoyne sarmy, in July 1777, could scarcely advance above a mile in a day on the road to Fort Edward. They had no fewer than 40 bridges to construct, one of which was of log work two miles in length ; circumstances which in after ages will appear hardly credible. Lat. 43 22 n. Long. 73 27 a?. 
|ANN, ST. a lake in Upper Canada, n. from lake Superior, which sends its waters n. e. into James s bay through Albany river. 
|ANN, ST. is the chief town of the province of Parana, in the e. division of Paraguay, S. America. 
|ANN S, ST. a port on the e. side of Cape Bre ton island, where fishing vessels often put in. It lies on the n. w. side of the entrance into Labrador lake. 
|ANN S, ST. is a small town on the river St. John s, province of New Brunswick, about 80 miles from St. John s. It is at present the seat of government. 
|ANNA, of the North, a river of the pro vince and colony of Virginia, which runs e. and enters the Rapahanock. 
|ANNA, called, of the South, to distinguish it from that of the same province and colony. It also runs c. and enters the Pamunkey. 
|ANN 
|AXNA, a county of the province and colony of Maryland, one of the 10 of which it is composed. 
|ANNA, an island of New France, in lake Supe rior, between the island of Pont Chatrain and the s. coast. 
|ANNA, a cape or point of land of the coast of New England, in the province and colony of Mas sachusetts. It runs many leagues into the sea, be tween the river Penny cook and Port Boston. [It forms the n. side of Massachusetts bay, as cape Cod does the s. side. Lat. 42 40 n. Long. 70 38 w. See GLOUCESTER. This cape was so named in honour of Anne, consort of king James the First. 
|ANNA, ST. another cape of the s. coast of the river St. Lawrence, in the province of Acadia or Nova Scotia. 
|ANNA, ST. a settlement and establishment of the French, called La Criquede St. Anne, in the part \vhich they possess in Guayana. 
|ANNACIOIS, or ANNACOUS, a barbarous na tion of Indians, in the kingdom of Brazil, and pro vince and captainship of Puerto Scguro. They inhabit the woods and mountains to the w. near the rivers Grande and Yuearu. They are constantly in a state of warfare, night and day, and are irre concilable enemies of the Portuguese, -whose colo nies and cultivated lands they continually infest, and which they destroyed in 1687. 
|ANNAPOLIS, REAL, a city and bay of the province and colony of Nova Scotia. It was the capital until this was translated to Halifax, since it was but small and badly fortified. It was found ed, with the name of Severn, by the relics of an army established here in the time of Queen Anne of England, on the shore of an excellent bay towards the n. The French established themselves here in the year J605, under the command of Mr. Pointis, who came from the island of Santa Cruz with a certain number of colonists. He gave it the name of Port Royal ; but the English, headed by co lonel Nicholson, drove them from the port. This port, besides being covered with the thickest clouds, is of difficult ingress and egress. Ships can make it only at one certain period of the year, and then but with great precaution ; the currents here being so rapid, as generally to drive them stern foremost ; but indeed, if it were not for this, it would be one of the best ports in the world. It is two leagues in length, and has a small island, called the island of Goals, almost opposite the middle of the quay. It is of a good depth , and well sheltered from every wind . \V hen it belonged to the French , the sh ips employed in the whale fisheries used to put in here ; but this commerce is at present wanting, since the English 
A. N N 
71 
rather prefer Port Breton. The city, although small, has some beautiful edifices, but of moderate height. The English destroyed the old forlification, and constructed another of a regular form, with four bastions, a deep ditch, a covered way, a counterscarp, a half-moon, and other exterior works detached from the body of &e fortified place, all of which excite in the Indians reveren tial awe. It has also different batteries conveniently placed to repel the attacks of an enemy, who can only hope to carry it by bombardment. This fortified place appears to be the battery of New England, and is the last to impede the invasion of the French or Indians on the e. as well by sea as land. Not far from the port is a point of land, lying between two rivers, where the tide falls 10 or 12 feet, and all around are beautiful meadows, which are thronged with all kinds of birds. Its principal commerce consists in skins, which they exchange with the Indians for European manufac tures. It is the residence of a governor, and is garrisoned by 500 men. At the beginning of this century it was, amongst the French, the very Dun kirk of America, serving as an asylum for pirates and cruisers, to the ruin of commerce and the fisheries. [The harbour is two leagues in length and one in breadth, and the small island, before referred to, is almost in the middle of the basin, which is said to be large enough to contain several hundred ships. Its depth of water is no where less than four or five fathoms ; it being six or seven on one side of the island, and on the other 16 or 18. The town is not large, but has some very handsome buildings. It is fortified ; nor can it be easily attacked but by a bombard ment. The fort is capable of containing about 100 men in its present state. Long. 65 22 . Lat, 44 49 n. 
|ANNAPOLIS, REAL, a capital city of the coun ty of Ann Arundel, in the province and colony of Maryland, at the mouth of the Severn, and was, by an act of the Assembly in 1694, declared a maritime city, it being ordained that it should be the resi dence of a collector and commandant of the ma rine ; from which time it began to take the name of Annapolis. Hither also was transferred the tribu nal of the county, together with all the state papers, acts, and other important documents : the parish church w;ts erected in 1699, and a puhlic school was founded agreeably to an act of the .Assembly, having the archbishop tor its chancel lor. Procurators, visitors, and governors were also appointed to preside in this citji, though this establishment failed to answer the wise purposes of its creation. The alba-aaid tribunal meets, in 
9, 
72 A N O 
ordinary, on the second Tuesday in September, November, January, March, and May. This city consists of more than 40 houses, but has not arrived at that pitch of grandeur that was expected, on account of its planters and mer chants having been always at variance, as are those of Virginia; and from this it is judged, that it can never hope to rise at a greater elevation of dignity or fortune. [It stands at the mouth of the Severn, 30 miles s. of Baltimore, 32 e . by n. from the Federal city, 72 s. zo. from Wilmington in Delaware state, and 132 s. w. from Philadel phia. In 1694 it was made a port town. It is situated on a peninsula formed by the river and two small creeks, and affords a beautiful prospect of Chesapeak bay, and the e. shore beyond it. This city is of little note in the commercial world, but is the wealthiest town of its size in the United States. The houses, about 300 in number, are spacious and elegant, indicative of great wealth. The state house is the noblest building of the kind in the Union. It stands in the centre of the city, from which point the streets diverge in every direction like radii. Lat. 39 2 n. Long. 76 40 a;. 
|ANNAPOLIS River, in Nova Scotia, is of small size. It rises in the e. near the head waters of the small rivers which fall into the basin of Minas. Annapolis river passes into the bay of Fundy through the basin of its own name ; on the s. side of which, at the mouth of the river, stands the town and fort of Annapolis Royal. It is navi gable for ships of any burden 10 miles ; for those of 100 tons, 15 miles ; and is passable for boats within 20 miles of Horton. The tide flows up 30 miles. 
|ANNAPOLIS, a county on the above river, ad joining to King s county, having five townships, viz. Wilmot, GranvihY, Annapolis ; the chief towns, Clare and Monckton. It is chiefly inha bited by Acadians, Irish, and New Englanders. 
|ANNATOM, one of the New Hebrides cluster of islands. 
|ANNOTO, a river of the island and govern ment of Jamaica. It runs n. and enters the sea on the coast lying in this point, and between the rivers Blowing and Paltnito. 
|ANO, NUEVA, a port of the N. sea, of the coast of California, or Red sea of Cortes; disco vered in 1613, on the first of Januan
, on which account this name was given it. 
|ANOANAPA, a small river of the province and government of Guayana, or Nueva Andalucia. It rises in the country of the Amacotas Indians, runs from *. to . and enters that of Aicaropa. 
|ANOLAIMA, a settlement of the jurisdiction 
of Tocaima and government of Mariquita, in the new kingdom of Granada. It is of a hot tempe rature, abounding in fruits peculiar to the climate, such as rnaize, plaintains, yucas, and quantities of sugar-cane, of which sugar and preserves are made in an infinite variety of mills ; and in this consists the commerce of the natives. These may amount to somewhat more than 100, exclusive of some Indians. Eight leagues from Santa Fe. 
|ANOPL, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Pastes in the kingdom of Quito. 
|ANOURAMA, a river of the province and captainship of Para in Brazil. It runs e. and joins the Maranon between the rivers Urupi and Maracapucii. 
|ANOURIAHI, a settlement of the province and captainship of Para in Brazil, situate on the shore of the river Xingu. 
|ANOZONOI, a settlement of the province and government of Popayan in the kingdom of Quito. 
|ANSERMA, SANTA ANA DE, a city of the province and government of Popayan, in the dis trict and jurisdiction of the audience of Quito, founded in 1532 by the field-officer Jorge Robledo, upon a hill seven leagues distant from the river Cauca. It is of a very hot temperature ; the earth abounds in gold mines and in salt, from which it took the name of the Vozanser, which, in the idiom of the Indians of this country, signifies salt. Its productions are rare, and it is very subject to tempests, when balls of fire and lightning often cause serious mischief. It was at first called Santa Ana de los Caballeros, on account of the number of the knights who assembled at its foundation. la its vicinity dwelt the Tapuyas, Guaticas, Quinchias, Supias, and other Indians, who are now no longer heard of here. Fifty leagues n. e. of Po payan. 
|ANSERMA, a settlement of the same name, with the addition of Vieja, of the same province and government, situate between two rivers. 
|ANSON, an interior county of N. Carolina, in Fayette district, having Mecklinburgh county n. and Bladen and Cumberland counties on the e. It contains 5J33 inhabitants, including 828 slaves. 
|ANTA, a settlement of the province and corregimicnto of Abancai in Peru. 
|ANTA, a province of &lt;he kingdom of Quito, but little known, to the s, of the city of Jaen, covered with impenetrable forests, lakes, rivers, and pools. It is unknown whether it be inhabited by infidel Indians. 
|ANTA, a river of the province and captainship of Rey in Brazil. It runs s.s.w. and enters the river Curucny 
|ANT 
A NT ABA MBA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Aymaraes in Peru. 
|ANTALIS, a barbarous and warlike nation of Indians of the kingdom of Chile, to the w. of Coquimbo, bounded by the province of Putunuaucasi. They valorously opposed the progress of Inca Yupanqui, compelling him to end his conquests on the other side of the river Maule, the last boundary of Peru. 
|ANTAPALPA, a settlement of the province and .corregimiento of Chilques and Masques in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Omacho. 
|ANTARPANGO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Angaraes in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Yulcarmaca. 
|ANTEGO. See ANTIGUA. 
|ANTEQUERA, [now called Oaxaca, a ca pital city of the province and alcaldia mayor of Oaxaca in Nueva Espana, founded in a beauti ful and spacious valley of this name, in 1528, by Juan Nunez del Mercado. It is a large and fine settlement, of an extensive vicinity and great com merce, as well from the fertility of its soil, and from the abundance of its fruits, as from its being in the direct road to the provinces of Guatemala. It has, besides the curacy of the Sagrario of its cathedral, the assisting parish chapels of La Sangre de Christo, Nuestra Senora de las Nieves, Nuestra Scfiora de la Consolacion, San Joseph, the hospital of San Cosme and San Damian, and an hermitage of La Santisima Trinidad ; eight con vents of monks, which are, two of Santo Domingo, one called Elgrande, a sumptuous fabric, and the other San Pablo ; one of Dezcalzos of San Fran cisco, that of San August in of Nuestra Senora de la Merced, of Carmetitas Dezcalzos ; a college which belonged to the abolished society of the re gular order of the Jesuits, with a house for stu dents ; two hospitals, one of San Juan de Dios, and another of Bethlemites ; two colleges, deno minated Santa Cruz and San Bartolome, for the education of children; thirteen monasteries of nuns, amongst which, are that of Santa Monica de Augustinas, the church, which is of magnificent structure, and the gate of most exquisite archi tecture, dedicated to Nuestra Senora de la Soledad (to whose image, it being very beautiful and mi raculous, that city pays singular devotion) ; another of La Concepcion, another of Santa Catalina de Sena, another of Capuchinas ; and a col lege for the education of children. The city is one of those most conspicuous for the beautiful symmetry of its streets, for its public places and edifices, which would have been still finer, had they not suffered by earthquakes. The tempera
|VOL. I. 
|ANT 73 
ture, although somewhat hot, is nevertheless healthy. Its eastern part is situated upon the long-continued top of a hill. It abounds in ex quisite fruits, such as pears of various kinds, apples, sapataSf pomegranates, melons, pines, dates, limes, cedars, lemons, pitahayas, nuts, and some grapes. Its wheat is scanty, and of bad quality. The principal productions in which it pays its duties to the King, are cacao of Soconusco, ready-made chocolate, and powders of Oaxaca, justly esteemed and celebrated for giving a delicate flavour to chocolate. It also fabricates black sealing-wax and some rosaries, the beads of which are made of the kernel of a fruit called tepexiloty on which they write with wonderful skill some versicles of the magnificat, and paint upon them images with a nicety that makes them much esteemed. In the cathedral, which is beau tiful and amply large, (having three naves), as well as in the chapels, is reverenced an arm of San Juan Chrisostomo, with other precious relics ; and in one of its chapels, a cross about a yard in length, made from a part of that wonderful cross of Guatulco, brought thither by the bishop Don Juan de Cerbantes. The inhabitants of this illus trious city, which has San Marcial for its patron, are composed of 6000 families ; and in the year 1766, through the benign influence of the pa tron, the number of souls amounted to 20,000. It is 85 leagues to the e. s. e. of Mexico. Long. 277 10 . Lat. 18 2 . 
|ANTERIM, a township in Hillsborough coun ty, New Hampshire, having 528 inhabitants, incorporated in 1777, 75 miles w. of Portsmouth, and about the same distance n. w. of Boston. 
|ANTHONY S Falls, ST. in the river Mississippi, lie about 10 miles n. w. of the mouth of St. Pierre river, which joins the Mississippi from the w. and are situated in about lat. 44 50 n. and were so named by father Louis Hcnnipin, who travelled into those parts about the year 1680, and was the first European ever seen by the na tives there. The whole river, 50 yards wide, falls perpendicularly above 30 feet, and forms a most pleasing cataract. The rapids below, in the space of 300 yards, render the descent consider ably greater ; so that when viewed at a distance, they appear to be much higher than they really are. In the middle of the falls is a small island, about 40 feet broad, and somewhat longer, on which grow a few hemlock and spruce trees ; and about half-way between this island and the eastern shore, is a rock, lying at the very edije of the fall, in an oblique position, five or six feet broad, and 30 or 40 long. These falls are peculiarly situated, 
74 ANT 
as they are approachable without the least obstruc tion from any intervening hill or precipice ; which cannot be said, perhaps, of any other considerable fall in the world. The scene around is exceed ingly beautiful. It is not an uninterupted plain, where the eye finds no relief, but composed of many gentle ascents, which, in the spring and summer, are covered with verdure, and interspers ed with little groves, that give a pleasing variety to the prospect. 
At a little distance below the falls is a small island, about one acre and an half, on which grow a great number of oak trees, all the branches of which, able to bear the weight, are in the pro per season of the year loaded with eagle s nests. Their instinctive wisdom has taught them to choose this place, as it is secure, on account of the rapids above, from the attacks either of man or beast. 
|ANTHONY S Kill, a western water of Hudson river. Its mouth is seven miles above that of Mohawk river, with which likewise it communi cates at the e. end of Long lake, 
|ANTHONY S Nose, a point of land in the high lands on Hudson river, in the state of New York, from which to Fort Montgomery on the opposite side, a large boom and chain was ex tended in the late war, which cost not less than 70,000/. sterling. It was partly destroyed, and partly carried away, by General Sir Henry Clin ton, in October 1777. Also the name given to the point of a mountain on the n. bank of Mohawk river, about 30 miles above Schenectady. Around this point runs the stage road. 
|ANTICOSTI, a barren, uninhabited island, in the mouth of St. Lawrence river. It is, how ever, of very considerable size, being 120 miles long, and 30 broad. The French formerly had a settlement on this island, but at present it is unin habited ; nor can it ever become of much im portance, as it does not possess a single harbour where a vessel can ride in safety. The wood which grows upon it is small, and the soil is rec koned unfruitful ; which, added to the severity of the winter, will ever prove serious obstacles to its colonization. 
|ANTIETAM Creek, in Maryland, rises by several branches in Pennsylvania, and empties into Potowmack river, three miles s. s. e. from Sharpsburgh. Elizabeth and Funk s Towns stand on this creek. It has a number of mills and forges. 
|ANTIGOA, PUNTA DE LA, an extremity and cape of the island of Guadalupe, which runs into the sea, facing the n. 
|ANTIGONA, a settlement of the province and 
|ANT 
government of Tarma in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Ondores. 
|ANTIGOSTI, a large island of the gulph of St. Lawrence, at the entrance of the river of this 
name, in Canada. 
|ANTIGUA, an island of the N. sea, one of the Small Antillas, called by the English, who possess it, Antego. -It is six or seven leagues long, and nearly the same broad. It is of difficult access for vessels, on account of the currents and shallows with which it abounds. It was first thought un inhabitable from a supposed want of water ; but the English, who established themselves in it, discovered some fountains, and the inhabitants, who may amount to about 900 persons, have made many wells and cisterns for preserving the rain water. It abounds in every kind offish, and one of a peculiar sort, which they call perro dt mar y . or sea-dog, from its devouring the other fish j and even the fishermen, on which account the bathing here is very dangerous. It has some very good ports and bays, such as the bays of St. John and Willoughby, and the ports English and Falmouth. It has also a species of sea woodcock, which has a beak similar to that bird, the upper part of which is much larger than the lower; it moves either jaw with equal ease ; and some have been seen four feet long, and 12 inches wide to wards the head ; they have two fins on each side, and a large one upon the belly, rising like the crest of a cock, and extending from the head to the tail : but what is most extraordinary, is the hard beak with two sharp and black horns, nearly an inch and an half each, which the creature has the power of withdrawing with pleasure into its belly, this serving as a scabbard ; it has no scales, but a black and rough skin upon its back. This island abounds also with a variety of birds ; and that which is the most common, is peculiarly beautiful to behold, having the upper part of the wings and belly of a golden colour, the other half and the back of sky-blue, the tail and long fea thers of the wings of a mixture of a very bright red and blue, and studded with other feathers of gold ; but the most singular feature is its head, which is covered with a sort of dark bonnet, fring ed with green, yellow, and clear blue; it has also a variegated beak ; there is a ring of white round the eyes, and the pupil is of a beautiful yel low and red, having the appearance of a ruby set in gold ; and upon the head is a plume of feathers, of the colour of vermillion, and others of the co lour of pearls. This bird is about the size of a pheasant. The climate is hot, unsalutary, and is very subject to hurricanes, similar to that 
AN T I G U A. 
dreadful one which happened in 1707. It is not deficient in cattle, and its wild wax is similar to that of Mainas. This island was first discovered, about the year 1623, by Sir Thomas Warner, and the English established themselves in it in 1636. The king of England granted it, in 1663, to William Willoughby, who sent to it, in 1666, a numerous colony to people it. It was the same year attacked and ravaged by the French, from whom it was retaken, in 1690, by Christopher Codrington. In 1736, three Indians, by name Court, Tombay, and Hecules, entered into a conspiracy to put some gunpowder in a situation that it might explode and blow up a saloon in which the governor was giving a ball and enter tainment ; but it was timely discovered, and the conspirators met with the punishment they de served. 
Antigua lies between lat. 17 and 17 12 n. and between long. 61 38 and 61 53 w. ; is situate about 20 leagues to the e. of St. Christopher s ; and was discovered at the same time with that island by Columbus himself, who named it from a church in Seville, Santa Maria de la Antigua. We are informed by Ferdinand Columbus, Utitt that the Indian name was Jamaica. It is a singu lar circumstance, that this word, which in the language of the larger islands signified a country abounding in springs, should, in the dialect of the Charibbes, have been applied to an island that has not a single spring or rivulet of fresh water in it, notwithstanding what Alcedo asserts. 
This inconvenience, without doubt, as it ren dered the country uninhabitable to the Charibbes, deterred for some time the European adventurers in the neighbouring islands from attempting a permanent establishment in Antigua ; but nature presents few obstacles which the avarice or indus try of civilized man will not endeavour to sur mount. The lands were found to be fertile, and it was discovered that the water preserved in the cisterns was wonderfully light, pure, and whole some. So early as 1632, a few English families took up lands there, and began the cultivation of tobacco. 
But the settlement was nearly strangled in its infancy. The attack by the French, in 1666, has been already mentioned. It was then that the island was invaded and ravaged with fire and sword. All the Negroes that could be found were taken away ; and the inhabitants, after be holding their houses and estates in flames, were plundered even to the clothes on their backs and the shoes on their feet, without regard to sex or age. 
Its recovery from this calamity was owing chiefly to the enterprising spirit and extensive views of Colonel Codrtngton ofBarbadoes. This gentleman removing to Antigua about the year 1674, applied his knowledge in sugar-planting with such good effect and success, that others, animated by his example, and assisted by his ad vice and encouragement, adventured in the same line of cultivation. Mr. Codrington was some years afterwards nominated captain-general and commander-in-chief of all the Leeward Charibbean islands ; and deriving from the appointment the power of giving greater energy to his benevolent purposes, had soon the happiness of beholding the good effects of his humanity and wisdom, in. the flourishing condition of the several islands un der his government. 
The prosperity of Antigua was manifested in its extensive population ; for when, in the year 1690, General Codrington commanded on the ex pedition against the French inhabitants of St. Christopher s, Antigua furnished towards it no less than 800 effective men : a quota which gives room to estimate the whole number of its white inhabitants, at that time, at upwards of 5000. 
About 34,000 acres of land in this island are appropriated to the growth of sugar, and pastur age annexed ; its other principal staples are cot ton-wool, ginger, and tobacco ; and they raise in favourable years great quantities of provisions. 
This island contains two different kinds of soil : the one a black mould on a substratum of clay, which is naturally rich, and when not checked by excessive droughts, to which Antigua is particu larly subject, very productive ; the other is a. stiff clay on a substratum of marl ; it is much less fertile than the former, and abounds with an irradicablc kind of grass, in such a manner, that many estates, consisting of that kind of soil, which were once very profitable, are now so impoverish ed and overgro\vn with this sort of grass, as either to be converted into pasture land, or to become entirely abandoned. Exclusive of such deserted land, and a small part of the country that is alto gether unimprovable, every part of the island may be said to be under cultivation. 
The island is divided into six parishes and 1 1 districts. The parishes are, St. John s, St. Mary .--, St. George, St. Peter, St. Paul, and St. Philip. It has six towns and villages : St. John s, (the capital), Parham, Falmouth, Willoughby Bay, Old Bay, Old Road, and James Fort ; the two first of which are legal ports of entry. JNo island in this part of the West Indies can boast of sol L 2 
|ANTIGUA. 
many excellent harbours ; of these the principal are English harbour and St. John s, both well fortified ; and at the former are a royal navy yard and arsenal, with conveniences for careening ships of war. The military establishment generally consists of two regiments of infantry, and two of foot militia. There are likewise a squadron of dragoons, and a battalion of artillery, both raised in the island ; and the regulars receive additional pay, as in Jamaica. The governor or captaingeneral of the Leeward Charibbean islands gene rally resides in Antigua, but visits occasionally each island within his government ; and in hear ing and determining causes from the other islands, presides alone. He is chancellor of each island by his office ; but in causes arising in Antigua, he is assisted by his council, after the practice of Barbadoes ; and the president, together with a cer tain number of the council, may determine chancery causes during the absence of the go 
vernor-general. The other courts of this island are, a court of king s bench, a court of common pleas, and a court of exchequer. The church of the United Brethren has been very successful in converting to Christianity many of the Negro slaves of this and the other islands. 
It is difficult to furnish an average return of the crops of this island, which vary to so great a de gree, that the quantity of sugar exported in dif ferent years has been from 2500 to 18,000 hogs heads. Thus, in 1779, were shipped 3382 hogs heads and 579 tierces; in 1782, the crop was 15,102 hogsheads and 160.3 tierces; and in the years 1770, 1773, and 1778, there were no crops of any kind ; all the canes being destroyed by a long continuance of dry weather, and when the whole body of Negroes would have been in danger of perish ing for want of food, if American vessels with corn and flour had been at that time denied admittance. 
Account of the number of vessels, &c. that have cleared outwards from Antigua, between 5th January 1787, and the 5th January 1788, which was esteemed a favourable year, together with an account of their cargoes, and the value thereof. 
Whither Bound. 
Shipping. 
Sugar. 
Rum. 
Molai
SM. 
-j. 
-c 
_= 
CottB. 
Dyeing Trood, in value. 
Miscellaneous articles, in value. 
Total. 
No. 
Tonnage 
Men. 
Cwt. c,r . Ibi. 
Gallons. 
Gall*. 
Ibi 
IbR. 
L. i. d. 
L. . d. 
L. s. d. 
Great Britain 
65 
13,806 
90 
254,575 1 18 
128,936 
3,510 
6 
131,01* 
1,742 6 6 
46,466 18 3 
484,483 19 6 
Ireland - 
16 
1,909 
159 
22,295 
97,400 
29,500 
2,400 
43 
50,768 16 8 
American States 
71 
8,281 
552 
&lt;J,779 
375,150 
1,700 
. 
407 5 
44,679 19 2 
Brit. Col. in Amer. 
34 
2,127 
177 
844 
109,320 
700 
14 7 
11,031 15 4 
Foreign W. Indies 
4? 
2,540 
269 
33 
5,740 
1,075 
1,632 5 
Total from Antigua 
233 
28,663 
2,018 
284 ; 526 1 18 
716,546 
5,910 
M 
160,510 
4,142 6 6 
48,006 10 3 
592,596 15 8 
In the report of the privy council on the slave trade, in 1788, the British property vested here is estimated at 69,277 taxed acres of patented estates, and the Negroes are computed at 60,000, valued at 50/. each Negro. In the same report, a general appraisement of British property, vested in the British colonies makes the land, buildings, and stock, double the value of the Negroes, and the towns, stores, arid shipping about 
 f of the land. 
Has. 
In 1783, Antigua produced, of sugar, 3,900 1787, produced and exported, 19,500 1792, four years average, only 3,900 It is thought that 17,000 hogsheads of sugar, of \Qcwt. may be reckoned a good crop ; but the es timate of the sugar produced in Antigua cannot exceed an average of 9000 hogsheads, of 13 cwt. at the king s beam. 
2 
By return to the house of commons, 1806, the hogsheads of sugar, at 13 cwt. exported, were In 1789, - - - 12,500 1799, - - - 8,300 1805, - - - 3,200 
The official value of the imports and exports of Antigua were, in 
Imports. Exports. 
1809, - .198,121 j216,000 
1810, - .285,458 .182,392 
And the quantities of the principal articles ex ported into Great Britain were, in 
Coffee. 
Sugar. 
Rum. 
Cotton wool. 
Brit. Plant. 
For. Plant. 
Brit. Plant. 
For. Plant. 
1809 1810 
Cwt 
309 40 
Cwt. 
3,983 
2,164 
Cwt. 106,1.50 188,799 
Cwt. 
629 3,821 
Galls. 143,223 
77,092 
Ibs. 112,016 
39,880 
|ANT 
The island abounds in black cattle, hogs, fowls, and most of the animals common in the other islands. By returns to government in 1774, the white inhabitants amounted to 2590, and the slaves to 37,808 ; but the latter were estimated in 1787 at (50,000, as above mentioned. 
The import of slaves into Antigua, by report of privy council 1788, at a medium of four years, and by a return to house of commons in 1805, on a medium of two years, from 1803, were, in 
|ANT 
77 
Average of four 
Imports. 
Re-exports. 
Retained. 
years to 1787 
768 
100 
668 
Two years to 1805 
434 
100 
334 
|ANTIGUASI, a settlement of the province and government of Tucuman in Peru, and of the district and jurisdiction of the city of Cordova. 
|ANTILLA, a settlement of the province and coregimiento of Abancaiin Peru. 
|ANTILLA, another, of the province and corregimiento of Angaraes in the same kingdom, an nexed to the curacy of Sabayno. 
|ANTILLAS, or ANTILLES, islands of the N. sea, discovered by Christopher Columbus in his first voyage, in 1492, situate between 18 and 24 n. lat. extending themselves in the form of a bow from the coast of Florida to the n. to the coast of Brazil to the s. They are divided into the Wind ward and Leeward islands, and into Greater and Less. Of the Greater are Cuba, Hispaniola or St. Domingo, Jamaica, and Puertorico ; of the Smaller the principal are 28. 
Belonging to the English. Virgines, Nevis, 
Anguila, Antigua, 
St. Christopher s, Monserrat. 
Barbadoes, 
Belonging to the French. S. Bartholomew, Deseada, 
[Ceded to Sweden Los Santos, in 1785. Martinica, 
Guadalupe, Granada. 
Mariegalante, 
Belonging to the French and Dutch. San Martin. 
Belonging to the Dutch. San Eustaquio, Bonaire, 
Aves, Curazao. 
Belonging to the Spanish. Margarita, Trinidad. 
Belonging to the Danes. St. Thomas, Santa Cruz. 
Charibbes. 
Dominica, Becoya. 
San Vincente, 
Desert. 
Tabago, Santa Lucia. 
Almost all enjoy a benign temperature, and the cold of winter is unknown to them. The fields preserve an everlasting verdure, and the soil is fertile in every kind of production, particularly in sugar, brandy, cotton, ginger, indigo, coffee, and tobacco ; these being the principal branches of commerce. Besides the above-mentioned islands, are those of Anegada, Sombrero, Saba, Granadilla, and others much smaller, which are, more properly speaking, little isles or rocks. At the time of their disco very they were peopled by In dian Charibbes, who are cannibals of a very fierce nature; a few of whom still keep possession of some of the smaller isles. The Europeans esta blished themselves in them in 1625, after that the Spaniards had kept in their possession some of the principal of them from the time they were first discovered. They have since been colonized by the English, French, Dutch, and Danish, and numbers of Negroes have been brought from the coast of Africa to labour in them ; these latter forming the greater part of their population. Although the vine has been brought hither, the wine produced from it is not found to keep. These islands are extremely subject to violent hurricanes, and it is seldom that five years elapse without some deplorable calamity taking place. 
The whole of the lesser islands, with the ex ception of St. Bartholomew, which still belongs to Sweden, and Margarita to Spain, have fallen into the hands of the English. See WEST INDIES, also each island under its respective head. 
|ANTINGO, a settlement of the province and government of Tucuman in Peru, of the jurisdic tion of the city of Rioja, situate to the . of the same. 
|ANTIOQUIA, the province and government of the new kingdom of Granada, one of those which are called Equinocciales, from their being close upon the line, bounded n. by the province of Car tagena, s. by Popayan, e. by the jurisdiction of Santa Fe, and w. by the government of Choco. It was called, in the time of the Indians, Hebexico, and was discovered and conquered in 1541 by the brigadier George Robledo. It is of a benign and mild temperature, abounding in pro ductions and in gold mines, from which it derives its source of commerce. It has also some mines of hyacinths, granite, and rock-crystal ; but they are little wrought, from the scarcity of workmen. 
78 
|ANT 
The country is mountainous, and watered by various rivers, although it is not without some large tracts of level ground. The capital is Santa Fe. 
|ANTIOSA, VALLE DE, in the province and corregimiento of Chilchas and Tarija in Peru. 
|ANTIQUERA, a seaport town in the pro vince of Oaxaca in Mexico. See ANTEQUERA. 
|ANTIQUERA, a town in New Spain, province of Oaxaca, 75 miles s. of the city of Oaxaca. See ANTEQUERA. 
|ANTISANA, PARAMO DE, a very lofty mountain covered with snow, in the kingdom of Quito, towards the e. From it the rivers Quixos and Caranga take their source ; some believe that it is a volcano. It is elevated 3016 feet above the level of the sea. It belongs, with its district, to the house of the Marquises of Orellana, who have also given to it a title, calling it Vizcondes de Antisana. 
The above is a porphyritic mountain of the Andes, in the vicinity of Quito, which was as certained by Humboldt, in 1802, to have rising from it a crater, in the midst of perpetual snow, to an elevation of 19,150 feet above the level of the sea. 
|ANTISANA, a hamlet in the Andes of the kingdom of Quito, elevated, according to Hum boldt, 3800 feet above the celebrated plain of Quito, and 13,500 above the sea, and said to be unquestionably the highest inhabited spot on the surface of our globe. 
|ANTOFAGASTA, a settlement of the pro vince and correguruento of Atacama in Peru, be longing to the archbishopric of Charcas, annexed to the curacy of its capital. 
|ANTOINE, S. Cape of, on the e. coast of the island of Newfoundland, between the bay of Pistolet and that of Luvres. 
|ANTOGO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Coquimbo in the kingdom of Chile, situate on the shore of the river Mamas. 
|ANTOGO, a volcano of the mountains of the Cordillera of the same kingdom. 
|ANTON, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Penonome, in the province and kingdom of Tierra Firme, situate near the coast of the S. sea, be tween the two rivers Chiru and Colorado, of a warm temperature. It abounds in cattle of the swine kind, in maize and other seeds, in which its commerce consists, and with which it supplies the city of Panama, and the vessels which sail from its port for the provinces of Peru. Eighteen leagues to the s. w. of its capital. 
|ANTON, another, in the province and cajptain
|ANT 
ship of Paraiba in Brazil, situate on the coast and shore of the river Camaratuba. 
|ANTON, another, of the province and captain ship of Pernambnco, in the same kingdom, on the shore of the river Tapicura. 
|ANTONA, LACUNA DE, a port of the coast of the island of St. Domingo. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, a settlement of the head settlement of Tollman, and alcaldla mayor of Queretaro, in Nueva Espana, with 32 families of Indian?. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, of the head settlement of Tampolomon and alcaldia of Valles, in the same kingdom ; annexed to the curacy of its liead settlement. It is of a hot and moist temperature, pro duces different sorts of grain and seeds, as do the other settlements of its jurisdiction, and much sugar-cane, of which the natives make sugar for their commerce. It contains 128 families of Guastecos Indians, and is 17 leagues to the s. of its capital, and four to the e. of its head settlement. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Toluca. It contains 51 families of Indians, and is at a little distance to the a? of its capital. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, the head settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Metepec. It comprehends 261 families of Indians. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, of the head settlement of Ahuacatlan, and alcaldia mayor ofZacatlan; three leagues from its head settlement. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, of the head settlement of Coronan&lt;o, and alcaldia mat/or of Cholula. It contains 44 families of Indians, and lies a league and a half n. of its capital. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, a small settlement or ward of the alcaldia mayor of Guauchinango, annexed to the curacy of Pantepec. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, of the head settlement of Huehuetlan, and alcaldia mayor of Cuscatlan, situate in an umbrageous valley. It contains 140 families of Indians, who employ themselves in, preparing, and in the commerce of, saltpetre, and in spinning cotton. It lies to the s. of its head settlement. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, of the head settlement of Chapala, and alca Idia mayor of Zay ula , on the shore of the great lake or sea of Chapala. It contains 27 families of Indians, who employ themselves in fishing, and in the culture of various seeds and fruits, which the fertility and luxuriance of the soil produces; and with these they traffic with the neighbouring settlements, by means of canoes. One league w. of its head settlement. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, of the government ef 
|ANT 
Neiba in the new kingdom of Granada, annexed to the curacy of the town of La Purificacion, situate on the spot which they call del Paramo. It contains 500 housekeepers; and at a very little distance is a convent of Agustine Rocolects. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, of the province and corregimiento of Angaraes in Peru. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, in the kingdom of Quito, of the corregimiento of the district of Las Cinco Leguas de la capital. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, of the province and government of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, in the province of Tepeguaria, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya, situated 130 leagues to the n. w. of the real of Guanacebi, in the vicinity of which is a large uninhabited spot, called Tinaja. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, of the province and government of Cumana in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, situate in the middle of the serrania. It is a reduction of Indians, and one of those held under the care of the Arragonese Capuchin fathers. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, which is the parish of the ancient Barinas, situate in the serrania and table plain of Moromoy, where that cily was. In its district are some small estates of cacao and sugar-cane, and some very rich modern establish ments of indigo. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, with the addition of Las Cocuisas, in the province of Barinas, situate near to the river Apure. Its district abounds in the larger cattle. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, with the addition of X-os Altos, situate in the vicinity of the city of Caracas. Its mountains abound in excellent woods and in maize. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, a town of the province and government of Guayana in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, situate on the shore of the river Paragua. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, of the province and government of Maracaibo in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, and district of the city of San Christobal ; situate in the road which leads down to the Nuevo Reyno. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, of the same province and government as the former, situate in the district of the city of Pcdraza. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, of the same province and government, on the shore of the river Paragua, near its source, between the cities of Pedraza and Barinas Vieja. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another settlement and asiento of the mines of the province and government of Chucuito in Peru, near the volcano of Ornate. 
|ANT 
79 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, of the province and captainship of the bay of Todos Santos in Brazil, situate on the shore of the river Paraguaca, near the bay. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, of the province and captainship of Sergipe in the same kingdom, situ ate on the coast, and at the mouth of the large river of San Francisco, at the same point. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, of the same province and captainship, situate at the source of the river Sirugipa. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another settlement and real of the silver mines in the province and bishopric of Guadalaxara in Nueva Espaiia. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, of the province and corregimiento of Colchagua in the kingdom of Chile, on the coast, and at the mouth of the river Rapel. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, of the province and corregimiento of Aconcagua in the same king dom. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, of the province and government of Tucuman, in the jurisdiction of Cordova, to the w. of this city. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, of the same province and government as the former, situate between the settlements of Solo and Tororal. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, of the province and corregimiento of Coquimbo in the kingdom of Chile, on the shore of the river Mamas. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, in the province and captainship of Pernambuco in Brazil, distinct from the other of the same name, which is found in it. It lies upon the coast, and at the mouth of the river of Sun Angelo. 
|ANTONIO, SA\ T , another, of the same captainship and kingdom, on the shore of the river Tapicura. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, of the captainship of Para in the same kingdom, on the shore of the river of the Amazonas, and??, of the capital. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, of the province and corregimiento of Ibarra in the kingdom of Quito, situate to the s. s. e. of the capital. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, of the province and government of Popayan in the new kingdom of Granada. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, of the missions held there by the regulars of the company of Jesuits, in the province of Gaira, of the government of Para guay. It is destroyed, and the ruins of it alone are visible upon the shore of the river Guabay, from the time that it was razed by the Portuguese of San Pablo, in 1680. 
80 
|ANT 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, of the province and government of Buenos Ayres, situate upon the shore of the river Ibiguay. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, in the country and province of Las Amazonas, and territory of Matagroso, between the river Itenes and that of Senere", to the w. of the town of S. Francisco Xavier. 
|AJTTONIO, SAN, another, with the surname of Abad, in the province and government of Carta gena, of the district of Sinu, situate on the bank of the stream Ingles ; one of those lately formed in 1776 by the governor Don Juan Pimienta. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, in the province and captainship of Los lllieos in Brazil ; situate near the sea coast, and at the source of river Santa Cruz. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, in the province and taptainship of Paraiba in Brazil, on the shore of the river Camaratuba. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, of the province and captainship of Pernambuco in Brazil, on the coast of the river Ciranhaya. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, of the missions, who maintained the religion of S. Francisco, in Nuevo Mexico. 
|ANTONIO SAN, another, of the head settlement of Teutalpan, and alcaldia mayor of Zacatlan, in Nueva Espana ; one league distant from its head settlement. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, called El Cerro del Antonio, in the province and government of Car tagena, situate on the sea shore, on the n. coast, and also to the . of thereat De la Cruz. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, a capital town of the province and alcaldia mayor of Zuchitepec in the kingdom of Guatemala. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, a village in the province and captainship of Todos Santos in Brazil. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, a town of the province and taptainship of the bay of Todos Santos in Brazil. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, a town in New Mexico, on the o&gt;. side of Rio Bravo river, below St. Gregoria. Also the name of a town on the river Hondo, which falls into the gulf of Mexico, n. e. of Rio de Bravo, and on the eastern side of the river, s. by w. from Texas. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another town in the province of rfavarre in N. America, on a river which runs 5. w. in the gulf of California. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, a bay on the coast of the S. sea, of the province and government of Choco, close to that of San Francisco Solano. 
|AJTTONIO, SAN, DE LOS CUES, averypopu
lous place of the intendancy of Oaxaca, on the road from Orizaba to Oaxaca, celebrated for the remains of ancient Mexican fortifications. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, a port of the n. coast of the island of Jamaica, between Cold bay and the river Grande. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, of the coast of the kingdom of Chile, in the S. sea, and of the pro vince and corregimicnto of Melipilla. Lat. 33* 39 s. Long. 71 41 w. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, a cape or point of land of the river Mississippi, opposite the Isla Grande. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, on the coast of the province and government of Buenos Ayres, one of the two which form the entrance of the mouth of the river of La Plata. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, which is the w. extre mity of the island of Cuba, opposite that of Cotoche, of the province of Yucatan, from whence it is four leagues distant. Long. 84 56 . Lat. 21 54 . 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, on the coast of the province and captainship of Todos Santos in Brazil, close to the cape of S. Salvador ; there is a castle in it of the same name, and a settlement, in which excellent sugar is made. Long. 38 37 w. Lat. 13 s. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, a small island of the coast of Brazil, between this and that of Santa Catalina, in the captainship of Rey : the Portuguese have a fort in it of the same name. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, a small river of the same king dom ; it rises in the sierra of Los Coriges, runs c* and enters the Tocantines on the w. side. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another small river of th province and government of Buenos Ayres, which runs w. and enters the Parana, between those of Anna Maria and Bernardo de Arcos. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, of the province and captainship of Rey in Brazil, which runs e. and enters the great lake of Los Patos, in the territory of the Tages Indians. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, a large river of the province and captainship of Pernambuco in Brazil ; it enters the sea, upon the coast between that of Camaraibi, and that of Antonio Pequeno, so called to distin guish it from this river ; also called Antonio Grande. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, called Antonio Peque no, to distinguish it from the former; in the same province or captainship. It runs into the sea between that river and the lake Del Norte. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, of the province and government of Texas in Nueva Espana. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, of the province and government of Costarica, in the kingdom of Gua temala ; it runs into the N. sea, between the rivers Conception and Talamancas. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, of the province and government of Paraguay ; it runs n. and enters the Grande de Curituba. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, a point of land on the coast of the strait of Magellan, between the bay of Arenas and the bay of Santa Catalina. At this point Pedro Sarmicnto took possession of that country for the crown of Spain. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another, on the coast of the province and corregimiento of Melipilla in the kingdom of Chile, between those points which form the port of the same name. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, some shallows or rocks on the coast of Brazil, of the province and captainship of Los Ilheos, at the entrance or mouth of the river of Santa Crnz. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, a canal, running from the river of Magdalena, which enters the swamp of Santa Marta, of the province and government of this name. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, a fort of the province and government of Buenos Ayres, on the banks, and at the source of the river Sala, built as a defence against the Pampas Indians ; it lying directly in the road which leads to Tucuman. 
|ANTONIO, SAN, another fort and garrison of the province and government of Buenos Ayres. 
|ANTRIVENTRIA, a subdivision of Tierra Firme, lying to the s. of Cartagena. 
|ANUNCIACIOiV, NUFSTRA SENORA DE LA, a settlement of the province and government of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito, situate at the source ofthe river Santa Maria. 
|ANVILLE, or Miller s Town, in Dauphine county, Pennsylvania, at the head of Tulphehocken creek. When the canal between the Susquehannah and Schuylkill, along these creeks, is competed, this town will probably rise to some consequence. It lies 18 miles n. e. by e. from Harrisburgl*, and 65 n. w. from Philadelphia. 
|ANZ FRMA. See ANSERMA. 
|ANZUI 
|LOS, a river of the province and government of Costarica in the kingdom of Gua temala ; it vises near the coast, runs e. and enters the sea bet.veen the rivers San Juan de Nicaragua and Matiiu;, in the province of Veragua. 
|ANZUKROS, or ANZURES, a river of the province nnd government of Quijos and Marcas in the kingdom of Quito ; it runs nearly due s. and enters the Putumayo. 
|VOL. I. 
81 
|APABOTA, a river of the province and govern ment of Guayana, or N.ueva Andalucia ; it rises in the country of the ferocious Charibbee Indians, and enters the Arui, on the n. side, a little before that of the Apaguata. 
|APACEO, SAN JUAN BAUTISTA DE, ahead settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Zelaya, in the province and bishopric of Mechoacan; it contains 135 families of Indians, ami 200 of Spaniards, Mu sices , and Mulattoes, as well as a convent of Franciscan monks. The territory of its jurisdiction is very fertile and pleasant; it is renowned for its abundant crops of grain and delicate fruits, especially the grape, which is held in high estimation for the superiority of its fla vour. Four leagues to the s. of its head settle ment. 
|APACF.O, another settlement, with the dedica tory title of Santa Maria, in the head settlement of the district of Zitaguaro, and alcaldia mayor of Maravatio, in the bishopric of Mechoacan ; it contains 24 families of Indians, and is three leagues to the s. of its head settlement. 
|APACHE, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Chancay in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Paccho. 
|APACHIERA, an audience and province of New Mexico, whose capital is St.. Fe. 
|APACUATA, a small river of the province and government of Guayana, or Nueva Anda lucia. It rises in the country of the ferocious Charibbee Indians, and enters on the n. side into the Arui. 
|APAGO, a river of the province and govern ment of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito ; it rises in the cordillera, runs n. and enters the Maranon, forming first some lakes by its waters. 
|APALACHES, a nation of Indians of Florida, in the territory of its name ; dwelling on the side of a chain of rugged mountains. They are very fierce, and so valorous, that it has never been pos sible to subject them from the time that they were first discovered by the Governor Hernando de Sota, in 1539. They have for their dwellings certain edifices of an oblong square figure, the extremities of winch universally point due n. and s. so that they are little molested by these winds, which, indeed, are here the most prevalent. The pavement is simple and elegant ; being made of calcined shells, and of a sort of sand of a gold colour, which they collect from the mountains, forming from it a paste, which, being spread upon the ground, and becoming dry, emits a colour as brilliant as though it were a plate of gold. The 
clothing and household furniture of these Indians consists of the skins of the beasts of the mountains : although they have abundance of vines, they are very sober, from their ignorance in what manner to make use of them, and commonly drink nothing 1 but water: they are accustomed to give their male children the names of the enemies they have conquered, or of some hostile settlement which they have plundered and burnt: they maintain the strictest faith in war ; nor are they excited to this by a slight pretext, neither through a spirit of avarice or of conquest, but only when they arc obliged for their own defence, or for the just satis faction of injuries received. These Indians have never known the barbarous method of poisoning their arrows ; they treat their prisoners with hu manity, and their wives and children in the same manner as their servants: some assert that they are very long-lived, and that it is common for them to reach a century : they adore the sun, to which they sing hymns every morning and even ing ; but at present they have a religion, which is a mixture of their own with the catholic and some protestant sects. [The A pal aches are emigrant Indians from West Florida 4 from off the river whose name they bear ; came over to Red river about the same time the Boluxas did, and have ever since lived on the river, above Bayau Jlapide. No nation has been more highly esteem ed by the French inhabitants, no complaints against them are ever heard. There are only 14 men remaining, who have their own language, but speak French and Mobil ian. .-/yA PAL ACHES, a bay on the coast of this pro vince, discovered by the Governor Hernando de Soto, in J535, from whence the Spaniards after wards formed a settlement called San Marcos, which was immediately reduced to a miserable village of Indians : before its cession, together with the province, to the English in the peace of Versailles, in 1763, it had a fort manned by a detachment of the garrison of San A gust in. Seven ty-four leagues from the bay of Carlos. 
|APAL ACHES, a settlement of Indians of the pro vince and government of Louisiana ; situate on the shore of the river Movila. 
|APALACHES, or St. Mark s River, rises in the country of the Seminole Indians, in E.Florida, near the n.w. source of Great Satilla river; runs s. w. through the Apalachy country into the bay of Apalachy, in the gulf of Mexico, about J5 miles below St. Mark s. It runs about 135 miles, and fulls into the bay near the mouth of Apalachicola /iver. 
|APALACHIAN Mountains, a part of the range called sometimes by this name, but generally Alleghany mountains. In this part of the great chain of mountains, in the Cherokee country, the river Apalachicola has its source. 
|APALACHICOLA, a town of the province and colony of Georgia, in which the English had a fort, on the shore of the river Savannah, now abandoned. 
|APALACHICOLA is likewise the name of the mother town or capital of the Creek or Muscogulge confederacy, called Apalachucla by Ber tram. It is, says he, sacred to peace ; no cap tives are put to death, or human blood spilt here ; and when a general peace is proposed, deputies from all the towns in the confederacy meet here to deliberate. On the other hand, the Great Coweta Town, 12 miles higher up the Chata-Uche river, is called the Bloody Town, where the Micos chiefs and warriors assemble when a general war is pro posed ; and there captives and state malefactors are put to death. Apalachicola is situated a mile and an half above the ancient town of that name, which was situated on a peninsula formed by the doubling of the river, but deserted on account of inundations. The town is about three days jour ney from Tallassee, a town on the Tallapoose river, a branch of the Mobile river. See COWETA and TALLASSEE. 
|APALACHICOLA, a river running between E. and W. Florida, [and having its source in the Apalachian mountains, in the Cherokee country, with in 10 miles of Tuguloo, the upper branch of Savan nah river. From its source to the mouth of Flint river, a distance of 300 miles, it is called Chata-Uche, or Chatahooche river. Flint river falls into it from the *. e. below the Lower Creek towns, in n. lat. 31. From thence it runs near 80 miles, and falls into the bay of Apalachy, or Apalachicola, in the gulf of Mexico, at cape Blaize. From its source to the 33d deg. of n. lat. its course is s. w. ; from thence to its mouth, it runs nearly s. See CHATA-UCHA and FLINT Rivers. 
|APALACHY Country extends across Flint and Apalaches rivers, in E. Florida, having the Seminole country on the n. e. Apalachy, or Apalachay, is by some writers applied to a town and harbour in Florida, 90 miles e. ofPensacola, and the same distance w. from Del Spiritu Santo river. The tribes of the Ap-dachian Indians He around it. 
|APALOUSA, Indians of N. America. It is said the word Apalousa, in the Indian language, 
means black head, or black skull. They are aborigines of the district called by their name. Their village is about 15 miles a. from tlie Apalousa church ; have about 45 men. Their native language differs from ail other ; they understand Attakapa, and speak French, plant corn, have cattle and hogs.} 
|APANEO, SAN FHANC:-SCO DK, a settlement of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tixtlan in Nucva Espana, of a hot tem perature. Its population, including its wards, may amount to 352 families of Indians. Three leagues n. of its capital. 
|APANGO, a head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Zayula in Nueva Espana, with 140 families of Indians; five leagues $. of its capital. 
tiAPANI, a river of the province and country of tbe Amazonas. It rises in the territory of the Asperas Indians, runs n.n.w. and enters the Madera. 
|APANTOS, a barbarous nation of Indians, who inhabit the woods lying 20. of the province of Guayaquil, and n. of the Maranon ; bounded on the w. by the province of the Curies Indians, with whom they live in union and friendship. They are inimical to the Tupinambos, use bows and arrows for weapons, and a certain kind of short darts, which are very heavy. They go en tirely naked, both men and women ; the latter accompany their husbands to battle, and assist them by carrying and serving out to them their arrows. They live by the chase, and worship a demon, which, according to some, appears in hideous forms to their priests, who pass for won derful sorcerers, and are very skilful at banquets in mingling poison in the cups of the guests. 
|APARCELADGS, CABO, a cape on the coast of the PatagoneS). which lies between the straits of Magellan and the river La Plata.. 
|APARIA, an imaginary and fabulous province, which some geographers maintain to be situated to the . of the river (Jururary, and that of the Mara* nou, where there is, in fact, no other province than that of Los Quijos. 
|APARICION, a settlement of the province and government of Venezuela, situate on the shore of the small river which runs into the G uache. It lies n. of the town of Araure, and e. of Truxillo. 
|APAiiU, a river of the kingdom of Brazil, which rises in the serrania, to the s. of the town Boa ; runs s. and enters the Madera. 
|APASTEPEC, a settlement of the province and alcaldia mayor of San Salvador, in the kingdom of Guatemala. 
|API 83 
|APATO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento ofXaujasin Peru. 
|APATENOMA, a river of the district of Marcas, and government of this name, in the king dom of Quito. It rises in the cordi Iem, near the settlement of the Inca, and enters the Ma ranon . 
|APAXCO, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of Atitalaquia, and alcaldia mayor of Tepelango,- in Nucva Espana. It contains 145 families of Indians. 
|APAZINGAN, a settlement of the head settle ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tanzitaro in Nueva Espana. It contains 34 families of Spaniards, 48 of Mmlees and Miulattoes, and 22 of Indians, and in the rancos of its district 47 others; all of whom are employed in cultiva ting the land, in breeding the larger cattle, and in collecting bees-wax and honey. Its temperature is sultry ; its territory is fertile, agreeable, and abounding ia fruits, and lies 11 leagues to the s. of its capital. 
|APENA, a river of the province and govern ment of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito. It rises in the interior of its mountains, is navigable for small vessels and canoes, and runs almost di rectly from s. to n, turns to the e. and enters the Guallaga on the e. side ; forming, about half-way in its course, a lake called Mahuati. 
|APERAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, who inhabit the forests bordering on the river Maranon,. towards the s. They are divided into various tribes or companies, meeting for the purposes of labour, and wandering through the woods. They occupy a space of unknown country, of upwards of 46 leagues, beyond the river Cayari. 
|APE RE, a river of the province and govern ment of Mojos in the kingdom of Quito. 
|APERRUES, a barbarous nation of Indians, of the province of Paraguay, to the n. e. to the e. of the city of La Asuncion. These Indians are idle, proud, and restless, continually molesting the other nations. The few that have remained are reduced into something like a settlement. 
|APETUOS, a barbarous nation of Indians, of the kingdom of Brazil, in the province and captainship of Puerto Scguro. They live in the woods towards the s. and in the vicinity of rivers and lakes, that they may be able to occupy themselves in fishing, which is their princi pal means of subsistence. They are but little known. 
APIAGA, a small river of the province and government of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito,M 2 
84 
It rises in the sierra which divides this province from that of Quixos and Marcas, runs nearly due j. and enters the Morona. 
|APIA!, a settlement of the province and go vernment of S. Juan -de Los Llanos in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, annexed to the curacy of the city of S. Martin del Puerto. It is poor and wretched, of a very scorching temperature, and, as such, produces only maize, yucas, and plan tains, immediately by it, the regulars of the abolished company of Jesuits had a noble and rich estate. In its district is found abundance of the herb escorzoneza (viper s grass). 
APICHIQUI, a barbarous nation of Indians, of the kingdom of Quito, on the coast of the S. sea, and to the s. e. of that city. It is compre hended in the government of Mainas, and was sub jected and united to the empire of Peru by the Inca liuainacapac, thirteenth Emperor. 
|APIOCHAMA, a large and rapid river of the kingdom of Peni. It runs to the n. of the city of La Paz, and after running 22 leagues from 5. w. to n. e. it enters the w. side of the river Beni. 
|APISSINITAS, a small river of New France, or Canada, which runs $. zo. between those of Monepieux and De Pic, and enters the lake Supe rior. 
|APLAO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Cuinana in Peru, situate in the fer tile valley of Mages, close upon a river. 
|APO, SAN MARTIN DE, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of Uruapan, and alcaldia mayor of Valladolid, in the province and bishopric of Mechoacan. It contains 30 families of Indians, and is distant 15 leagues to the e. of its head settlement, and 27 from the capital. 
|APOLABAMBA, a province of Peru, bounded by the province of Moxos to the e. and Carabaya to the zo. It extends about 80 leagues from s. w. to K. e. and in this space are situate the settlements consisting of the missions of Apolabamba, founded and governed by the monks of San Francisco, of the province of San Antonio de Charcas. Of these settlements there are eight, and the number of their inhabitants, including both sexes and all ages, may amount to 3000. The country is mountain ous, intersected with hills, rocks, and precipices ; the road, consequently is very rugged from the settlement of Buenavista to the pleasant valley ; in going to which, are three descents, called, from steepness, the Attempts, (las Tentaciones), the last being the most difficult. This territory has many rivers, the most considerable of which is the Tuiclii. Many idioms are spoken in the aforesaid 
provinces, the inhabitants being a mixture of diffe rent nations, namely, the Uchupiamonas, Lecos, Yubamonas, and Poromonas. The fruits which they cultivate are yucus, rice, maize, camotes, mani) and plantains, which are the common ali ment of all the settlements : they likewise cul tivate cotton, of which they make body linen for themselves : they collect some wax, which the bees deposit in the trunks of trees ; and in the pampas or llanos of Isllamas, some cacao, which is produced without any other trouble or culture than such as nature may afford. The trees herp are very numerous ; of these are the guayacanes&gt; cedars, inarias, &c. Ir it be not put a stop to soon, these woods will be rilled with monkeys of every tribe ; these animals are very mischievous, and, in order to gratify their appetites, pick off all the buds from the trees. On the moun tains are several wild beasts and venomous animals, insects, and grubs. In every settlement, two al caldes are appointed by the missions, for its poli tical government, and these appointments are confirmed by the viceroy of Peru. The produc tions that have been before stated as peculiar to it, are carried for sale to La Paz, and to other parts, the products of which, whether they may nave been sold or exchanged, are sufficient for the necessary subsistence of the Indians, and of the missionaries and the churches. The larger cattle, the flesh of which alone is here tasted, are provid ed from the provinces of Lampa andAsangaro; and with the two settlements of Thumapasa and Isllamas, the last of the province of Moxos, it barters cacao for other goods. The entrance to this province is through the settlement of Pelechuco, from that of Larecaxa. 
The settlements of this jurisdiction are, San Juan de Sahagun, San Antonio de Aten, S. Juan de Buenavista, S. Joseph de UchupiaSanto Cruz de Valle monas, 
Ameno, Trinidad de lariapu, 
Concepcion de Apola- S. Antonio de Isllamas. 
bambii, 
|APOLABAMBA, a settlement of this province and corregimiento, situate on the shore of the river Santa Rosa, one of those which are composed of the missions. 
|APOMARCA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Cotabambas in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Pitu. 
|APOMATOX, a river of the province and colony of Virginia, which runs e. and turning towards the s. afterwards takes its former direction, until it enters the river James. 
|APONGARA, a small river of the province and colony of Surinam, or part of Guayana be longing to the Dutch. It enters into another river, which is nameless, and where many rivers unite to enter the Cuyuni. 
|APONGO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Vilcas Huaman in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Canaria. 
|APONIA, a settlement or alcaldia mayor of the Portuguese, in the province and country of the Amazonas, situate on the shore of the river of its name, a little before it enters the Madera. 
|APONIA, a river of the same province, which runs from w. to e. and enters that of the Madera, opposite that of Tucumare. 
|APOQUENEMY Creek falls into Delaware bay, from Middletown in Newcastle county, Delaware, a mile and an half below Reedy island. A canal is proposed to extend from the 5. branch of this creek, at about four miles from Middletown, to the head of Bohemia river, nearly 
eight miles distant, which will form a water communi cation between Delaware bay and that of Chesapeak, through Elk river. 
|APOROMA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Carabaya in Peru, situate on the frontier of the Chunchos Indians, on the shore of the river Inambari. It has a celebrated mine -of gold of the finest quality. 
|APOSOL, a settlement of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Juchipila in Nueva Espana, situate five leagues to the s. of that head settlement. 
|APOSTOLES, a settlement of the missions which belonged to the regulars of the abolished company of Jesuits, in the province and govern ment of Paraguay, situate between the rivers PaTana and Uruguay, to the s. of the settlement of S. Joseph. 
|APOSTOLE&, a settlement of Indians, of the province and government of Buenos Ayres, found ed by the Jesuits in 1632, in the mountains of Tape. Lat. 27 54 43" s. Long. 55 49 19" o&gt;. 
|APOSTOLES, some islands of the strait of Ma gellan, which lie at its entrance into the S. sea, close to the cape Deseado. They are 12 in num ber, from which circumstance this name was given to them. They are all small, barren, and desert; their shores, although they abound with good shell-fish, are very dangerous, from being rocky. Lat. 52 s 34 s. Long. 75 6 w. 
|APOSTOLES, another island, of lake Superior, of New France, or Canada, situate near the s. const. 
|APOTOS, a barbarous nation of Indians, of the 
85 
province and country of Lns Amazonas, who inha bit the shores of the river Cunuris, bounded on the n. by the nation of the Tagaris, and s. by that of the Cunuris. 
|APOZO, SAX LUCAS DF, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of Irurnpo, and al caldia mayor of Maravatio, in the bishopric of Mechoacari. It contains 15 families of Indians, and is a league and a half e. s. e. of its head settlement. 
|APPA, a settlement and the capital of the alcaldia mayor of this name, in Nueva Espana. Some call it Apami. It contains 200 families of Indians ; and its jurisdiction, which is very much re duced, comprehends only two other head settlements of the district. It lies on the boundary dividing the archbishopric of Mexico from the bishopric of La Puebla, and it has itself some territory in the latter. Its inhabitants employ themselves in tilling the ground. In the two aforesaid settlements, in cluding those of its rancherios and estates, the inha bitants amount from 25 to 30 families of Spaniards, MusteeS) and Mulattoes, who are equally employed in the cultivation of maize, barley, beans, and other seeds, and in the breed of swine, for which the country is well adapted. 
|APPLE Island, a small uuinhabi ed island in St. Lawrence river, in Canada, on the *. side of the river, between Basque and Green islands. It is surrounded by rocks, which renders the naviga tion dangerous. 
|APPLE Town, an Indian village on the . side of Seneca lake, in New York, between the town ships of Ovid on thes. and Romulus on the . 
|APPOMATOX is the name of a s. branch of James river, in Virginia. It may be navigated as far as Broadways, eight or ten miles from Ber muda Hundred, by any vessel which has crossed Harrison s bar in James river. It lias eight or nine feet water, a mile or two farther up to Fisher s bar, and four feet on that and upwards to Petersburgh, where all navigation ceases. 
|APROBAGUE, orApitooACK, a river of the province and government of Cayenne, belonging to the French, in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. Its source is in the interior of the mountains, and it enters the sea near cape Orange. 
|APROBAGUE, a point or cape of the coast of the same province. It is one of those which form the entrance or mouth of the river mentioned in the above article. 
|APUALA, a settlement and head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Tepozcolula in Nueva Espana ; situate in the most woody part of the road leading to the coast. In its territory are found two-headed eagles. Onr of these, which 
86 
had been killed, was presented by the curate. lo the Marques de Valero, viceroy of that kingdom ; and the viceroy sent it to Spain. 
|APTAI-A, anolher settlement in the alcaldia mayor of Yanguitlari, with 85 families of Indians, who employ themselves in the cultivation of seeds and fruits of different sorts. Six leagues n. of its capital. 
|APUCARA, an ancient province of Peru, n. of Cuzco. In past times it was Avell peopled by Indians. It was conquered by Yupanqui, fifth Em peror of the Incas, and united to the empire of Capac. 
|APUI, a small river of the province and goTernment of Guayana, or Nueva Andalucia. It rises in the country of the ferocious Charibbee Indians, runs nearly due e. and enters the Arvi. 
|APUIAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, of the kingdom of Brazil, in the province and captainship of the Rio Janeiro. They inhabit the loftiest mountains towards the w. and extend themselves to the . for many leagues. These Indians are rriu l and treacherous, and are continually at war Avith the bordering nations and with the Portuguese, to. whom they do infinite mischief, from the nightly sallies that they are accustomed to make. The women, as Avell as the men, go entirely naked. They are given to drunkenness and luxury, re specting neither age nor affinity the most close, and render themselves a terror even to their friends and allies. They live upon the flesh of their ene mies, or upon fish. They are accustomed to treat tfieir prisoners well, that they may get fat, and make them, for this reason, partake of their horrid banquets. If there should be among the captives on unfortunate female, she becomes the victim of their brutal lust, end uniformly perishes under their repealed and successive acts of violation, and is thus abused till she literally breathes her last. These Indians could never be subjected either by the Portuguese or by the missionaries ; for tht.se have always fallen a victim to their cruelty. 
|APUIDO, a settlement of the province of Vene zuela and government of Maracaibo; situate in the Punta Colontda of the coast. 
|APUILAILAUAXARE, a river of the pro vince and country of Las Arnazonas, in the Portuguese possessions. It rises in the territory of the Andhases Indians, runs from s. to n. and turning its course a little to the w. e. enters the river Abacachis, which is a canal or arm of the Mad era. 
|APULCO, a settlement and head settlement of the ahaldia mayor of Cuquio in Nueva E.spanu. .Three leagues e. of its capital. 
|APURE, SAN FERNANDO DF, a j-ettlemcnt formed on (he right shore of the celebrated river of this name, by some of the inhabitants of the town of Guanare, of the province; and government of Venezuela. Allured by the fertility of the soil, they soon obtained for their little village the title and honours of a cily. Their property consists chiefly in oxen and mules, and, they are given much rather to grazing than to agriculture. Their city, without being large, is pretty well built, and the only church it has, though not a grand building, is neat and well endowed. Population about jjOOO souls. 
|APURE, a large river of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada; it rises in the serranias of Pamplona &gt; and takes the name of Uru, collecting in its chan nel the Maters of several other streams ; namely ? that of Chitaga, which rises in the sume s/crlYf, those of St. Domingo, Masparro, ami La Portuguesa, in the jurisdiction of Barinas, and that of Guarico in Caracas. Being formed of all these, it takes the name of the Apure for upwards of SCO leagues through the extensive llanos of San Juan, and, overwhelmed by the weight of its waters, rushes through a forest, and empties itself into the Aguarico, which flows in a small stream from the province of Caracas, and is not navigable until it receives these additional waters : it then, in an un restrained course, runs 20 leagues further, and enters, by very rapid streams and by three mouths, into the Orinoco. Its rush is indeed so violent, that, although it be there a league in width, the Orinoco resigns its current entirely to the influence of the waters of the Apure for upwards of a league, when the fury of this river being somewhat abated by dreadful whirlpools, (at which even the dex terous and crafty Indian has been known to shud der), it runs for the space of three leagues more amicably with the Orinoco ; its waters, however, being yet distinguishable, from their bright and crystal appearance, until, being further commixed by the rocks of the current of Aguarico, they be come at length inseparably confounded with the sombre stream of the Orinoco. On its shores are four settlements of the missions which were held there by regulars of the order of the Jesuits and others, consisting of some reductions of Indians, established by the monks of St. Dominic. Near the city of Pamplona is a very large bridge. On the ;?. part this river receives, besides those already mentioned, those of Caparo, Suripa, Canagua, Paguii, Cailode Guachi-quin,and Yuca; and on the s. the Guaritico, Cano tie los Seteata, and others of little consideration, such as the Matiyure. In the part called La Horqucta de Apure, 
* A P U 
opposite the settlement of San Antonio Jo Cocnisns, and on the s. side, this river throws out an arm, which is called Apurito, through which it dis charges nearly a fourth part of its waters : and thus separating itself from the mother stream, it traverses a great part of those llanos, sometimes in the main branch, and at others divided into various lesser streams, forming sundry islands ; and these again uniting, receive the waters of the Arauca, which flows clown from the llanos of Cazanare, and enters the Orinoco. The main body of the A pure, after receiving the river Portuguesa, throws out an arm to the n. which runs to unite it self with the Guarico, in the province of Venezuela, and then empties itself into the Orinoco. The re gulars of the company of the Jesuits did not find any settlements of missionaries on the shore of this river, as, in fact, all the settlements that were founded by them were at some distance from it. The Apure (observes Depons) rises in the neigh bouring mountains of St. Christopher, belonging to the kingdom of Santa Fe ; its length is 170 leagues, of which 40 arc from n. e. to s. e. and the remainder from w. to e. it then takes its course to the s. to join the Orinoco. It is navigable for more than 60 leagues, and in its course increases the volume of its waters by a number of other rivers, of which some are also navigable, and the more useful, because, after having irrigated a great part of Venezuela, they serve for the conveyance of the produce which springs from the luxuriance they afford to the soil. These rivers are the Tinaco, San Carlos,* Cojeda, Aguablanca, Acarigua, Are, Yaruo, Hospiria, Abaria, Portnguesa, Guanare, Tucupido, Bocono, Masparro, La Yuca, St. Do mingo, Paguey, Tisnados, &c. These succes sively confound their waters in the immense plains of Venezuela. Almost the whole of them are united above Santiago, and form a considerable volume of water, which, at twelve leagues below that place falls into the Apurc, 20 leagues n. of the Orinoco. This quantity of water being too much for the bed of the Apure to contain, is forced into a division of many branches, and so falls by several months into the Orinoco. The cattle bred upon the banks of the Apure, and of the other rivers which lose their names in joining its waters, consist of numerous droves, and are highly esteemed. They are principally oxen, horses, and mules, but chiefly the latter. Their exportation is naturally by Guayana, through the accommodation of the pastures in that route up to the Orinoco. All the part of Venezuela, forming the new province of Barinas, and even all its s. part, are invited by the facility of the transport tp so iid their coffee, ootlon, Mud iiiJigo, to Guayann, instead of carry ing them on mules to Caracas or Puerto Cabal .o, over a hundred leagues, on roads almost impracti cable, and crossed by rivers nearly unbounded. 
|APURIMAC, a large river of the province of Abancay in Peru ; it rise. 1 - in it, and following a n. course, passes through Cuzco, uniting itself after wards with those of Santiago and Pachucuaca, and after running 120 leagues through the mountains of the Andes, it enters the Maranon with the name of Ucayale, in such an augmented stream that it is difficult to ascertain which is the tributary one ; it then, by the force of its waters alone, is obliged to change the direction of its course. Some have maintained that this river is truly the Maranon, founding their opinion on its remote origin. It traverses the high road which leads from Lima to Cuzco, and other provinces of the sierra. It is crossed by a bridge, made of thongs or cords, of SO yards long and three wide, at which there is paid a toll of four reals for every parcel of goods of the country, and 12 reals for such as are of Spaim Some bagres are caught in this river. 
|AQUA FORT, a settlement on the e. side of the s. c. extremity of Newfoundland island. Lat. 47 5 n. Long. 52 33 a&gt;. 
|AQUAQUATI, a river of the province and government of Portobelo in the kingdom ofTierra Firme ; it rises in the mountains on the n. and enters the sea at the bay of Mandinga, opposite the small island of Broquel. 
|AQUATZAGANE, a settlement of Indians, of the province and colony of Pennsylvania. 
|AQUEDOCHTON, the outlet of lake Wimipiseogee, in New Hampshire, whose waters pass through several smaller ones in a s. w. course, and empty into Merrimack river, between the towns of Sanburn and Canterbury. 
|AQUEPEZPALA, a settlement of the province and alcaldia mayor of Comitlan in the kingdom of Guatemala. 
|AQUETI, a river of the province and govern ment of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito. It rises in the country of the Guallagas Indians, enters the river of this name, and that of Ucayale, runs w. and e. forming a curve, and enters the latter. 
|AQUI, a river of the province and government of San .Juan de los Llanos in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It runs e. and enters the Rio Negro, where the Maranon joins the Orinoco. 
|AQU lA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Caxatambo in Peru, aunexed to the curacy of Chiquian. 
|AQUIACULCO, a river of the province and government of Vcra Cruz in Nueva Espona. It 
83 A Q U 
runs n. and enters the sea to the a), of the Alvarado, opposite La Roca Partida. 
|AQUICHA, a settlement of the province and corregiminito of Yauyos in Peru, annexed to the curacy of its capital. 
|AQUIDNECK, the ancient Indian name of Rhode island, in the state of Rhode island. 
|AQUIGUIRES, a barbarous nation of Indians, of the kingdom of Brazil, very numerous and valorous ; they inhabit the woods and mountains towards the a 1 , and make frequent sallies upon the Portuguese establishments of the captainship of Espiritu Santo, and often do great mischief. Iheir customs are similar to those of the other barbarous tribes in Brazil. 
|AQUILA, SANTA MARIA DE, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of Maltrata, and akaldta mayor of Orizaba, in Nueva Espana. It contains 70 families of Indians, and is half a league distant from its head settlement, and lies lour and a half w. of the capital. 
|AQUIMURU, a settlement of the province and government of La Sonora in Nueva Espana, situate at the source of a river, near the settlement of Busanis. 
|AQUINABIS, a settlement of the missi ons held by the Portuguese Carmelite fathers, in the country of the Amazonas, situate on the shore of the Rio Negro. 
|AQUIRA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Cotabambas in Peru ; near to which is a spring of water, forming a stream abounding in trout, which, although small, are nevertheless well tasted, and much esteemed, especially in the time of Lent. 
|AQUIRE, a river of the province and govern ment of Guayana in Nueva Andalucia. It rises in the sierras of Itamaca, and enters in a very large stream into the Orinoco, where this runs into the sea, at its widest mouth called De Navios. 
|AQUIRE, a port of the coast of the kingdom of Tierra Firme, in the province and government of Cumana. 
|AQUISMON, a settlement and head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Valles in Nueva Espana, situate on the skirts of the sierra Madre. It is commonly the residence of the akaldia mayor, and a Franciscan convent that it has is the abode of the grand ecclesiastical super visor of the jurisdiction, from the conveniency of its central situation, for providing against any un toward circumstances that might happen upon the frontiers, and for a check upon the bordering Indians. It contains 240 families of Indians, 25 of Spaniards, and as many others of Mustees and 
2 
Mulatloes. At three leagues distance, upon the skirt of the sierra, it has two rancherias of Pames and Guastccos Indians. Twelve leagues s. of its capital. 
|AHAAIBAIBAS. SeeGuAiiAYos. 
|ARABANATE, a large lake of the province and government of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito, to the s. of the river Marailon, abounding in tortoises. It enters through a canal into the river Guallaga, on the e. side. It is three leagues dis tant from the settlement of the lake, which is the principal of the missions of Mainas, and four from the settlement of Chamicuros, to the n. n. w, 
|ARABATE, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Yamparaes in Peru, of the bishopric of Charcas. 
|ARABIBIBA, a small river of the province and captainship of Todos Santos in Brazil. It rises at the foot of the sierra of Mongaveira, runs e. and afterwards shaping its course s. enters the bay. 
|ARACA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Cicasica in Peru, annexed to the curacy of that of Lurubay. It has in its district a gold mine, though the same is worked with little success. / 
|ARACAI, a river of the province and captain ship of Paraiba in Brazil, it rises in the territory or country of the Petiguares Indians, runs e. and then shaping its course to s. s. e. enters the sea, between the river of Monganagappe and the port of Jorge Pinto. 
|ARACARI, a settlement of the missions held by the Portuguese Carmelite fathers, in the province and country of Las Amazonas ; situate on the shore of the Rio Negro. 
|ARACARI, a river in this province, in the part belonging to the Portuguese. It runs e, and forms a large lake before it enters the Rio Negro. 
|AHACAS, a small river of the province and go vernment of Cumana, which rises close to the settlement of Iguana, runs s. and enters the Orinoco, opposite the Ciudad Real. 
|ARACOA, CANO DE, an arm of the river Orinoco, communicating with the channel of Manano, and the grand river Desparrarnadero. 
|ARACORI, a settlement of the province and captainship of Rey in Brazil, situate in the island Bepitanga. t 
|ARACU YES, a barbarous nation of Indians, of the kingdom of Brazil, but little known : they live in the woods of the captainship of Pernambuco
, and all that is known of them is, that they are nume rous, and feed with a rare zest upon tigers : they go naked, and carry suspended to their ears, lips, 
and prepuces, small tablets of an oval form, for ornament : they paint their bodies all over red and yellow, and to their heads, arms, and legs, they attach the feathers of the birds of the most beautiful colours : their weapons are bows, arrows, and clubs of heavy wood. 
|ARAGANA-CUERA, a lake of the province and country of the Amazonas, in the territory pos sessed by the Portuguese. It is an overflowing or pool of the river Maranon, opposite the island Cuchibara. 
|ARAGANATUBA, a settlement of-the province and country of the Amazonas, in the part pos sessed by the Portuguese ; situate on the shore of that river. 
|ARAGUA, a town of the province of Barcelona, in the government of Cumana, founded in 1744 by some Mustees and Negroes, who established them selves there. The territory, although level, is only fit for breeding cattle, for which purpose there are 24 estates. Its inhabitants may amount to 150. The above estates, with some plantations which yield wretchedly, together with the indo lence of the natives, concur in making it alto gether but a desolate spot. Twenty leagues from its capital. 
|ARAGUA, some valleys in the province and government of Venezuela, where there are fjve settlements of Spaniards and some Indians, called La Victoria, S. Mateo, Cagua, Turmero, and Maracay, near the lake of Valencia ; in the dis tricts of which are many estates of indigo, some sugar-mills, and abundance of tobacco, with which article they supply the government. 
|ARAGUA, a river of the province and govern ment of Paraguay, which runs n. and enters the Moretes. 
|ARAGUAIA, a large river of the province and captainship of Para in Brazil. It rises in the sierra of the Coriges, runs n. n. e. and afterwards turning n. enters the Tocantines, in the territory of the Parainabas Indians. 
|ARAGUITA, a settlement of the province and government of Venezuela, in the district of which there are many good cacao estates. It belongs to the curacy and parish of Caucagua. 
|ARAGUITA, SA.VTO DOMINGO DK, a settlement of the province and government of Cumana in Nueva Andalucia, founded in the year 1690, on the shore of the river Nivcri, by the father Alonso Ilomnias, a monk of the order of St. Francis, near a rocky piece of ground, in which is a spring of fine water, and from which this place took its name. It is close to a lofty and pleasant moun tain. Its territory is fertile in cacao, sugar-cane, 
|VOL. I. 
cassavi, maize, plaintains, and other fruits of that country. It contains 250 souls, and is three leagues .?. e. of Nucva. Barcelona. 
|ARAHUAI, a settlement of the province and government of Canta in Peru. 
|ARAIPALGA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Chilques y Masques in Peru, an nexed to the curacy of Colcha. 
|ARAMANCHE, a small river of the province and colony of N. Carolina, which runs s. e, and enters the Saxnpahan. 
|ARANCAI, a town of the province and corre gimiento of Huamalies in Peru. 
|ARANCAGUA, a large river of the kingdom of Chile, in the territory of Coquimbo, in the n. part. It rises in the mountains of the Andes, and running from e. to ro. washes and fertilizes the beautiful plains of Curimon, Aconcagua, Quillota, and Concon, and empties itself in an abundant stream into the S. sea. 
|ARANDA, a settlement of the province and government of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. 
|ARANJUEZ, a town of the province and alcaldia mayor of Nicoya in the kingdom of Guatemala, thus called from the resemblance that this delightful country has to the royal seat of this name in Spain. It has nevertheless a veryscanty population of Indians, and is five leagues from the city of Nicoya. 
|ARANTAC, a port of the S.sea, on the coast of the province and corregbiiento of Arequipa in, Peru. It wants both security and convenience, and is only frequented by a vessel now and then driven to it in distress. 
|ARANTZAN, SAN GF.ROXIMO ne, a settlewent and head settlement of the district and acaldia tnnvor of Valladolid, in the province and bishopric ofMechoacan; the jurisdiction of which consists of nine settlements. It is of a cold temperature, and is but scantily inhabited, having been almost entirely depopulated by an epidemic disorder, called here matlazahua. Twelve leagues w. of it* capital. 
|ARAPA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Asan
raro in Peru. 
|ARAPARIPUCU, a town of the province and captainship of Para in Brazil, situate on the bank of the arm of the river Maranon, or Amazonas, which forms the island of Marajo. 
|ARAPECUMA, a river of the province of Guayana, in the territory of the Portuguese : it rises in the country of the Apamns Indians, runs s. and enters the Maranon near the .strait of Pauxis. 
90 
|ARAPIJO, a settlement of the province and captains/tip of Para, in Brazil, on the shore of the river of I /as Amazonas, near the Curupa. 
|ARAPIJOS, a settlement of the same captain ship and kingdom as the former ; situate on the 5. shore of that river, between the settlements of Maraques and Comaru. 
|AKAPUCU, a river of the province and go vernment of Guayana, in the Portuguese posses sions. It runs s. s. c. between those of Carapanatnba and Macuacuari, entering the Maranon at its month, or where this river disembogues itself. 
|ARARANA, a lake of the province and coun try of Las Amazonns, in the territory of the Por tuguese. It is a large pool of water formed by various canals or arms of the Maranon. 
|ARARANGUA, a small river of the province " and captainship of Rev in Brazil. It runs e* and enters the sea near the Morros of Santa Marta. 
|ARARAPIRA, a settlement of the province and captainship of Sari Vincente in Brazil ; situate in the island Bepitanga. 
|ARARAT, Mount, or the Stone Head, a short range of mountains on the n. frontier of N. Caro lina, in a n. e. direction from Ararat river ; a n. w. branch of Yadkin river. 
|ARARAZ, a settlement of the captainship of San Vincente in Brazil, on the shore of the river Turmay. 
|ARARI, an abundant river of the province and captainship of Para in Brazil. It rises from the mountains to the w. of Tarnaraca. The woods that are immediately on its shore arc inhabited by some barbarian Indians, the Tapuyes. It runs s. and enters the sea, opposite the great island Tamaraca. 
|ARARI CA, a river of the province and go vernment of Paraguay. It runs e . and enters the grand river San Pedro, in the captainship of San Vincente in Brazil. 
|ARASAGIL, a river of the province and cap tainship of Maranham in Brazil. 
|ARASAPI, a small river of the province and government of Guayana, in the Dutch territory. It enters the Esequibe, or Esquibo. 
A RASAS, a barbarous nation descended from the Sernigae?, inhabiting the woods which lie be tween the rivers Tig re and Curaray. 
|ARASPAHA, a city of the province and colony of New York, founded by the Dutch in 1(&gt;OS. It has a good fort, and was taken by the English, un der tlie command of Robert Carr, in 1640. They have since been in possession of it. 
|ARATAI. SecTARACiNi. 
A RATH APE SCOW, an Indian tribe inhabit
ing the shores of the lake and river of that name, in the ;/.u&gt;. part of N. America, between the lati tudes of 57 and 59 ;/. North of this nation * abode, and near the Arctic circle, is lake Edlande, around which live the Dog-ribbed Indians. 
|ARATICtI, a river of the province and cap tainship of Para in Brazil, which runs n. between the rivers Jacunda and Tocantines, and empties it self into the mouth of the river Amazonas. 
|ARAUAGIA, a river of the province and coun try of Las Amazonas. It rises in the territory of the Curanaris Indians, runs n. and enters, after a short course, that of the Mataura. 
|ARAUARI, a river of the province and go vernment of Cayena in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. It has its rise in the mountains, and enters the sea between cape Orange and the bay of Vi cente Pinzon. 
|ARAUCA, a grand river of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, which flows from the mountains of Bogota, and passes through the llanos of Cazanare and Meta. Its shores are inhabited by the Chinatos, Jiraras, and other barbarous nations of Indians. 
|ARAUCAI, a river of the province of Chaco in Peru. It is an arm of the Pilcomayo. 1 
|ARAUCANOS, a barbarous nation of Indians, of the kingdom of Chile, who inhabit the country lying s. of the river Biobio, in the mountains of the Andes, extending also over the plains. They are the implacable enemies of the Spaniards, who have never been able to reduce or subject them. On the contrary, whenever their country has been invaded, they have manfully resisted their ene mies, committing the most terrible slaughter and execution amongst them, destroy ing their cities and forts, laying waste their lands, and never sparing the life of a Spaniard. The women, indeed, they reserve for their own use, as happened in the years 1599 and 1720. They are faithless and traitorous, but of incredible valour and resolution. The first peace which was made with them, from an idea that it was impossible to reduce them to subjec tion, took place in 1641; Don Francisco de Tuniga, Marques de Baydes, Conde del Pcdroso, be ing president, governor, and captain-general of the kingdom. In 1650 a peace was concluded for the second time, but which was broken a short time after, like the first. Before the rebellion of 1720, the missionaries of the Jesuits had formed, with inconceivable trouble and dangers, five large settlements of these Indians ; but every thing was lost by this revolution, and a third peace was aftcrwards established in 1724. This lasted till 1767, when it was also broken. These Indians were ac2 
customed to carry on a trade with the Spaniards, exchanging their manufactures of wool, and their horses, not inferior to those of the famous Andalucian breed, for wine, leather, and earthen ware. They have no chief or head to govern them : all military authority rests in their elders, to whom they pay the same respect as though they were the fathers of the country, and from them, in times of war, they select a general or commander, whom they call toquil
 and he is the arbiter both of war and of peace. His armies are formed from the various tribes, and meet together with the ut most quietness ; they are composed of cavalry and infantry; theirfirst attack is terrible, especially that of the foremost ranks ; they have some few fire arms and swords, but the principal and most com mon weapon is a long and thick lance, which they manage with great dexterity. They are robust, handsome, and liberal, but much addicted to ine briety and sensuality ; nevertheless the men, as well as the women, live honestly after their fashion. The Spaniards, to defend themselves against their invasions, have built some forts upon the confines, furnished with men and artillery ; and in its dis trict is celebrated, once a year, a kind of fair, at which a meeting is made between the president of Chile and the ancients of these Indians, to ratify the treaties of peace ; and the former makes, in the name of the king, various presents of leather, wine, and cloths of different colours. The num ber of inhabitants is very considerable, as well through the polygamy that prevails here, as that the climate contributes to propagation. In its dis trict are mines of gold of excellent quality, but they are not worked. [In the s. provinces of the Araucanos, between the nrer Biobioand the Archi pelago of Chiloe, several very rich mines of gold were formerly discovered, which yielded immense sums ; but since the expulsion of the Spaniards from those provinces by the Araucanos, these mines have been in the possession of that warlike people, who have prohibited the opening them anew by any one under pain of death. In the territory of these Indians is the Quila rush, of which they make excellent lances ; also a shrub producing honey, and the boighe tree, which they have, from time immemorial, considered sacred, carrying its branches in their hands on the conclu sion of a peace, as the ancient nations of Europe did those of the olive. See a complete history of their manners, &lt;$r. in article CHILE. 
|ARAUCO, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Tucuman, in the district of the city of ilioja. It is fertile in wine of excellent quality, 
91 
but in every thing besides very poor ; for which reason tl*ey petitioned the king, as arbitrator in their cause, to provide for this unproductiveness of soil by encouraging their mines, and, for this pur pose, allowing them to avail themselves of the mule trade carried on between the jurisdiction of Cor dova and Peru. 
|ARAUCO, a fort in the kingdom of Chile, on the shores of the river Tucapel, built for the pur pose of restraining the invasions of the infidel Indians. Close to it there was a college belonging to the regulars of the abolished order of Jesuits. 
|ARAUJA, a settlement of the island of Trini dad, in the kingdom of Ticrra Firme, situate on thee. coast behind the point of Los Arracifes. 
|ARAUJO, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Santa Marta in the kingdom of Ticrra Firme, situate at the mouth of the river Magdalena. 
|ARAUNA-PURU, a river of the country of Las Amazonas, in the territory of the Portuguese. It runs . n. w. and enters the Cumaypi. 
|ARAURE, a city of the province and govern ment of Venezuela in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. It is on the shore of the river Acarigua, and n. n. e. of the city of Truxillo. [The city of Araure is one of the happy results of the labours of the first Capuchin missionaries of Andalucia, who, by persuasion and mildness, effected that which was thought impossible to be accomplished but bjr force of arms ; namely, the bringing to a civilized life its savage and idolatrous race of Indians. The situation of Araure is fine, agreeable, and advan tageous. Three rivers water its territory, which is fertile, but of which the inhabitants are far from making every advantage. Their principal and almost sole occupation is the rearing of cattle. They cultivate only some cotton and a little coffee. The ground of the city is regular and agreeable. The streets are straight. It has a handsome square. The houses are well built ; but the only thing worthy of note is the church, which is superb, and famed for the image of our Lady of C orteza, who enjoyes the public veneration, not only of all the faithful of the city, but also of all those in the surrounding villages, although the fame of her power and miracles are not equal to those ascribed to our Lady of Comoroto.j 
|ARAURO, a celebrated gold mine in the pro vince and corregimicnto of Condesuyos of Arequipa in Pern, it is of metal of the best quality, but little worked, both on account of the hardness of the stone and of its depth, which makes the la bour of it very expensive. N 2 
92 ARE 
|ARAWARI, a settlement of the province of Guayana, in the Portuguese possessions, situate on the coast. 
|ARAWARI, a river of this province and territory, which runs in an abundant stream to the e. and enters the sea opposite the island of Penitencia. 
|ARAXI, a rapid and violent river of the king dom of Brazil, in the province and captainship of Paraiba. It flows down from the mountains lying to there , passes through some extensive forests, and enters the Mongaguaba. 
|ARAYA, SANTIAGO DE, a point of land on the coast of Nueva Andalucia, and government of Cumana, where there were some famous salt pits ; and for the defence of these, a castle was built, forming a square, with good bastions, and mounting heavy artillery, which, however, was ultimately destroy ed, from the salt pits having become useless, inas much as, owing to some n. winds, they had been filled with more than six fathoms of water. Lat. 10 36 n. Long. 64 20 w. 
|ARAZA, a large river of Peru. It rises in the cordillera of the Andes of Cuchoa, in the province and co&gt;~res:imiento of Pomabamba, runs n, and then f. making various wind ings until it enters, through different mouths, the abundant waters of the Maranon. Some will have it to be the same as the Cuchivero, through the origin which is given to it by Don Cosine Bueno, geographer of Peru, in his description of the province of Cuzco. 
|ARBI, VALLE DE, in the province and govern ment of Cartagena, of the kingdom of Tierra Firme, near the river Cauca, where formerly was founded the town of Antioquia, the ruins of which (as it has been translated to another spot) are still to be seen here. 
|ARBOL, ARROYO DEL, a small stream of the province and government of Buenos Ayres. It runs 5. and enters the Gil. 
|ARBOLEDAS, a scanty and mean settlement of the province and government of Pamplona, in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, of a hot tempera ture, and lying in a very craggy and rocky spot. It produces sugar-cane, yucas, plaintains, and other fruits of that climate ; is 16 leagues n. e. of Pamplona, and divided from thence by many rivers, which are passed over by bridges made of cane. 
|ARBOLES-SECOS, CABO DE, a point of land on the coast of Brazil, and province and captain ship of Maranon, between the island of Santa Ana and the sand bank of Pireyras. 
|ARBOLETES, CIENEGA DE LOS, a port of the coast of the N. sea, in the province and go
vernment of Cartagena, and kingdom of Tierra Firme. It is a recess at once beautiful, capacious, and quiet ; covered with trees, sheltered from every wind, and irrigated with a small river of delicious water. It is 24 leagues from the river Sinu. 
|ARBOREDA DEL NORTE, an island on the coast, and in the province and captainship of Rey, of the kingdom of Brazil, to the n. of the island Santa Catalina. 
|ARBOREDA, another island in the same province and captainship, called Del Sur, (of the south), to distinguish it from the former, as it lies in the same direction, as does also that of Santa Catalina. 
|ARCAHAI, a settlement and parish of the French, in their possessions in St. Domingo, situ ate on the w. coast, between the river Lodos and the bay of Flamencos. 
|ARCAI, a settlement of the province and corre~ gimicnfo of Quillota in the kingdom of Chile, si tuate in the valley of Colina. 
|ARCANGELES, a settlement of the missions held by the regulars of the abolished company of Jesuits, in the province of Gaira and government of Paraguay. Its ruins alone are visible at the source of the river Pegueri or Itazu, since that they were destroyed by the Portuguese Paulistas, or followers of St. Paul. 
|ARCARDINS, Islands of, near the w. coast of the island of St. Domingo, in the French pos sessions, between that of Goanava and that of Cayo Icarnier. 
|ARCAS, a river of the province and captainship of Para in Brazil. It rises in its mountains, and runs to disembogue itself into the mouth of the river De las Amazonas, opposite the island of Joanes, or De IVlarajo. 
|ARCAS, some small islands or rocks near the coast of Yucatan, in the bay or gnlph of Mexico. Lat. 2CP 12 7 . Long. 92 24 . 
|ARC AT A, a settlement and seat of the silver mines of the province and corregimiento of Condesuyos de Arequipa in Peru. They were formerly very rich, and produced much metal, but they are at present in great decay for want of labourers. 
|ARCH Spring. See BALD EAGLE Valley. 
|ARCHIDIPISCO, SAN SEBASTIAN DE, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of Xacapistla, and alcaldia mayor of Cuenavaca, in Nu eva Espaiia. 
|ARCH I DONA, a city of the province and go vernment of Quijos and Marcas in the kingdom of Quito. It is very small and poor, from the incur sions that it has continually suffered from the bar
|ARE 
barons Indians. Its inhabitants, who may amount to little more than 150, cultivate maize and plaintains ; these, with the food they procure by the chase, being their subsistence. It produces no thing besides, although i(s soil is very fertile, and its temperature mild. 
|ARCHIHUENU, a small river of the province and corregimif.nto of Quillota in the kingdom of Chile. It runs s. s. ZD. and joins tiie Lihuay to en ter the Longomilla. 
|ARCHIPELAGO, D.ANGEFOUS, the name given by Bougainville, in Feb. 1768, to a cluster of islands in Ihe Pacific ocean, in the neighbour hood of Otaheite, situate between 10 and 18 s. lat. and between 142 and 145 w. long, from Pa ris. The islands which compose this Archipelago, he named Qu;:tre Facardins, the Lanciers, and La Harpe : there are other islands forming two groups, to which he gave no names. In April 1769, Capt. Cook fell in with these same islands, and named them Lagoon island, Thrum Cap, Bow island, and the Two Groups. 
|AUCHIPKLAGO of the Great Cyclades, a cluster of islands in the Pacific ocean, lying between 14 and 20 s, lat. and between 166 and 170 e. long. Discovered by Bougainville, 22d of May 1768. This is the same cluster of islands discovered by Quiros 1606, and by him called TIERRA AUSTRAL DEL ESPIRITU SANTO, which see. Captain Cook passed these islands in 1774, and called them New Hebrides. 
|ARCOS, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Parinacochas in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Charnbi. 
|ARDAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, who in habit the s. of the river Napo, and the n. of the Maraiion, in the provice of Quijos and kingdom of Quito. They occupy the thickest forests, and are bounded by the Maisamaes. 
|ARDOIS, a mountain in Nova Scotia, between Windsor and Halifax, 13 miles n,w. from the lat ter. It is deemed the highest land in Nova Scotia, and affords an extensive prospect of all the high and low lands about Windsor and Falmouth, and the distant country bordering the basin of Minas. 
|AREAS, a small river of the province and cap tainship of Para in Brazil. It runs n. and enters that of Las Amazonas near the town of Cuxupa. 
|AREBATO, a small river of the province and government of Guayana, of Nueva Andalucia. It rises in the country of the Carinacas Indians, and enters the Cayora. 
|AREBICO, a town of the island and govern
93 
ment of San Juan de Puertorico, 30 leagues dis tant from its capital. 
|ARECHONA, a marsh of the province and government of San Juan de los Llanos in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is formed by different arms of the rivers Sarare and Apure, and commu nicates itself with another, called De Cascas, at the foot of the mountain desert of Chisgas. 
|ARECO, a small settlement of the province and government of Buenos Ayres, situate on the shore of the river of its name. It has large breeds of cattle, especially of the mule kind, in which it car ries on a great commerce. Its families may amount to 60, and is 24 leagues from its capital. [It is situ ate on a small river near the Parana. Lat. 34 14 2" s. Long. 59 47 a&gt;. 
|ARECO, a small river of the same province and government, which runs from s.w. to n.e. entering that of La Plata between thoseof Lujan and Arrecife. 
|AREGUAY, a settlement of Indians of the province and government of Paraguay, situate on a small river four leagues e. of Assuncion. Lat. 25 18 s. Long. 57 26 42" a?. 
|AREGUE, a settlement of the province and government of Venezuela, in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, situate on the shore of the river Tucuyoj to the n. e . | to the e. of the city of Carrora. 
|AREITO, a river of the province and govern ment of Cumana. It rises n. of the table-land of Guanipa, runs s. and enters the Guarapiche. 
|AREN, a river of the province and government of Cumana. It rises at the foot of the mountains of Bergantin, runs e. and enters the Guarapiche. 
|ARENA, BAH i A DE LA, on the s. coast of the island of Jamaica, close to the point of Morante. 
|ARENAL, a point on the coast of the island of Margarita. It is the extremity looking to the w. and opposite to the point Tortuga. 
|ARENAS, BAHIA DE, a bay on the coast of the strait of Magellan, between the bay of Aguabuena and the point of San Antonio de Padua. 
|ARENAS, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Tucuman, situate between the rivers Tala and Del Rosario. 
|ARENAS, another, of the province and govern ment of Cumana in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. It is situate on the shore of a river near to Cumanagota, to the n. $ to n. w. 
|ARENAS, a point on the coast of the province and government of Maracaibo. 
|ARENAS, another, which looks to the e. of the island of La Puna, in the province and govern ment of Guayaquil. 
|ARENAS, another, likewise called De San Sebas tian, in the coast of the Tierra del Fuego, one of 
94 ARE 
those which form the entrance of the canal of San Sebastian, in the strait of Magellan. 
|ARI.NAS, an island of the coast of the kingdom of Tierra Firme, in the province and government of Cartagena, opposite the Morro Hermoso. 
|ARENAS, a shoal of the sound of Campeche, near the coast of this province and government. 
|ARENAS, some medanos, or mountains of sand, of the coast of Peru, in the province and corregimicnto of Piura, near the point of Negrillo. 
|ARENAS, two islands between those of Caicos, to the n. of the island of St. Domingo. The one is between the Cayo Frances and the Cayo Grande, and the other farther distant to the s. 
|ARENAS, another, called Arenas Gordas. See 
|CORRIENTKS. 
|ARENI LLAS, a settlement of the province and corregimicnto of Aconcagua in the kingdom of Chile, situate on the shore of the river Ligua. 
|ARENOSA, a small island near to the n. coast of the island of St. Domingo, between the ports of Caracol and of Delfin. 
|ARENTAPAQUA, a settlement of tlic alcaldia mayor of Valladolid, in the province and bishopric of Mechoacan. It contains 24 families of Indians, and is a league and a half distant from its head settlement. 
|AREPUCO, a settlement of the province and government of Guayana, situate on the shore of the river Orinoco, to the 5. of the city of San Tomas. 
|AREQUIPA, a province and government of Peru, bounded on the n. by that of Collaguas, e. by that of Lampa, s. by that of Moquehua and that of Arica, w. by the S. sea, and n. w. by the province of Cumana. It is 16 leagues in length from n. zc. to s. e. and 12 in width at the most. On its coast is a port, which is insecure, and two creeks. Its productions, and in which it carries on a com merce with the other provinces, are reduced to wine, of which 500,000 jars, containing each 22 flasks, are made annually in the valleys of Arequipa, Moquegua, Locumba, Victor, Tacar, Liguas Mages, &c. It abounds also in wheat, sugar, maize, and potatoes, but not in meats ; and there fore it is obliged to bring these hither from other parts. Its jurisdiction contains only 11 settlements; ttnd it is watered by the river Tambo, which gives its name to a very fertile valley, through which it passes ; and by the Chile, which is formed from the water which distils from a cavity of a great rock, which, on the outside, is extremely dry. 
The capital is the city properly called Arequipay, which means to say, " It is well, remain ;" because, in one of the conquests of the Incas, the yictorious army passing through these parts, many 
|ARE 
of the captains, attracted by the beauty of the coun try, asked permission to form a settlement here, when they received for answer, "Arequipay." The Spaniards founded this city by order of Francisco Pizarro, in 1536, in the valley of Quilca, at 20 leagues distance from the S. sea, on the skirt of the mountain called Ornate, which is loftier than the others of the mountains of the sierra which surround it. This mountain, although always covered with snow, vomited fire at the time of the conquest. The chronologer Antonio de Ilerreru says, that this city was founded in 153 4, and Don Antonio de Ulloa, in 1539 ; but one and the other have erred, and we follow the friar Antonio Calancha, who affirms the first mentioned date by original documents. Its temperature, notwith standing its continual rains, is notoriously dry, and very benign and salutary. Its edifices are handsome, and built of stone ; the dwelling-houses being somewhat like arched vaults, and having no upper stories, so as to be prepared against the effects of earthquakes. It is watered by the river Chile, which is let off by sluices to irrigate the en virons, and to enrich the fields. It was subjected to the bishopric of Cuzco till the year 1577, when Gregory XV. erected it into a cathedral, its first bishop being Don Francisco Antonio de Ervia, of the order of St. Domingo. This authority was immediately extinguished, and then it became sub ject to its former dependency until the year 1609, when it again became the head seat of a bishopric, the influence of which extends as far as the pro vinces of its name, and of those of Cumana, Condesuyos, Cailloma, Moquega, and Arica. The Emperor Charles V. gave it the title of city, on the 15th May 1541, granting it for arms, in J549, a volcano vomiting fire from a mountain surrounded by a river. It has a beautiful fountain of brass in the Plaza Mayor, or chief square, and a bridge of magnificent arches upon the river ; three parishes, and convents of San Francisco, San Domingo, San Augustin, La Merced, and San Juan de Dios ; a college which belonged to the regulars of the com pany of Jesuits, of Recoletos de San Francisco, on the other side of the river ; an hospital of Agonizantes, and a college for the instruction of youth ; monasteries of nuns of Santa Catalina, Santa Te resa, and Santa Rosa ; a house of correction for women, a religious house (beateno) of Indians, and two houses of labour, both for men and wo men, lately founded. In the city is preserved, among its archives, a precious monument of some royal letters patent, in which Philip II. returned thanks to this city for its having, in times of neces sity, supplied to the crown abundaut relief, and 
A R E Q U I P A. 
95 
from its inhabitants having volunteered all their prior in various convents ; he went over to Spain,, jewels and ornaments for that purpose. Amongst where he was made preacher (o the king ; and 
i . i TTV li " 1 j 1 I _ 1 /* * J 1_ ITi 1. _ 
having acquitted himself with great credit, he was elected bishop of Arequipa in 1551, where he remained till 1658. 
7. Don Fray Juan de Almoguera, a monk of the order of La Santisima Trinidad Calzada ; he was born in Cordova, studied philosophy and theology in his native place, and in Sevilla ; was provincial minister of the province of Andalucia, visitor of it, and nominated for its genera! ; he was 16 16 .?. It rains here only in
tlie months of also preacher to king Felipe IV. presented to this 
its illustrious children, we may reckon Don Alonso de Peralta, inquisitor of Mexico, and archbishop of Charcas, and Doctor Don Francisco Xarava, collegiate of the royal college of San Martin in Lima, and Oidor of Panama. This city has been sundry times destroyed by earthquakes, in the years 1582, 1600, 1604, 1687, 1"25, 1739, and 1738. It is 217 leagues s.c. of Lima, 60 from Cuzco, and 50tt. of Arica. Long. 71 58 . Lat. 
December, January and February. Its settle ments, which are in its vicinity or suburbs, are, Chiuhata, Paucarpata, 
Yanahuaya, Valle de Victor, 
Characoto, Tiabuya, 
Cairna, Valle de Jambo. 
The names of the bishops who have presided in Arequipa. 
1. Don Fray Christobal Rodriguez, a Domi nican monk, native of Salamanca; he was master and prior of the convent of Alcala, visitor of the convents of Indians; elected archbishop of St. Domingo, and promoted to be first bishop of Arequipa, on 17th October 1611 ; he died in the town of Gumana, before he took possession, in 1612. 
2. Don Fray Pedro de Perea, of the order of Augustin ; he was qualificator of the inquisition, and elected bishop in 1612; he died in 1624. 
3. Don Augustin de Ugarte and Garavia, who was elected in 1624, and promoted to the bishop ric of Quito in 1630. 
4. Don Pedro de Vilbgomez Vivanco, native of Castroverde del Campo, canon of Sevilla, visitor of the convents of monks of this city, judge of the inquisition, visitor of the royal au dience and university of Lima, elected bishop in 1631, and promoted afterwards to the arch bishopric of Lima in 1640. 
5. Don Pedro de Ortega Sotomayor, native of Lima, where lie studied in the royal university ; and having been there 19 years, he put up for, and gained the title of Professor of Arts, after wards that of evening lecturer, and was a professor of theology ; the former occupying his studies six years, and the latter 15 : he was magistral canon of that church, school-master, archdeacon and bishop of the church of Truxillo, from whence he was promoted to this in 1647, and from this to that of Cuzco in 1651. 
6. Don Fray Gaspar de Villarroel, of the order of Augustin, native of Quito ; he took the habit iu the convent of Callao, was lecturer of arts and 
bishopric, of which he took possession in 1661 ; promoted to the archbishopric of Lima in 1674. 
8. Don Fray Juan de la Calle y Heredia, of the order of Nuestra Senora de las Mercedes, pro moted from the church of Truxillo to this in 1678. 
9. Don Antonio de Leon, promoted from the church of Truxillo in 1678 ; he died in 1684. 
10. Don Juan de Otalora, minister of the royal and supreme council of the Indies, elected bishop to this church in 1714, but at which place he did not arrive; and to his situation was nominated, 
Don Fray Juan de Arguelles, an Augustin monk, promoted from the bishopric of Panama, and who, though elected to Arequipa, died before he could take possession. 
11. Don Fray Ignacio Garrote, of the order of Preachers, elected bishop of this church in 1725, and remained so until 1742, when he died. 
12. Don Juan Bravo del Rivero, native of Lima, treasurer of the church of La Plata, elected bishop of Santiago of Chile in J734, and promot ed to this in 1742. 
13. Don Juan Gonzalez Melgarejo, who was bishop of Santiago of Chile, and dean of Para guay, promoted to Arequipa, and being elected in 1742, and remaining till 1755. 
14. Don Jacinto Aguado y Chacos, of Cadiz, bishop of Cartagena of the Indies, promoted to Arequipa, elected in 1755, and remained in office until 1761, when he died. 
15. Don Diego Salguero, who was elected in 1760, and governed till 1771. 
16. Don Manuel A bad y de Liana, elected in 1771, and who reigned till 1782. 
17. Don Fray Miguel de Pamplona, native of this city in Navarra, a Capuchin monk, who was colonel of the regiment of infantry of Murcia, comendador of Obreria in the order of Santiago, and who, having disengaged himself from the world, embraced a religious life, working with. 
96 A R I 
great labour in the missions of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, and, in spite of his resistance, was elected bishop of this church, in 1782, until 1786, when he renounced its functions. 
18. Don Pedro Chaves de la Rosa, lecturer of Cordoba, elected bishop of Arequipa, from the renunciation of this bishopric, in the year 1786. 
This city experienced an earthquake, which ruined the greater part of its edifices and temples, in 1785, but they were rebuilt in a short time. Among the illustrious persons it has produced, should be added, 
The Doctor Don Pedro Durana, archdeacon of his holy church, bishop elect of Paraguay. 
Don Juan Bautista dc Taborga, dean of his church, and bishop elect of Panama. 
Don Fray Joseph Palavisino, a monk of the order of St. Francis, bishop of Paraguay and of Truxillo. 
Don Francisco Joseph de Maran, canon of Cuzco, bishop of La Concepcion in Chile. 
Don Fernando Perez de Oblitas, treasurer of the church of Cuzco, bishop of Paraguay, and of Santa Cruz de la Sierra. 
Don Juan Manuel Moscoso y Peralte, arch deacon of the holy church of his native place, coadjutor of that bishopric, promoted to Tucuman, and from thence to Cuzco. 
Don Clcmente Durana, oidor of Chuquisaca. 
Don Mafias de Peralta, oidor of the royal au dience of Mexico, and provisional captain-gene ral of that kingdom. 
Don Agustin Butron y Muxica, a very fine scholar. 
|ARGYLE, atownship in Washington county, New York, on the e. bank of Hudson river, con taining 2341 inhabitants, inclusive of 14 slaves. In the state census of 1796, there appears to be 404 electors. 
|AUGYLE, a township in Shelburne county, Nova Scotia, settled by A cad fans and Scotch. 
|ARIACUACA, a settlement of the province and country of Las Amazonas, in the Portuguese possessions, situate on the shore of the river Urubu. 
|ARIARI, a large river of the province and government of San Juan de los Llanos in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It rises in the moun tains of Neiva, runs from w. to e. for a long course, aud makes several windings, until it enters the Orinoco. See GUABIARE, or GUAVABERO 
|ARIAS, DOMINGO, a settlement of the pro vince and government of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, on the shore of the river Yaguara, and in the road which leads from Neiva 
to Popayan, at a small distance from the city of La Plata. 
|ARIAS, a river of the province and government of Tucumiui, the head of the Pasage and Salado. It rises to the w. of the city of Salta. 
Am AS, another, a small river of the province and government of .Buenos Ayres. It runs nearly n. w. and eiiters the Plata. 
ARIBA, a settlement of the missions belonging to the Portuguese Carmelite fathers, in the pro vince and country of Las Amazonas, situate on the shore of the Rio Negro. 
ARIBACIII, a settlement of the province and government of La Sonora in Nucva Espana, situate to the w. of that of Cocomorachi. 
ARIBETICHI, a settlement of the province of Ostimuri in Nueva Espana. It is 20 leagues n. e. of the 7 cul of Rio Chico. 
|ARICA, a province and corregimienloofPeru, bounded on the n. by that of Moquehua, n. w. by the jurisdiction of Arequipa, w. by the S. sea, s. by the province of Atacamas, s. e. by that of Lipes, and e. by that of Pecajes. It is in length 82 leagues n. w. s. e. and 16 in width e. w. It is composed, as arc the other provinces on the coast, of valleys, -which begin in the uneven grounds and windings of the cordillera, and which, for the most part, terminate on the shore of the S. sea. The parts lying between the val leys in this province are dry and unfruitful, and only serve for pastures in those months in which the gently sprinkling rain falls which is called gama, from May to September. In those val leys, which are, generally speaking, fertile, since they do not suffer from drought, is grown a suf ficient supply of wheat, maize, and other seeds ; also much Guiney pepper is cultivated, with which a commerce is carried on with the other provinces of the sierra, and a good quantity of cotton, olives, and sugar. In the 17th century, the aforesaid pepper grown on this province might be reckoned to produce the yearly value of 200,000 dollars. It does not want for wines or brandies ; and of the vino plant, the most celebrated is that of the valley of Loctimba, on account of its flavour. In the mountains towards the cordillera, cattle of the larger and smaller sort are bred, also native sheep. It, has the fruits peculiar to its temperature, such as papas and some wheat, es pecially in the curacy of llabaya, by which the adjoining town of Moquehua finds a regular sup ply. In order to render the land fertile, the husbandmen make use of huano, wiiich is the dung of birds called hunnaes, and is brought from an island close upon the coast, called Iqueinc. 
|ARE 
This province has very few rivers, and only two of any consideration, one in the valley of Loa, where the province is bordered by that of Atacania, and another which flows down through the valley of Locumba, and is composed of two great streams, which flow in directions nearly contrary to each other, and form a very deep lake of fou r leagues and an half in width, at the end of which is a deep cavity, from which issues, with an immense force, the stream forming the river of Locumba, which continues running with an equally abun dant supply. This province has to the e. a vol cano in a very lofty mountain, from the skirts of which spring forth some fetid hot waters; but what are most worthy of note are its mines. In the mountains of the curacy of Pica, are veins of gold, and of the finest copper, neither of which are worked, on account of the hardness of their temper. In the part upon the coast are two mountains, namely, of Chanavnya and of Huantajaya, two leagues, more or less, from the sea, and some others; all of which are very rich in metals, which are nevertheless not worked, owing to the scarcity of water experienced in this ter ritory for many leagues. The second of these mountains is supposed to have been dug in former times ; the attempt has been repeated in the pre sent age, but without method ; it being imagined that there were no regular veins of metal in it, but merely some lumps, since some of these had been found lying detached indifferent parts. Of late, however, some strata of metal have been discover ed, and it is seen that the lumps which were first picked out, were only the forerunners or indica tors of better fortune. From hence there has been a regular establishment of labourers, and much riches have been, and still continue to be, extracted from this mine ; and were it not that, owing to the want of water, the labourers are obliged to carry the metals to be worked at a great distance, and through unpeopled parts, the masters would be much enriched, the kingdom would be benefited, and the demand for workmen much larger. This province comprehends 46 settlements and various ports. Its repartimiento used to amount to 880,900 dollars. The settlements of this juris diction are, 
The Capital, Putre; 
Caplira, Sora, 
Matilla, Tarata, 
Camsana, Maure, 
Satoca, Locumba, 
Minuni, Tacna, 
Pachica, Toquella, 
Saesama, H uutacondo,, 
|VOL. I. 
Mam ifia, 
Esqmfiai, 
Ileffk-ii, 
Parinricota, 
Ticaco, Sama, Ylo, Pachia, 
Pachania, Choquelimpr, Libiiia, Chaspaya, Ylabaya, Pallagua, Pica, Huavifia, Cibaya, Camina, Copta, Tignabuar, 
Tarapaca. Socoroma, 
Yquique, Huayaquiri, 
Pachica, Umagata, 
Sipisa, Tarucachi, 
Tumar, CandaraJv. 
The capital is founded in a beautiful and plea sant valley, and is about a league in length, and on the sea shore, with a port in the middle, which is much frequented by vessels. It is very fertile, and abounds in productions, from which it derives great commerce, especially in Agi pepper, and in glass, which it manufactures. It was ancientry a large and renowned settlement, but at present it is reduced to a scanty population, since the time that it was destroyed by an earthquake, in 1605, and sacked by the English pirate, John Guarin, in 1680, when the greater part of its inhabitants passed over into the settlement of Tacna, which is 12 leagues from hence. It has three convents, one of the order of San Francisco, one of La Merced, and another of San Juan de Dios, all very poor and badly served. It is 90 leagues 7i. a?, of Atacames. Long. 70 18 . Lat. 18* 26 s. 
A R EQUIP A, a settlement of Indians of Louisiana, in which the French had a fort and establishment, on the shore of the river Missouri. 
|AREQUIPA, a mountain, called the Morro de Arica, on the coast of the S. sea, of the province and corregimiento of its name. 
|AREQUIPA, a port in the above province and corregimfento, which wants both security arid convenience, but which is nevertheless frequented from its situation : here are to be seen the ruins of the city which was the capital of the province, and which was translated from this spot. 
|ARICAGUA, a pleasant, long, and fertile val ley of the province and government of Maracaibo, and jurisdiction of the city of Merida, in the dis trict of which are many Indians, who are called Giros, and some Mustees and White*, established in various messuages. They have some small churches, do injury to no one ; and should a o 
08 
priest be seen passing through their neighbour hood, they oblige him to say mass, and regale him very bountifully. They have gold mines, but do not work them, and their country abounds in honey, bees-wax, and other productions. 
|ARICAGUA, a settlement of the province and government of Cumana, very near the city of Cumanagoto. 
|ARICAGUA, another, of the province and goYernment of Venezuela, situate on the shore of the river Buga, to the e . | to the s. of the city of Coro. 
|ARICAN, a settlement of the province and captainship of Para in Brazil, situate on the shore of the river of Las Amazonas, and at the mouth of that ofXingu. 
|ARICARA, a settlement of the province and captainship of Para in Brazil, situate on the shore of the river Xingu. 
|ARICARETES, a barbarous nation of Indians of Guayana, divided into two parties or tribes, one oriental, which inhabits the vicinity of the river Aricari, and gives its name to the whole na tion, and the other oecidental, in the neighbour hood of the river Yapoco. It is a very reduced population, and they manifest a very docile and pacific nature. 
|ARICARI, a large river of the province and country of Las Amazonas. It rises in the moun tains of Guayana, to the s. of the fabulous pro vince of Dorado, and after washing the unknown countries of the infidel Indians, it runs e. and enters the Orinoco, and not into the sea, as some have thought. From it the Aricaretis Indians de rive their name. 
ARICAPANA, a settlement of the province and government of Venezuela, situate on the shore of the river Guarico, to the /*. of the sierra of Carrizal. 
A RICH AT, a town in Cape Breton island. 
|ARICORIA, a small river of the province and country of Las Amazonas. It rises in the territory of the Guarinumas Indians, runs n. n. w. and enters the Madera. 
ARICORIS, or ARICORES, a barbarous na tion of Indians of Guayana, to the s. w. and n. of the river Maranon. They are of the same origin as the Yaos, and are bounded on the e. by the Abacas, n. by the Charibbes, and s. by the Mayos : they have a poor spirit, though they are revenge ful : they go naked, both men and women : they believe in the immortality of the soul, and make 
freat feasts and honours for their dead, sometimes illing the slave, in order that he may accompany and serve his master in the other world : they 
worship the sun and moon, the latter of which they look upon as their mother, and believe thorn to be animated bodies : they mnintain that the large stars are the daughters of the sun and moon, and the lesser their servants : their priests and sor cerers make them believe that they hold converse with the great spirit, which they call Valipa, which is the devil, who is said to appear to them in various forms : they traverse the forests in troops, carrying with them their wives and chil dren, and maintain themselves by the chase, and by wild fruits : their numbers increase astonish ingly, not only since they practise polygamy, but since they believe that in getting many children they do a work calculated more than any other in the world to render themselves great and merito rious in the eyes of the Vatipa : they are happy also in the idea of increasing their nation, so as the more easily to overcome their enemies. 
|ARICUPA, a settlement of the province and captainship of Para in Brazil ; situate in an island which lies at the mouth of the river De dos Bocas. 
|ARIES Kill, a small creek which runs n. into Mohawk river, two miles and a half w. from Schoharie river, in New York . 
|ARIGUANATUBA, a large island of the river of Las Amazonas ; one of those which form the arms of the river Coqueta before they enter it. It is the largest of the islands inhabited by the in fidel Indians. 
|ARIMNABA, Islands of, in the river Orinoco, opposite the lake Maruo, and to the w. of the island of Trinidad. 
|ARINES, a river of the province and govern ment of Yucatan, which runs e. and enters the sea between Cainpeche and the Punta Desconocida. 
ARINOS, a river of the kingdom of Brazil, which rises in the territory of the Pareses Indians, runs n. w. many leagues, in so large a stream as to be navigable for canoes, and enter* the Topayos. 
|ARIO, a small settlement of the head settlement of the district of Xacona, and alcddia mayor of Zarnora, in Nueva Espana. It contains 22 fami lies of Indians, who traffic in skins, fruits, and seeds ; and is two leagues s. of its head settle ment. 
|ARIPANUM, a river of the province and colony of Surinam, in the part of Guayana pos sessed by the Dutch. It rises between the rivers Mazarroni and Esquibo ; runs n. and enters the latter on the w. side. 
ARIPORO, a river of the province and govern ment of San Juan de los Llanos in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. It rises near the city of Pore, and enters the Meta. 
|ARIPUANA, a large river of the province and country of Las Amazonas ; it is an arm of the Madera, which runs in an abundant stream ; and forming different pools, in which are many islands, it returns to enter the said river through many mouths. 
|ARIPUANA, a settlement of the above province and country, situate on the shore of the former river, in the territory of the Urubringuas Indians. 
|ARIPUCO, a settlement of the province of Guayana and government of Cumana ; one of the missions which are held by the Catalanian Capu chin fathers. 
ARIRAPUA, a settlement and asienfo of the mines of the province and corregimiento of Condesuyos de Arequipa in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Salamanca. Its gold is of the finest quality, but it is not extracted at the present day in the same quantity as heretofore. 
|ARISMENDI, SANTIAGO HE, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of Texupilco, and alcaldia mayor of Zultepec, in NuevaEspaiia ; annexed to the curacy of its head settlement ; situate on the plain of a deep ravine. It is of a cold and moist temperature, contains 15 families of Indians, and is five leagues to the s. of its head settlement. 
ARISPE, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Sonora in Nueva Espana ; situate on the shor of the river of its name, between the settlements of Chinapa and Guapique. [Persons who accompanied M. Galvez in his expedition to Sonora affirm, that the mission of Ures near Pitic would have answered much better than Arispe for the capital of the intendancy. Population 7600 souls. 
|ARITAGUA, a river of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, which runs through the llanos of Cazanare and Meta, and dcsembogues itself into a river which has the name of the former, 60 leagues from the port of San Salvador. It abounds in fish, and its forests are inhabited by some barba rian Indians of the Achagua nation. 
|ARIUI, a settlement of the province of Bar celona, and government of Cumana, in the king dom of Tierra Firme ; one of those which are under the religious observers of San Francisco, in the missions of Piritu. 
|ARIUI, a river of the above province and go vernment, which rises to the e. of the town of San Fernando, runs from the foot of the sierra of Pariagua to the e. making many windings, turns to the s. and enters the Orinoco. 
|ARK 
99 
|ARIZ I BO, one of the principal places in Portorico island, in the West Indies, it has few inhabitants, and little trade but smuggling. 
AH JON A, a settlement of the province and government of Cartagena in Tierra Firme, one of those which was re-united and formed of other small settlements in 1776 by the Governor Don Juan Pimienta. It is six leagues n. of its ca pital. 
|ARKANSAS, or ARKEXSAS, a n. w. branch of Mississippi river, of a very lengthy course, which falls in by two mouths, and forms an island. Thirty-five miles long, and ten broad. The branch on the n.e. side of the island receives White river, about 24 miles from its mouth. The course of the river Arkansas, with its meanders, Major Pike computes at 1981 miles, from its junction with the Mississippi (or rather the Missouri) to the moun tains ; and from thence to its source 192; the total length being 2173 miles : the former portion to the mountains may be navigated. It also re ceives several rivers, which are navigable for more than 100 miles. The banks of the Arkansas swarm with buffaloes, elks, and deer, in numbers which seem inexhaustible by the hunting tribes. Near the sources of this river is a prodigious mountain, well known by the savages for many hundred miles around. The altitude was observed on a base of a mile, and found to be 10,581 feet above the Prairie ; and admitting the Prairie to be 8000 feet above the sea, the height of this peak would be 18,581 feet. But when our author on this occasion mentions the peak of Teneriffe, he forgets the authentic observations of La Crenne, and other astronomers employed by the Frencli king, who have sufficiently ascertained that the height of the peak of Teneriffe is only 1742 toises, or 10,452 French feet, above the level of the sea. It is the detached and insular situation which makes this peak appear higher than it really is. If it approached nearly to the height of Mont Blanc, 15,500 feet, the difficulty of the ascent would be such, that four days would not be more than suffi cient to go and return ; whereas there is no hint of any such circumstance. But it is almost neces sary to apologize for any such observations on the work of our enterprising traveller. One man can not unite every quality ; and a scientific traveller might have perished amidst the difficulties which were surmounted by his courage and perseverance. The distresses suffered by him and his companions, amidst those mountains covered with eternal snow, were terrible ; famine daily staring them in the face; while their clothing was exhausted, the blood started from under the bandages of their o 2 
100 
|ARM 
snow-shoes, and some of the men even lost their feet by the severity of the frost. 
|ARKANSAS, are Indians wholiveon the Arkansa river, s. side, in three villages, about 12 miles above the post or station. The name of the first Tillage is Tawanima, second Oufotu, and the third Ocapa ; in all, it is believed, they do not at pre sent exceed 100 men, and are diminishing. They are at war with the Osages, but friendly with all other people, white and red ; are the original pro prietors of the country on the river, all which they claim, for about 300 miles above them, to the junction of the river Cadvva with Arkansas ; above this fork the Osages claim. Their language is Osage. They generally raise corn to sell ; are called honest and friendly people. 
All LET, a settlement and parish of the French in the island of Martinique. It is a curacy of the Capuchin fathers, situate on the coast which looks to the &lt;r. and lias this name from two bays, one of which is larger than the other, and which are at the extremity of the island. 
|ARLET, a point or cape of this island, on the n. n. &lt;. coast. 
|ARLINGTON, a township in Bennington county, Vermont, 12 miles n. from Bennington. It has 991 inhabitants. 
|ARM A, SANTIAGO J&gt;E, a city of the province and government of Antioqnia, in the Nuevo Key no de Granada, founded by Sebastian de Benalcasar in 1542, aud peopled by Captain Miguel Munoz: it was a little time after removed to a *hort distance, and the ruins of it are still to be seen on the shore of the river Cauca. It is of a very hot temperature, but abounding in gold mines : it is fertile in seeds, and in the productions of the country, but barren in those of Europe. It is memorable by the unjust death which the Marshal George Robledo experienced under the hands of its founder ; that unhappy person having suffered decapitation. The natives, the Indians, used still to eat human flesh, notwithstanding the settlements the Spaniards had made amongst them. Fifty leagues n, e. of Popayan, and 16 from Anserma. Lat. 5 33 n. Long. 75 36 w. 
|ARMA, another settlement of the same pro vince and corregimieiito of Castro-Vircyna in Peru, and annexed to its curacy ; near to it are two large . estates, called Huanca and II uaiiupisca. 
|ARMADILLO, SANTA ISABEL DEL, a settle ment and head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of S. Luis de Potosi in Nueva Espafia. In its vicinity, and in that of the estates of its district, are counted 675 families of Spaniards, 
Masters, and Mulattoes. Six leagues to the e. of its capital. 
|ARMENTABO, a river of the province and government of French Guayana, which runs c. and enters the Oyapoco. 
|ARM IRA, a river of the province and govern ment of Darien, and kingdom of Tierra Firme, which rises in the mountains towards the n. and runs into the sea by the side of cape Tiburou. 
|ARMIROS, a barbarous nation of Indians of Paraguay, descendants of the Guaranics ; they inhabit a fertile and pleasant country, and were first discovered by Alvar Nunez Cabcza de Vaca in 1541. 
|ARMUCICESES, or AHMOUCHIQUOIS, a bar barous nation of Indians, of the province of New France, or Canada. 
|ARNEDO. SeeCnANCAV. 
|AROA, a river of the province and govern ment of Venezuela in Tierra Firme. It rises in the sierra to the w. of the town of S. Felipe, runs e. and enters the sea beyond the bay of Burburuta, opposite to some islands which are called Los Cayos de San Juan, to the s. of the point of Tucaca. It is formed from the waterfalls of the serrania of the cities of San Felipe and of Bariquismcto. In its course it fertilizes a large val ley, in which there is a settlement, as also some fine cacao estates. 
|AROCOBA, a river of the province and go vernment of French Guayana. 
|AROI,a river of the province and government of Guayana, which rises in the centre of this province, from the lake Casipa, in some very rugged moun tains ; runs n. w. and enters the Orinoco in an abundant stream. Its shores are inhabited by the Charibbes, the Aruacas, and the Araris Indians, who lead a wandering life. 
|AROIALT, a small river of the province and country of Amazonas, in the Portuguese posses sions. It is an arm communicating itself with the Paranamini. 
|AROQUOIPI, CANO DE, an arm of the river Orinoco, which communicates itself with the Aracoa, and which with it forms the island of Faxarado. 
|AROUARI, a river of the province of Guayana, in the Portuguese possessions. By these people a fort was built upon the shore in 1688, but it was destroyed by an overflow of the river in 1691. 
|AROUENS, an island of the river Maranon or Amazonas. It is just at the entrance of this river, and is inhabited by many infidel or gentile Indians. 
2 
|AROUKAOBA, a river of the province of Guayana, in the French possessions. 
|AROURA, a settlement and parish of the French, in their possessions in Guayana, situate on the shore of the river Oaya. 
|ARPONES, RANCHO DE LOS, a settlement of Indians, on the n. coast of the province and go vernment of Darien, between the island of La Laguna and the point of Mosquitos. 
|ARQUE, a settlement of the province and corregimicnJo of Cochabamba in Peru. 
|ARQUTATI, a river of the province and go vernment of Darien, and of the kingdom of Tierra Firme. It rises in the mountains of ifs interior, runs s. e. arid n. zc. and enters the Chucunaqui. 
|ARRACIFFU. SCCARRECIFE. 
|ARRAIAL, a town of the Portuguese, in the province and country of the Amazonas ; it is on the shore of the river Madera, between the two great lakes or pools of water formed by this river, one of which is called the Salto Grande. 
|ARRASTRADERO, a toy of the coast of the S. sea, in the province and government of Esmeraldas, on the side of the port Palmar. 
|ARRAYAL DE PORATE, a town in Brazil, situated on the w. side of Para river, below the junction of its two great branches. See PARA. 
|ARRECIBO, a settlement of the island and government of San Juan de Puertorico, situate near the coast, on the shore of the river of its name. This river has its rise in the mountains towards the n. and runs into the sea. 
|ARRECIFE, or CAPILLA DEL SENOR, a small settlement of the province and government of Buenos Ayres, in the road which leads from Lima to this city, where there is a chapel, in which mass is performed on festivals by the curate of the settlement of Baradero, which is 14 leagues distant. It is situate on the banks of a river of its name, and is 34 leagues from its capital. [Lat. 34 4 10" w. Long. 60 27 10 a&gt;. 
The river above-mentioned runs from s. w. to n. e. and enters the river La Plata, between that of Areco and that of Tres Hermanas. 
|ARRECIFE, (sometimes called Oliuda), acity in the kingdom of Brazil, in the province and captain ship of Pernambuco. It has a good fort, well garri soned, and a commodious and capacious port ; the entrance of wh ich is small and rendered still more diffi cult of access from having a good fort. The city was taken by the English, in 1595, under the command of James Lancaster, [who entered the port with seven English vessels. He staid in the city a month, and carried off immense plunder ; but since that time the Portuguese have made it almost inaccessible to 
101 
enemies. Its commerce is trifling, and rts climate hot, but the air is healthy. It is the residence of a Portugaese governor, and is in Lat. 8 13 s. Long. 35 5 w. 
A R RECIFE, an island of the coast of the same kingdom, in the province and government of Maranon ; situate at the mouth of the river Paragnas, between the Igarasu and the Punta Gorda. 
|ARRECIFES, CANO DE LOS, an arm of the river Orinoco, near its entrance into the sea, through the large mouth called De Navios, (of ships) ; it forms a curve, and so runs back into this river, leaving a large island in the middle of its course. 
|ARRECIFES. a point or extremity of land on the e. coast of the island of Trinidad, which faces that of Tabago. 
AnREciFts, some shoals on ttie coast of Brazil, of the province and captainship of Scara, between the lakes Upiens and Cum. 
|ARRETA, a small river of the province and cap tainship of Para in Brazil ; it runs n. n. to. towards the rnouth of the river Amazonas, and to the arm of this river which forms the island of Marajo. 
|ARRENON, a river of the province and go vernment of Guayana ; it runs s. s. w. and enters the Orinoco between those of Caralana and Winikine. 
|ARRIANICOSIES, a barbarous nation of Indians, of the province and government of Para guay, who inhabit the country near to the Rio de la Plata. They arc much reduced, and as yet but little is known of them. 
|ARRICARI, a river of the province and go vernment of Guayana, in the French possessions. ARRIETA, a settlement of the province and government of Cartagena in the kingdom of Tierra Firme ; situate to the n, of the town of San Benito Abad. 
|ARROUSICK, an island of the N. sea, near the coast of the province of Sagadahoc, at the mouth or entrance of the river Kenebec. 
|ARROWSIKE, an island in the district of Maine, parted from Parker s island by a small strait. It is within the limits of George Town, and contains nearly of its inhabitants, and has a church. It contains about 20,000 acres of land, including a large quantity of salt marsh. See GEORGE Town and PARKER S Island. 
|ARROYO DE LA CHINA, a town of the pro vince and government of Buenos Ayres, situate on the w. side of the Uruguay, in Lat. 32 29 18*. Long. 58 I4 o&gt;. 
|ARROYOS, a parish of the province and go vernment of Paraguay, situate between two small 
rivers, at the foot of the mountains which separate the rivers running into the Parana and Paraguay. Seventeen leagues e. of Assumpcion. Lat. 25 25 36" s. Long. 56 47 w.~\ 
|ARSACIDES, the Islands of the, the name given by M. de Surville, in 1769, to Solomon s islands, on account of the barbarous character of their inhabitants, particularly at Port Praslin. These islands were visited by Mr. Shortland in 1788, and by him called New Georgia. See SO LOMON S Isles and PORT PUASLIN. 
|ARTHUR-KULL, or NEWARK BAY, on the coast of New Jersey, is formed by the union of Passaicand Hackinsack rivers. 
|ARTIBONITO, a large and abundant river of the island of St. Domingo. It rises in the moun tains of the mines of Ciboo, runs nearly due zv. making many circumvolutions, and enters the sea in the to. head of the island, between the bay of Gran Pierre and the Morro del Diablo. Various projects have at different times been entertained for the forming of canals which might irrigate large territories; but they have not, on account of the want of workmen, been put into execution. Its proper name is Hatibonico, but by corruption it is universally called Artibonito. 
|AIITIBOMTO, a small river of the above island, rising in the valley of Inojuelo, runs s. s. w. and enters the former. 
|ARTIBONITO, a settlement of the above island, belonging to the French, and situate on the shore of the first mentioned river. 
|ARTIBONITO, a port of the island of Cuba, on the s. coast, between the port of Guantanamo and the island of Auriga-Grande. 
|ARTIGONICHE, a river of the province and colony of Nova Scotia. It rises in a lake near the e. coast and the strait of Canso, runs n. e. and enters the sea. 
|ARTIGONICHE, a settlement of Indians of this province and colony, situate on the shore of the former river. 
|ARTLEBURGH, a township of the county of Bristol, in the province and colony of New Eng land. It is noted for the great increase of houses which arose in a few years from its commerce, having been till lately nothing better than a mean village. This township, properly called Attleborough, is 32 miles s. from Boston, and nine trom Providence. 
|ARUACAS, a barbarous nation of Indians who inhabit the s.e. of the river Orinoco, descendants of the Charibbes. They are very numerous, and in habit the country between the river Berbice and the mountains of Guayana : they have no fixed habitations, aud therefore wander about those 
mountains : they are the friends and allies of the Dutch of the colonies of Berbice, Esquibo, and Surinam. 
|ARUARA, a small river of the province and colony of Surinam, or part of Guayana in the Dutch possessions. It runs from *. to n. and en ters the Cusguni on the s. side. 
|ARUBA, one of the Little Antille islands in the \\ est Indies, is subject to the Dutch. It is uninha bited, lies near Tierra Firme, 14 leagues a&gt;.ofCuracoa, and produces little else besides corn nnd wood. Lat. 1230 M. Long. 67 35 a?. See ORUBA. ARUCARA, a township of the Portuguese, of the province and captainship of Para in Brazil, si tuate at the mouth of the river Guanapu. 
|ARUG, a river of the province and government of Choco in the kingdom of Tierra Firme ; it rises in the mountains of Abide, runs w. and enters the Paganagandi. 
|ARUI, a large river of the province of Gua yana and government of Cumana. It has its origin from a border or line of serrania, lying 14; leagues from the mouth at which it enters the Ori noco. It is navigable in canoes as far as a violent current or waterfall, caused by a heap of stones, and which makes the water to rush with such a noise in the winter time as to be heard at two leagues distance. In its mid course it receives on the w. the river Camurica, which runs between the port and fortification of Muitacu and the settlement of Guazaiparo, of the religious observers of St. Francis of Piritu. Its shores are inhabited by Charibbes Indians. 
Auui, a small river of the island and govern ment of Trinidad, which runs s. and enters the bay of Chaguaramas by the point of La Galera. 
|ARUNI, an ancient province of Cuzcoin Peru, bounded by the province of Collaguas on the w. and s. by the llanuras or plains of Arequipa. It was conquered and united to the empire by Malta Capac, fourth Emperor. 
|ARUNDEL, a county of the province and co lony of Maryland. See ANA. 
|ARUNDUL, a settlement of the island of Barbadoes, in the district and parish of Santiago, on the w. coast. 
|ARUNDEL, a township in York county, dis trict of Maine, containing 145 inhabitants. It lies between cape Porpoise and Biddeford, on the n. e. on Saco river, 21 miles n. e. from York, and 96 n. e. from Boston. 
|ARUPORECAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, lately discovered to the n. w. of the province of the Chiquitos ; though of them as yet but little is known. 
|ASANCOTO, a settlement of the province and corrcgimiento of Chimbo in the kingdom of Quito. It is of a cold temperature, inhabited by Indians and JMiisteeS) who are for the most part muleteers, and who carry to the neighbouring provinces flour, seeds, baizes, and other productions, and take in exchange wine, brandy, salt, cotton, fish, and oil ; this traffic being carried on only in the summer. 
|ASANGARO, a province and corregimiento of the kingdom of Peru, bounded n.e. and e. by the province of Carabaya ; s. e, and s. by that of Larecaxa ; s. w. by that of Paucarcolla and the lake Chucuito ; by the w. and n. w. by the pro vince of Larnpa. It is of very small extent, being only 20 leagues in length, and as many in breadth. Its figure is very irregular, its temperature is very cold, and consequently produces little else than potatoes. W hen these are destroyed by frost, as is the case some years, the Indians endure great privations, and are forced to seek food in the province of Larecaxa. This province abounds greatly in cattle, from the hides and fat of which, as well as from some herds of swine, it derives its principal source of commerce. There is in its district a fine fresh water lake, from whence it is provided with salt. The river of the greatest con sideration is that which bears its name, and which empties itself into the lake Chucuito. The inha bitants amount barely to 3000 ; they are divided into 11 settlements ; and the amount of its repartimiento was reputed at 114,500 dollars. 
The names of the J5 settlements of this juris diction are, , 
The Capital, Arapa, 
Asilto, Saman, 
Cominaca, Putina, 
Munani, Ananea, 
Santiago de Papuja, Betanzos, 
Achaya, Taraco, 
Chupa, Pusi. 
Poto, 
The capital settlement is situate on the shore of the lake Chucuito on the n. part, and at the mouth of the river of its name. The above river rises close to the settlement of Sayani, on the e. part, and runs s. till it enters the above-mentioned lake. ASCATLAN, a settlement of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tepactitlan in the kingdom and bishopric of Nueva Galicia, situate eight leagues to the s. of its capital. 
|ASCENSION, NUESTRA SENORA DE LA, a capital city of the island and government of Mar garita, founded by Martin Villalobos in 1525. Although small, it was formerly of much con
A S II 
103 
sideration, on account of i(s fine pearl fisheries, from which it carried on a great commerce, but which are now entirely abandoned. It has a very good parish church, convents of monks of St. Francis and St. Dominic, an hospital, and two her mitages. Two leagues distant from the coast. It is called Ascencion, in honour of the virgin, who is its patron. It was invaded by the French in the war at the close of the past century, when they destroyed and burnt the hospital and hermitage of Santa Lucia, and of which the walls alone were to be seen in 1762. It has, contiguous to the convent of St. Francis, a chapel, with the title of Nuestra Senora de la Soledad, and the two hermitages with the titles of Nuestra Senora de la Consolation and of San Pedro Martyr. 
|ASCENSION, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Cuyo in the kingdom of Chile, to the 5. e. of the city of San Juan de la Frontera. 
|ASCENSION, another, a small settlement or ward of the head settlement of the district of Zumpahuacan, and alcaldia mayor of Marinalco, in Nueva Espafia, 
|ASCEWSION, a small island of the Atlantic sea, near the coast of Brazil, in the province and cap tainship of Espiritu Santo, also called De la Trini dad. It is somewhat to the w. of the island of Martin Vaez, and to the n. w. to the w. of that of Dos Picos. It is half a league long from s. to n. and at that point it takes the form of a small mountain, in the figure of a truncated cone. All its coast is surrounded by cliffs and hidden rocks, against which the sea beats with fury. It abounds in fresh water, which runs from various fountains. Although it belongs to the Portuguese, it is not inhabited ; its situation is in Lat. 20 30 s. Long. 29 9 w. 
|ASCENSION, a bay on the coast of the province and government of Louisiana, between the N. cape and the river Missisippi. 
|ASCENSION, another very large, beautiful, and convenient bay, on the coast of the province and government of Yucatan, opposite the shoal of Quita Suenos. 
|ASCENSION, a river of the kingdom of Nuevo Mexico, which runs from n. to s. and is of little note. 
|ASCHEPOU, a river of the province and colony of Georgia. It runs e. then turns to the s. and enters the sea between the rivers Chia and Pom pon. 
|ASHBURNHAM, formerly Dorchester Cana da, lies in Worcester county, Massachusetts, 30 miles n. of Worcester, and 54 from Boston ; was incorporated in 1765, and contains 951 inhabitants. 
104 
It stands upon the height of land &lt;. of Connecticut river, and w. of Merrimack, on the banks of Little Naukheag. In this township is a white sand, equal in fineness to that at cape Ann, and which, it is judged, would make fine glass. 
|ASH BY, a township in Middlesex county, Massachusetts, 50 miles n. w. from Boston, con taining 751 inhabitants. 
ASI1CUTNEY, or ASACUTNEY, a mountain in Vermont, being partly in the townships of Windsor and \Yeathersfield, and opposite Claremout on Sugar river, in New Hampshire state. It is 2031 feet above the sea, and 1732 above high water in Connecticut river, which glides by its e. side. 
|ASH FIELD, a township in Hampshire county, Massachusetts, about 15 miles n. w. of North ampton, and 117 w. from Bost&n, containing 1459 inhabitants. 
|ASH FORD, a township in Windham county, Connecticut, settled from Maryborough in Massa chusetts, and was incorporated in 1710. It lies about 38 miles n. e. from Hartford, and 76 s. w. from Boston. 
AsHFoitD, NEW, a township in Berkshire county, Massachusetts, 155 miles w. from Boston, containing 460 inhabitants. 
|ASHLEY, a river of the province and colony of Georgia. It rises from pools formed by certain springs, runs s. e. and enters the sea. 
|ASHLY, a large and abundant river of the province and colony of Carolina. It is divided into two arms ; the one towards the s. preserves its name, and that towards the n. takes the name of Copper. 
|ASH MOT, the principal harbour in isle Madame, which is dependent on Cape Breton. See BRETON, CAFE. 
|ASHUELOT, or ASHWILLET, a small river, having a number of branches, whose most distant source is at the n. end of the Sunapee mountains in New Hampshire. It runs s. w. through part of Cheshire county. Below Winchester it runs w. by n. and empties into Connecticut river at H insdale. 
A Si A, a settlement of the province and correvimiento of Canete in Peru, situate on the sea coast. 
|ASIA, an island of this province and corregimientO) near the coast. 
|ASIA, a point of land or extremity of the coast, also of the said province. 
|ASIENTOS, a sett lenient of Indians of the kingdom of Nueva Galicia. 
|ASPOTAGOEN Mountain. This high land 
|ASS 
lies on the promontory that separates Mahone from Margaret s bay, on the coast of Nova Scotia. It is seen at a great distance from the offing, and is the land generally made by the ships bound from Europe and the West Indies to Halifax. The summit is about 500 feet above the level of the sea. 
|ASSA, a small river of the province and govern ment of Guayana, or Nueva Andalucia. It rises from two streams in the country of the ferocious Charibbec Indians, and enters Ami on the n. side. 
|ASSABET, a rivulet which rises in Grafton, "Worcester county, Massachusetts, and runs . e. into Merrimack river. 
|ASSAPARA, a small island formed by the river Aropa, at its mouth, by which it enters the Orinoco on the n. side. It is not so large as Walter describes it, since it is a little less than a mile in length, and its widest part does not exceed 180 feet. It is somewhat elevated and covered with branching trees, but uninhabited. 
|ASSEMPOLI, a large lake of N. America, abounding in whales. Some believe that it has a communication with the sea. [There is no such name in the modern maps. It is probably th same as Winnepeg lake. 
|ASSERRADORES, a settlement of the island of Cuba, on the s. coast, and near a tolerably good port. 
|ASSERRADORES, another settlement of the pro vince and government of Nicaragua in the king dom of Guatemala, situate on the coast of the S. sea, and close upon the port of Posesiones. 
|ASSETEACI, a small river of the province and colony of Maryland. It runs e. and enters th sea. 
|ASSILLO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Asangaro in Peru. It has a veryabundant lead mine, by which it has a great com merce with the other provinces. It is situate on the shore of the great lake Chucuito, on the n. part. 
|ASSINAIS, a settlement of the missions which belonged to the order of St. Francis, in the pro vince of Texas in Nueva Espana. It is situate on the shore of the river Trinidad. 
|ASSINIBOILS, or ASSIN JBOELS, a river and lake in the n. w. part of N. America, spoken of by some geographers, though not found in modern maps. It is probably the same as Win nepeg. 
|ASSINIBOLESES, a nation of barbarous Indians who inhabit the forests and wilds of Ca nada, whose customs are but little known. 
|ASSORIA, a small river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas, in the Portuguese pos session
. It rises in the territory of the Naunas Indians, runs w. and enters the Maranon, close to the Imato, and opposite the mouth of the Gran Caqueta. 
|ASSUMPCION, or ASSUMPTION. See ASUN CION. 
|ASSUMPTION River, in New York, falls in from the e. into lake Ontario, after a n. w. and w. course of about 28 miles, 5 miles s. e. from Ga verse. 
|ASTCHIKOUNIPI, a vast lake in New Biitain, abounding with whales, and supposed to communicate with the N. sea. 
|ASTILLANO, a settlement of the province and government of Maracaibo, situate on the w. shore of the lake of this name. 
|ASTILLERO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Itata in the kingdom of Chile j situate at the mouth of the river Maule. 
|ASTOBAMBAS, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Caxatambo in Peru, annexed to the curacy of its capital. ASTORES. See the article SANTA LUCIA. ASTORGA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Rancagua in the kingdom of Chile, near the large lake Pepeta. 
|ASUAI, PARAMO PE, a snowy mountain of the Cordillera of the kingdom of Quito ; one of those which form the cordillera in the road to Cuenca. When it is covered with snow, its cold renders it impervious, and this season is called u de paramo," (desert), since then there is a constant fall of snow, or small sleet, accompanied with a sharp wind. Its skirts abound in marshes, which render the road very dangerous to travellers, obliging them to wait for the time when it may be passed with safety, lest they should, as has happened to some adventurers, perish in the attempt. In its vicinity is an estate called La Capilla de Asuai. 
|ASUNCION DEL PARAGUAY, a capital city of the province and government of this name, founded in 1535 by Juan de Salazar y Espinoza, by order of Don Pedro de Mendoza, udelantado and governor of the province, on the e. shore of the river Paraguay, and upon a commodious and beautiful spot. It is the head seat of a bishopric, erected in 1547, its first bishop having been Don Fray Juan de los Barros, of the order of St. Fran cis. It has a beautiful cathedral church, three parish churches, one the mother church, another with the title of NuestraSenora de la Anunciacion, and the third called De San Bias, for the Indians ; four convents of monks of St. Dominic, St. Francis, 
|VOL. I. 
105 
of Recoletans, and of the order of La Merced. It had also a college of the Jesuits, and a monastery of nuns of La Ensenanza. It is of a mild and salutary temperature ; its inhabitants, although they do not amount to more than 400, form a part of more than 6000 who live out of the city. In fact, the whole of the province is peopled by messuages or small estates, some of which are called estancias, in which, there being large tracts of pasture land, are bred cattle of all sorts, as cows, sheep, goats, horses, mules, and asses ; others are called ckacras, and in these is cultivated an abundance of wheat, maize, sugar, tobacco, cotton, yucas, mandicocct) potatoes and other vegetables, and garden herbs. The greater part of the in habitants dwell in these estates ; and in the valleys of Pirebebuy and Carapegua are two parishes; also in some more civilized valleys, are different chapels of ease, in which the inhabitants hear mass, but on the particular festivals they go to the city. It was nearly totally destoyed by fire in 1543, the greater part of its houses having been built of wood, and many of its inhabitants perished in its ashes. In its district are the nations of the Guatataes, Mogolues, and Guananaquaes Indians, all of whom are Christians ; also the celebrated mis sions that were held and formed here by the regu lars of the abolished society of Jesuits. Lonff. 57 37 , Lat. 25 16 *. 
|ASUNCION, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of Tlapacoya, and alcaldia mayor of Quatro Villas, in Nueva Espana. It contains 15 families of Indians, who occupy themselves in the culture and commerce of certain grain, seeds, and fruits, and in cutting wood. Two leagues to the n. of its head settlement. &gt; 
|ASUNCION, another, with the dedicatory title of Santa Maria, in the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Izucar in the same king dom. It contains 147 families of Indians, includ ing those of a ward in its vicinity : it is one league n. of its head settlement. 
|ASUNCION, another, of the province and cor regimiento of Angaraes in Peru, annexed to the curacy of San Sebastian. 
|ASUNCION, another, of the province and corre gimiento of Caxamarca in the same kingdom. 
|ASUNCION, another, of the missions which be longed to the Jesuits, situate on the shore of the Casanare. 
|ASUNCION, another, a small settlement united to that of Tequistlan, of the alcaldia mayor of Theotihuacan in Nueva Espana. 
|ASUNCION, another, with the surname of Tetel
106 
|ATA 
macingo, in the head settlement of the district of Huitepec, and alcaldia mayor of Cuenavaca, in the same kingdom, with 19 families of Indians. 
|ASUNCION, another, of the head settlement of the district of Zumpahuacan, and alcaldia mayor of Marinalco, in the same kingdom. 
|ASUNCION, another, which is the real of the gold mines in Brazil, situate on the shore of the river Tocantines, opposite the mouth of the Paratinga. 
|ASUNCION, an island of the gulf of St. Lawrence, in Canada or New France, at the entrance of that river ; very full of woods. The French possessed it from the peace of Utrecht, when it was ceded by the English, until the year 1757, at which time these returned, and made themselves masters of it. 
|ASUNCION, a bay and port of the N. sea, on the coast of Florida ; it is small and ill-adapted to large vessels, on which account it is abandoned, or at least only inhabited by some Indians. It lies between cape Lodo and the bay of Espiritu Santo. 
|ASUNCION, a small island of the N. sea, on the coast of California, and at a small distance from the same. 
|ASUNCION, a river of New France or Canada, which runs s. e. then turns s. and enters the St. Lawrence, opposite the island of Montreal. 
|ASUNCION, another, of the province of the Apa ches in Nuevo Mexico. It rises in the mountains of the sierra grande, runs from n. to s. and enters the river Salado, before this joins the Gila. 
|ASUNCION, another, a very abundant stream of the province and government of La Sonora. 
|ASUS, a river of the province and captainship of Espiritu Santo in Brazil. It rises in the sierra of the Carajes Indians, runs nearly due e. and enters the river of Las Esmeraldas, just after form ing a large cataract. 
|ATA, a small river of the province and govern ment of Cumana. It rises at the foot of the sierra of Imataca, runs s. and enters the Cuyuni on the ti. side. 
|ATABACA, a small river of the same province and government as the former. It rises n. of the Orinoco, opposite the canal and fort of Limones, runs s. and enters the canal of Aracoa. 
|ATABAPU, a large river of the province and government of Guayana in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. It rises in the centre of this province, between the rivers Negro and Orinoco, takes an e. course, receiving the waters of many others, and then turning n. enters with a most abundant stream into the Orinoco. 
|ATA 
|ATACAMA, a province and corrt
imietilo of Peru, bounded n. by the province of Arica ; n. e. by Lipes ; e. and s. e. by the territory! of Salta and jurisdiction of Tucuman ; s. where there is an unpeopled waste as far as Copiapo, by the king, dom of Chile ; and w. by the S. sea. It is divided into High and Low. The first is of a cold tempera ture, abounding in fruits of the sierra, in seeds and potatoes. In the Cordillera are numerous flocks of ostriches and vicunas 9 which the Indians hunt, selling their skins and eating their flesh, which is tender and well-tasted. The bezoar-stone is also found here. Although the aforesaid animals are extremely nimble, they are nevertheless hunted with great ease ; and it is performed in this as well as in other provinces by simply fixing upright, by means of stones, some small sticks of about two yards long, in a narrow pass ; and attaching to each a thread or cord, they tie at small distances pieces of coloured wool, which is moved about by the wind. The trap being thus prepared, the hunters endeavour to frighten the vicunas from different parts into this valley, where, as soon as they arrive, being completely overcome with terror at the bits of wool, the whole of the troop remain prisoners, this trifling barrier forming an insurmountable obstacle to their escape. The hunters then make use of a cord, somewhat more than a yard long, having a stone attached to the extremity, which they sling round the feet of the vicunas, which being thus fast entangled, are ea sily taken. If, by accident, an huanuco is found amongst the troop, the whole are lost, for he im mediately darts through the barrier, and the rest follow him. This province is not without its gold and silver mines ; but they are not regularly work ed. It has many springs of warm water, and a lake called Blanca, abounding in salt, another called Agul, a league and an half long, which is as salt as the sea. The low province contains some ports on its coast, where some go to fish for con gers, to sell in the sierra. In the mountain named Conche, of the parish of Santa Barbara, and in other parts, are mines of copper, which they work and form into hammers, to be carried to Potosi, or other parts where minerals are worked. Here are found veins of crystal of various colours, of jasper, talc, and copper, blue vitriol, and alum. This province is much in want of water. The most considerable river is that which runs down into the sea through the valley of Loa, serving there as a limit to this province and to that of Arica. Its inhabitants amount only to 2500. The capital is the settlement of S. Fran
|ATA 
|ATA 
107 
; and the other settlements are, Chiuchiu, Hiquina, 
Cobixa, Peine, 
Socaire, Caspana. 
cisco de Atacama Toconao, Antofagasta, Calama, Son cor, 
The desert of this province is a large unpeopled tract, dividing the kingdoms of Peru and Chile. It is a barren and sandy waste, upon which many Spaniards perished for want of water when it was first discovered. 
|ATACAMA, a port of this prorince, on the coast of the S. sea. It is small, but well frequented by lesser vessels employed in fishing for tolto, which abounds here, and which is a species of cod-fish. 
|ATACAMES, a settlement of the province and government of Esmeraldas in the kingdom of Quito, . with a good port in the S. sea. It is si tuated on a large barren spot, surrounded by lofty mountains, where the cold is so intense as to freeze people to death . It is near the tropic of Capricorn, and was once the capital of the pro vince. 
|ATACAPAS, a barbarous nation of Indians of Louisiana, who inhabit the sea-coast to the w. They are thus called because they are Charibbes, and in their own language their name signifies can nibals. Although they treat and have commu nications with the Spanish, these are nevertheless ignorant of their customs. The French have, however, persuaded them to leave off the barba rous custom of eating their fellow- creatures. [The district they live in is called after them. Their village is about 25 miles to the westward of the Attakapa church, towards Quelqueshoe. Their number of men is about 50 ; but some Tunicas and Humas, who have married in their nation, and live with them, make them altogether about 80. They are peaceable and friendly to every body ; labour occasionally for the white inhabitants ; raise their own corn ; have cattle and hogs. Their language and the Carankouas is the same. They dwelt near where they now live, when that part of the country was first discovered by the French. 
|ATACHEO, a settlement of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tlaxsasalca in Nueva Espana. It contains 26 families of Indians, and in seven small settlements of its dis trict, 157 of Spaniards, Mustees. and Mulattoes, who trade in the productions of its estates. Four leagues to the e. s. e. of its capital. 
|ATACO, a settlement of the corregimiento of Coyaima in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of a hot temperature, abounding in cacao, sugar 
cane, maize, yucas, plantains, and neat-cattle, as also in mines and washing places (lavaderos) of gold, in which specie the tributes of the natives is paid. These should amount to 100 Indians, who go and collect only just as much as will de fray the tribute required. They are much given to inebriety, and this is no doubt the cause of their being so wretchedly poor. 
|ATALAYA, S. MIGUEL DE LA, a settlement of the province and government of Veragua in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, situate two leagues from the capital. 
|ATALAYA, S. MIGUEL DE LA, another setttement of the province and government of Buenos Ay res in Peru, situate on the shore of the Rio de la Plata, near its entrance. 
|ATALAYA, S. MIGUEL DE LA, another, of the province and government of Tucuman in the same kingdom, between the rivers Tala and Del JRosario. 
|ATALAYA, S. MIGUEL DE LA, another, which is the asiento of the silver mines of the alcaldia mayor of Guanajuato, and the bishopric of Mechoacan, in Nueva Espana. 
|ATALAYAS, SANTIAGO DE LAS, a capital cify of the province and government of San Juan de los Llanos in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It was founded by Gonzalo Ximenes de Quesada, when, from an eminence, he discovered those ex tensive llanuras in 1541, as he was returning from the search after the imaginary province of Dorado. It was quickly depopulated, and was afterwards founded by the Governor Ancizo on the banks of of the river called Agua-Mena; on the fertile plains of which grow many trees of exquisite fruits, and among the rest, the leche-miel, which is like a large grape, divided into two parts by a slender film : in the one is included a juice similar to milk (leche), and in the other a juice similar to very delicate honey (miel). It is somewhat of an un healthy and hot temperature, abounding in fruits peculiar to the climate. It contains 400 house keepers, and is nine leagues from the city of Pore. 
|ATANARI, SAN JOAQUIN DE, a settlement of the missions which belonged to the regulars of the company of Jesuits, in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra nada, founded by the Indians of the Achagua na tion in 1666, but abandoned three years after wards, on account of the invasions which it re peatedly experienced from the Charibbee Indians. 
|ATANARI, SAN JOAQUIN DE, a large and navigable river of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, which enters the Mota. Its shores are inhabited by Indians of the nation of Achagua. p 2 
108 
|ATE 
|ATANCAMA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Aimaraez in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Lambrama. 
|ATA PALO, a settlement of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tinguindin in Nueva Espana. It contains 23 families of Indians, well skilled in the sowing of wheat and maize, and in the cultivation of many fruits of that region . Four leagues to the w. of its capital. 
|ATAPARAN. See MAZARRONI. 
|ATAPIRIRE, a settlement of the province of Barcelona, and government of Cumana, in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, one of the missions which belonged to the order of St. Francis de Piritu, and founded in 1749. Although it belongs to the aforesaid province, it is in the province of Guayana. 
|ATAPSI, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Tucuman, in the jurisdiction of the city of Salta, and annexed to the curacy of Chiquiana. 
|ATARA, a river of the province and govern ment of Choco in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. It runs s. then w. and enters the Cauca. 
|ATASIS, a settlement of Indians of the pro vince and colony of Georgia, situate on the shore of the river Apalache. 
|ATAVILLOS, a nation of Indians of Peru, converted to the Catholic faith. It was discovered and subjected by Don Francisco Pizarro, who wns allowed the title of Marquis de los Atavillos by the Emperor Charles V. These Indians dwell in the province of Jauja, and work with nicety all kinds of woollen manufactures. They are of a lively and docile disposition, and the whole of the above province is peopled by them. 
|ATAVILLOS, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Canta in Peru, with the deno mination of Atavillos Altos, to distinguish it from the other in the same province, and which is call ed Atavillos Baxos. 
|PATCH I KOUNIPI, a lake in Labrador, which sends its waters s. into St. Lawrence river, through a connected chain of small lakes. 
|ATEMANICA, a settlement of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Juchipela. It has a considerable population of Spaniards, but the greater part consists in Mustees and Indians, some of whom reside in the large estates in its district, such as those of Milpillas, Caxas, Estanzuela, Baez, Teresa, and Totolotalco, which abound in vegetable productions and in cattle. It is seven leagues from the real of the mines of Mesquital. 
|ATE 
|ATEMAXAQUE, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of Amaqueca, and alcaldia mayor of Zayula, in Nueva Espana, situate on the skirt of a mountain. It is of a cold temperature, and contains 112 families of Indians, who trade in the bark of trees. Six leagues from its head settlement. 
|ATEMPA, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Tenzitlan in Nueva Espafia. It contains 248 families of Indians, and is nine leagues to the s. w. of its capital. 
|ATEMPA, another settlement of the head settle ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Zochicoatlan in the same kingdom, situate in a hollow, and surrounded by very rugged mountaias. It contains 43 families of Indians, and is 14 leagues to the w. of its capital. 
|ATEN, SAN ANTONIO DE, a settlement of the missions belonging to the monks of St. Francis, in the province of Apolabamba in Peru. 
|ATENGO, SAN SALVADOR DE, a settlement of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tezcuco in Nueva Espana, situate on the shore of the lake of Mexico. It contains 196 families of Indians, who trade in salt, wool, maize, fruits, and seeds. It is half a league to the n. of its capital. 
|ATENGO, another, with the dedicatory title of Santa Maria, in the head settlement of the district of Mizquiaguala, and alcaldia mayor of Tepetango, in the same kingdom. It contains 18 families of Indians. 
|ATENGO, another, with the dedicatory title of San Mateo. It is the head settlement of the dis trict of the alcaldia mayor of Metepec in the same kingdom, and contains 280 families of Indians. 
|ATENGO, another, a head settlement of the dis trict of the alcaldia mayor of Chilapa in the same kingdom. It contains 70 families of Indians, and is distant five leagues from the settlement of Toliman. 
|ATENGO, another, of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Autlan in the same kingdom, with 33 families of Indians, who gather seeds and fruits in abundance. It is 39 leagues to the s. with an inclination to the w. of its head settlement. 
|ATENGUILLO, a settlement of the head settle ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Huachinango in Nueva Espana, situate in the s. part of that district. 
|ATTEPEC, SAN JUAN DE, a settlement of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Teocuilco in Nueva Espana. It is of a mild 
A T 1 
and somewhat moist temperature, contains 88 fa milies of Indians, and is three leagues directly s. e. of its capital. 
|ATEQUARO, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Valladolid in Nueva Espana, near its capital. 
|ATEZCAPO, SAN JUAN DE, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of San Francisco del Valle, and alcaldia mayor of Zultepec, in Nu eva Espana, situate on a spacious plain. It con tains 50 families of Indians, and is six leagues to the e. of its capital. 
|ATHAPESCOW Lake. See ARATHAPEScow and SLAVE Lakes. 
|ATHENS, a township in Windham county, Vermont, 32 miles n. e. from Bennington, and about six w. from Connecticut river, having 450 inhabitants. Sextons river, which rises in London derry passes, s. e. by Athens into the township of Westminster to Connecticut river. 
|ATHOL, a township in Worcester county, Massachusetts, containing 16,000 acres of land, very rocky and uneven, but well watered with rivers and streams. On these stand 4 grist-mills, six saw-mills, a fulling-mill, and a trip-hammer. It contains 848 inhabitants, is 35 miles n. v). from Worcester, and 72 from Boston. A medicinal spring, famed for its many virtues, issues out of a high bank on Miller s river, 20 feet above the sur face of the river. 
|ATICO, VALLE DE, a settlement of the pro vince and corregimiento of Cumana in Peru, an nexed to the curacy of Caraveli. 
|ATICO, MORIIO DE, a mountain on the coast of Peru, of the same province. 
|ATIGOUANTINES, a nation of Indians of New France in N. America, towards the 44 of lat. In their dwellings many families live toge ther, and the continual fires which they are obliged to make produce such a quantity of smoke that they are universally blind in old age. Their extravagant mode of living is similar to that of the other Indians, excepting that in their repasts, these give a decided preference to the eye of their victims, which they pluck out with the greatest avidity, avowing it to be a most precious morsel. After human flesh, they esteem most that of dogs. Their method of curing infirmity is not less pecu liar, and every one of them may practise as a phy sician, since the same remedy is observed as is given in Europe for the treatment of the bite of the tarantula, namely, the endeavouring to divert the patient by means of music and songs. It is not known that these Indians worship any deity, but through an impulse of terror they own a certain respect for the devil. They nevertheless believe 
109 
in the immortality of the soul, and promise them selves a place of jubilee and merriment in the other world, persuaded also that they shall there be united to their friends. 
|ATIMUEN-CUDIARA, a lake of the country of Las Amazonas. in the territory of the Portu guese, on the shore of the river Maranon, and formed by a channel of this river. 
|ATINGUI, a small river of the province and government of Paraguay ; it rises to the s. of the settlement of Nuestra Senora de Fe, runs s. and enters the Parana near the settlement of Santiago. 
|ATIPAC, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of Tepexpan, and alcaldia mayor of Theotihuacan, in Nueva Espana. It is of a cold temperature. 
|ATIQUIPA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Cumana in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Choler. In its district are large fertile hills of the same name, abounding in pastures, which feed numbers of large and small cattle, as well as mules and asses, which are its articles of commerce. It is near the sea, and has a small port or creek, in which abundance of fish are caught. Also a mountain called Morro de Atequipa. 
|ATIRA, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Paraguay, situate on the shore of the river of its name, opposite the city of Asuncion. 
AxiRA, a settlement of Indians, of the pro vince and government of Paraguay, about seven leagues e. of Asuncion. Lat. 25 16 45" s. Long. 57 14 w.~\ 
|ATITALAQUIA % a head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Tetepango in Nueva Espana. It is of a pleasant temperature, but ill provided with water. Its territory is peopled by estates and ranchos, in which are grown wheat, maize, seeds, and fruits ; but it is particularly famous for the breeding of small cattle for slaughter. Its natives are 200 families of Othomies Indians, and 30 of Spaniards, Mulattoes, and Mustces. Twenty-one leagues to the n. of Mexico. 
ATITAN, a head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Solola in the kingdom of Guatemala. 
|ATITLAN, a head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Villalta in Nueva Espana It is of a hot temperature, contains 171 families of Indians, and is 15 leagues to the e. of its capital. 
|ATKINSON, a township in Rockingham county, N. Hampshire, which was incorporated in 1767, and in 1775 contained 575 inhabitants, in 
110 
1790 only 479. It is distant 30 miles from Ports mouth, and has an academy which was founded in 1789 by the hon. N. Peabody, who endowed it with 1000 acres of land. In this township is a large meadow, wherein is an island of six or seven acres, which was formerly loaded with valuable pine timber and other forest wood. When the meadow is overflowed by means of an artifical dam, this island rises with the water, which is sometimes six feet. In a pond in the middle of the island there have been fish, which, when the meadow has been overflowed, have appeared there when the water has been drawn off, and the island settled to its usual place. The pond is now al most covered with verdure. In it a pole 50 feet long has disappeared without finding a bot tom. 
|ATLA, a small settlement or ward of the alcaldia mayor of Guauchinango in Nueva Espana, annexed to the curacy of Naupan. 
|ATLA, another settlement of the same alcaldia mayor, annexed to the curacy of Pahuatlan. 
|ATLACA, SAN JUAN DE, a settlement of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Orizaba in Nueva Espana, situate between two lofty hills. It is of a cold temperature, and con tains 28 families of Indians, whose trade consists in fattening herds of swine. Seven leagues to the s. s. e. of its capital. 
|ATLACAHUALOIA, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of Xonacatepec, and /ealdia mayor of Cuernavaca, in Nueva Espana. 
|ATLACHICHILCO, SAN AUGUSTIN DE, a head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Guaiacocotla in Nueya Espana. It contains 400 families of Indians, including those within the wards of its district ; and they are employed in the cultivation of the soil. 
|ATLACO, a head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Zayula in Nueva Espana, situ ate on the top of a hill, and of a cold tempe rature. It contains 60 families of Indians, and a convent or hospital of the order of St. Francis. Six leagues to the w. of its head settlement. 
|ATLAHUILCO, SAN MARTIN DE, a settle ment of the head settlement of the district of Thequilan, and alcaldia mayor of Orizaba, in Nueva Espana. It contains 110 families of Indians, who trade in seeds, tobacco, small cattle, and swine ; is six leagues from its head settlement, and situate at the foot of the sierra. 
|ATLAMA JACINGO, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of Atlistac, and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa, in Nueva Espana. It contains 42 families of Indians, whose only trade consists 
in the barter of some maize and fruits. It is two leagues to the w. s. w. of its head settlement. 
|ATLAMAXACZINGO DEI, MONTE, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Tlapa in Nueva Espana. It contains 85 families of TIapeneco* Indians, and is four leagues and a half to the s. of its capital. 
|ATLAMAZUQUE, a settlement of the alcal dia mayor of Tlapa in Nueva Espana. It contains 45 families of Indians, and is one league to the e. of its capital. 
|ATLAMULCO, SANTA MARIA DE, a settle ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Metepec in Nueva Espana. It contains 1235 families of Indians, including those of the wards of its district. 
|ATLANTIC OCEAN, The, separates America from Europe and Africa. See SEA. 
|ATLAPANALA, a small settlement or ward of the alcaldia mayor of Guauchinango in Nueva Espana, annexed to the curacy of Tlaola. 
|ATLAPULCO, SAN PEDRO DE, a head settle ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Metepec in Nueva Espana. It contains 290 families of Indians, and is five leagues to the w. s. w. of its capital. It is the head of its curacy, to which are annexed many other settlements. 
|ATLATLAUCA, an alcaldia mayor of Nueva Espana, in the province and bishopric of Oaxaca. It is the smallest population and jurisdiction of any district in this province, consisting only of two head settlements at a small distance from each other. It is at the same time the most barren in produc tions and commerce ; on which account it is the last in reputation in the kingdom, and is thought but little of, since it yields scarcely sufficient to sup ply its own necessities. The capital has the same name. This is situate in a hot temperature, and contains 78 families of Zapotecas Indians. The abundant stream of the Cuicatlan passes through its vicinity ; but such is the sterility of the soil, that no advantage can be derived from its waters. It, in short, produces nothing but a moderate quantity of maize. It is 70 leagues s. e. of Mexico. 
|ATLATLAUCA, with the dedicatory title of San Esteven, another head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Tepozcolula in the same kingdom, situale upon a mountain covered with lofty trees ; and from these the inhabitants, who consist of 108 families of Indians, cut tablets and planks, which, with seeds and some cotton manu factures, constitute their commerce. Eight league* s. w. of its capital. ATLATLAUCA, a head settlement of the district 
of the alcaldia mayor of Tenango del Valle in the same kingdom. It contains 165 families of Indians. 
|ATLATITLA, SAN MIGUEL DE, a head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Chalco in Nueva Espana. It contains 181 fami lies, and a convent of monks of St. Dominic*. It is five leagues to the s. | to the *. w. of its capi tal. 
|ATLATONGO, SANTIAGO DE, a settlement of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tezcoco in Nueva Espana, annexed to that of Acolman, from whence it lies a quarter of a league to the n. It contains 111 families of Indians, and four of Spaniards. 
|ATLEBOROUGH, an English settlement in the province and colony of Massachusetts, at the mouth of the river Patucket. 
|ATLIACAN, a settlement of the head settle ment of the district of Tixtlan in Nueva Espana. It contains 180 families of Indians, and lies three leagues and a half from its capital. 
|ATLISTAC, a head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa in Nueva Espana. It has a convent of Agustin monks, and 66 fami lies of Indians, whose principal commerce con sists in cotton, which it yields in abundance, and in the fabricating of blankets, cloths, huapiles, and other vestments. It is six leagues to the w. of its capital. 
|ATLIXCO, a town of the intendancy of Puebla, in the kingdom of Nueva Espana, justly celebrated for the fineness of its climate, great fertility, and savoury fruits with which it abounds, especially the anona cheremolia, Lin. (chilimoyd), and several sorts of passiflores (parchas) produced in the environs. 
a ATOCHA, Lake of, in the province and cap tainship of Rey in Brazil. It is at the extremity of the coast formed by the Rio de la Plata. 
|ATOGUI, a river of the province and cap tainship of Seara in Brazil, which runs n. and enters the Parana. 
|ATOKAS, a small river of New France, or Canada. It runs n. and enters lake Superior, be tween the rivers Probavie and de Fond. 
|ATOLE, a large lake of the province and go vernment of Maracaibo, formed by different rivers, and principally by the Pampano and Olaga. It afterwards joins the grand lake Maracaibo, through a narrow mouth called De las Piraguas ; in it are many small islands. 
|ATOLUA, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Teazitlau in Nueva Espana. It contains 47 
111 
families of Indians, and is half a league n. of its capital. 
|ATONTAQUI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Otavolo in the kingdom of Quito. 
.ATOTONILCAO, a head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Tulanzingo in Nueva Espana. It has a convent of Agustin monks, 265 families of Indians, and some Spa niards, Mulattoes, and Mustees, who occupy themselves in tilling and cultivating the land for fruits and seeds. Seven leagues n. e. of its capi tal. 
|ATOTONILCAO, another settlement, in the head settlement of the district of Atitalaquia, and alcal dia mayor of Tepetango, in the same kingdom, containing 150 families of Indians. 
|ATOTONILCAO, another, of the head settlement of the district of Xonacatepec, and alcaldia mayor of Cuernavaca, in the same kingdom. There still remains here a bath which was built by the order of Herman Cortes, which is raised on arches, and with such ingenuity that the water can be made deep or shallow at will. The water it crystalline and pure, and a cure for many infir mities. 
|ATOTONILCAO, another, of the same head settlement of th district and alcaldia mayor as the former. 
|ATOTONILCAO, another, of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tlaxomulco in the same kingdom. It contains a convent of monks of St. Francis. 
|ATOTONILCAO, another, of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of La Barca in the kingdom of Nueva Galicia. It has a large population of Indians, Mustees, and Mulattoes, who breed large and small cattle, and cultivate wheat and other grain. In its district are many estates, as San Andres la Cienega, Milpillas, Sapote, and Aio. It is 12 leagues to the n. e. of its capital. 
|ATOTONILCAO, another, ofthe head settlement of the district of Amaqueca, and alcaldia mayor of Zayula, in the same kingdom. It contains 120 families of Indians, and lies four leagues n. of its head settlement. 
|ATOTONILCAO, another, ofthe missions belong ing to the monks of St. Francis, in the province of Tepeguana, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya. It is five leagues from the real of the mines and the settlement of Parral. 
|ATOFAQUE, a settlement ofthe head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Za
112 
R 
yala in Nueva Espana, situate in a valley of an agreeable temperature. It contains 50 families of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattoes, 150 of Indians, and a convent of monks of St. Francis. Four leagues to the e. of its capital. 
|ATOYAQUE, another, with the dedicatory title of La Concepcion, the head settlement of the dis trict of the alcaldia mayor of Tepozcolula, in the province and bishopric of Oaxaca in the same kingdom. It is of a hot temperature, situate near the large river of its name, which fertilizes the greater part of the territory, and in it, at certain seasons, trout are caught and carried to be sold in the capital of the province, where they are held in high estimation, their price varying in proportion to their scarcity. It produces an infi nite quantity of cotton, the manufacture of which is the principal source of commerce to the natives, who consist of 29 families of Indians. Fifteen leagues to the s. with a slight inclination to the w. of its capital. 
|ATOYAQUE, another, formerly called Maxaltepec, of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Zacatula. It contains 175 fami lies of Indians, including those of the wards of its district. 
|ATOYAQUE, another, ahead settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Xicayan in the same kingdom. It contains 172 families of Indians, who trade in cotton and seeds. Nine leagues n. w. of its capital. 
|ATOYAQUE, a deep and large river in Mexico, or New Spain. On it is the famous natural bridge, called Ponti di Dio, 100 miles s. e. of Mexico, over which coaches and carriages conveniently pass. 
|ATOYAQUILLO, a head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Tepozcolula in Nueva Espana, of the province and bishopric of Oaxaca. It is of a hot temperature, and contains 70 families of Indians, who trade in woven cotton manufactures, bartering them for salt found on the coast of Xicayan. Twenty-four leagues s. w. of its capital. 
|ATRATO, a large and abundant river of the province and government of Dfirien in the king dom of Tierra Firme. It has its origin and source in the mountains of the province of Choco, from two lakes which form the rivers Quito and San Pablo, which latter become immediately united. It runs nearly straight from s. to n. for more than 95 leagues, and empties itself into the N. sea ; collecting in its course the waters of the Tigre, Torren, and Pequest, the waters of the lake 
Luina, and several other streams of such magni tude as to cause it to form a mouth upwards of five leagues broad, in the great bay or gulph called Darien, near the limits which divide the two governments and jurisdictions of Cartagena and Pamana. This river, which in that country is also known by the names of Darien and Choco, is navigable for many leagues ; but its navigation is prohibited on pain of death, without any ex ception whatever, in order to avoid any prejudice which might arise to the provinces of the Nuevo Reyno, by means of the facility with which this kingdom might be thus entered. Neverthless the viceroy of that kingdom, Don Manuel Guiriol, proposed that this passage should be free and open, though with the proper precautions against any probable mischief. Its sands abound with gold. Just at its entrance into the sea, are 17 small islands lying in two lines. Its mouth is in lat. 8 
2 77. 
|ATRIS, a very fertile valley of the province and government of Quito, belonging to the juris diction of Pasto, and where this city was founded. It is of a cold temperature, and is washed by the river Pascamayu on the e. : it abounds in pastures and cattle. 
|ATRISCO, or CARRION, a capital town of the alcaldia mayor and jurisdiction of its name in Nueva Espana. It is very beautiful and large, abounding in streams, which irrigate the whole of its district and render it agreeable both in appearance and fertility. It has two parishes, one for the Spaniards and another for the Indians ; five con vents of the religious orders of St. Fran ciscans, La Merced, San Juan de Dios, in which there is a good hospital and building for con valescents, of barefooted Carmelites, and of the nuns of Santa Clara ; different chapels and her mitages in the wards, which are peopled by Indians, and of which the most extensive is that called De los Solares, a small population living in orchards and gardens which are filled with flowers, fruits, and vegetables ; the same charming spot being rendered fertile by different streams encom passing it on all sides, and affording refresh ment and recreation to the inhabitants of the ca pital, who amount to 400 families of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattoes, (from whom three com panies of militia have been formed), and also to 1250 families of Mexican Indians. The valley of Atrisco, celebrated for its beauty and fertility, has cultivated estates which produce immense abundance of wheat, maize, barley, and other grains, by which other provinces are supplied, 
113 
t!ire being the principal sources of trade in this province; and although it is not without a sullicient quantity of flax and hemp, yet of these little is made ; nor indeed docs the small attention "which is paid to their cultivation, warrant the ex-, pedation of any considerable emolument to, be derived from them. In the estates are 150 families of Spaniards, and innumerable parties of Indians, who assist in their cultivation. It abounds also in large and small cattle, and its woods in hares, rabbits, partridges, and other birds. It is water ed by several large rivers, from which not only the estates, but also all the gardens of the greater part of the settlements of its district, derive great benefit. The Indians arc much given to the cul tivation of cotton, of which they make particu larly fine garments, and indeed they are natu rally very indusrious. Thirty leagues s. e. of Mexico. 
The settlements of this jurisdiction are, Zoyatlitlanapa, Amecaque, 
Tianguismanalco, SanAndrcsdeCalpa. 
Guaquechula, 
|ATRISCO, another town of the* same name, in the kingdom of Mexico. 
|ATROPICHE, a small river of the province and government of Guayana, or Nueva Andalucia. It runs from s. to n. and enters the Orinoco, on the side of the new city of San Gabriel de Guayana. 
|ATTAKAPAS. See ATACAPAS. f ATTLEBOROUGfl. See ARTLEBURGH. ATUJNCANAK, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Cuenca in the kingdom of Quito. It is of an agreeable and healthy tempe rature, abounding in productions, especially in sugar-canes and cochineal. In the lime of the IncasofPeru, it was a very wealthy population, having a temple dedicated to the sun, a palace and a fort, of which the ruins still remain, at the distance of two leagues towards the n. and which is the most regular, capacious, and well constructed of any in that kingdom. At the entrance of this tort, and in the front, is a small river, which runs close up to its walls ; and on the opposite side it is terminated by a moderately lofty hill, and hemmed in by a strong wall. Nearly in the centre is a turret of an oval figure, which rises on the interior of the wall to about the height of two toises, and to six or eight on the exterior. In the middle of it is a square inclosed by walls, which, towards the part which looks into the country, has all its angles touching the circum ference of the oval, without leaving any pass; and there is, indeed, nothing left on the other side 
|VOL. I. 
save a very narrow way. In the middle of the square is a division forming two small apartments, which have no cornmunieaiioii with each other; and they arc entered by a door placed at the side opposite the division. In the sides which front the country are small holes, which served as a watch ing place, and where, to all appearance, a guard used to be mounted. Close upon the exterior of this oval runs the wall, to the extent of 40 toises on the left hand, and 25 on the right. This wall afterwards becomes doubled, forming different irregular angles, and including a large space. Close to the rocky place from which the river has its source, is a gate or entrance, and near to this runs a narrow pass, where two persons only can go abreast ; and this pass, when it comes to the opposite wall, turns about and leads to the tower, being still of the t,ame breadth. It afterwards inclines rather towards the rocky place, but at length widening, forms an half pl-iin before the same tower. In this narrow pass, at the distance of three feet from each other, are disposed niches, formed in the solid wall like sentry boxes, and in another part of the wall are two gates, which are capable of admitting very large stores and accom modations for the lodging of the troops. Tli.3 interior space is formed into various compartments, and from the height of the walls, the gates, and the nice economy which prevails, the whole fabric seems evidently to have been the habitation of some prince. All the walls are full of holes, and there are many small stones of six or eight inches long, and three or four broad, jetting out from their sides, and which no doubt served as pegs, upon which the soldiers might hang up their arms. The whole of the wall is very thick, having a fine parapet and a deep ditch without, and a very capacious terrace within ; and although there is a way entirely round the top, it has only one en trance, namely, by means of a staircase close to the oval tower, which, after rising some steps, forms the main staircase for the tower itself. The structure, as well of the walls as of the interior buildings, is entirely of unequal stones of irregular figure ; but these are so neatly and so firmly put together, that it is scarcely possible to perceive where they are joined. Opposite this settlement, the Inca Atahualpa conquered his brother Huascar, and put to the sword 60,000 of his vassals. In its (listrict-towards the e. is an estate called Bueran. 
|ATUNCOLLA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Lam pa in Peru , at one league s distance from the great lake Titicaca, in which there is an island four leagues in circumference, 
114 
Z 
ami where arc to he seen vestiges of the palace of the Great Colin. Jt is of a triangular figure, and built of imshaperl stones, similar to the fort of Cuzco. This edifice was destroyed by the hands of some avaricious persons, who found in it con siderable hidden treasure. It was anciently the court of the aforesaid (ircut Colla, bul it is at pre sent the most wretched population of any in the province. 
|ATL NJAUXA, a settlement of the province rid cprrcsimiehio of .Jauxa in Peru. 
|ATUN QUILLACAS, a settlement of the pro vince and corrcginricnlo of Paria in Peru. 
|ATUXQLIXOS, a scttlemeiit of the province and government of Quixos and Macas in the King dom of Quito. 
|ATURES, a settlement of the missions which belonged to the Jesuits in the Orinoco. It is at pre sent under Use care of the Capuchin monks. 
|ATI:RI:S, t he Torrents of the Three "Water-falls of. The&gt;e are very tremendous, and at a small distance from each other, in the river Orinoco. They check the navigation here, and make it requisite for ves.*-els to be carried on men s shoulders by land. These falls arc 35 leagues from the mouth of the river. 
AT WOOD S Key, one of the uninhabited Ba hama i.-&gt;I:inds, situate in the Atlantic ocean, about ei-ht or ten leagues in a n.e. direction fromCrookcd i&gt;land,and about. 
.) due e. from the middle part of Long island. See BAHAMAS. 
AT/AT/A, SAN MATIAS DE, a settlement of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia in ci i/or of Guejozingp. Tt contains 24 families of Indians, and is situate to the e. of its capital. 
|ATZALAN, a head settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Xalapa in Nueva Espaila. This dis trict is bounded by that of TIacoIula, of the same jurisdiction : s. w. by that of Thepayahualco, to which belongs the extensive territory of Perote ; nnd from its being situated lower than this moun tain, its temperature is not so cold, although it is verv subject to fogs and dews. It abounds in fruits, seeds, tobacco, and fish called bobos, which are found in two rivers which run immediately by the settlement. Its population amounts to 70 families of Spaniards, including those of the wards of Santa Maria TIapacoya, vluch, for the most part, are under the care of Don Felipe Moteguma. The name of this settlement, which in the Mexican language signifies, " a population between two rivers," is derived from the aforesaid rivers, the largest of \vhich runs to the s. of it. It is a league and an half s. e. of Xalacingo. 
A fZOLA, a head settlement of the district of 
the akalriia mat/or of Ohicapa in Nneva Esprma, of the province and bishopric of Oaxaca. It is of a mild temperature, and abounds greatly in cochineal and seeds. It is inhabited by 
85 fami lies of Indians, comprehending tho.se of the wards of its district. Twelve leagues to the s. s. e. of its capital. 
|ATZOMPA, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Tlapa in Nueva Espana. It contains JJ6 families of Mexican Indians, including those of a ward in its vicinity, who are very much given to the culture of the soil, which produces in abun dance seeds, fruits, garden herbs, cochineal, nnd cotton. Seven leagues from the real of the mines of silver in the district of Alcozauca. 
AT/OMIM, another settlement of the same name, with the dedicatory title of Santa Maria, in the head settlement of the district of Cuilaya, and alcal dia mayor of Quatro Villas, in the same kingdom. It contains 143 families of Indians, who nre em ployed in the commerce of cochineal, seeds, fruits, coal, and bark of trees. It is little more than a league ;;. n\ of its head settlement. 
AT/OPAN,, SAN AGUSTIN nu, a settlement of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of (luejocingo in Nueva Espana. It con tains !27 families of Indians, and lies s. of its capital. 
|AUACA, a small river of the province and government of Guayana in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. Jt rises in the sierra of the country of the Macirinabis Indians, runs nearly due e. and enters the Cauca. 
|AUALOS, a settlement of the province arid government of Tucuman, in the jurisdiction of the city of Cordova, and kingdom of Peru. It lies upon a narrow strip of land or peninsula, formed by the river Primcro. 
|AUANA, a river of the province and govern ment ol Guayana, or Nueva Andalucia, in the king dom of Tierra Firme. It rises s. of the settlement of San Joseph de Mapoyes, runs s. and enters the Sipapu. 
|AUANDA, a settlement of the Portuguese, being a reduction of Indians of the missions of the Carmelite monks of that nation, in the province and country of the Arnazonas. It is on the shore of the river Negro, at the same mouth by which this is entered by the Nuisi. Mr. Bellin, in his maps, calls it the Anivida. 
|AUAIIA, a small river of the province and county, of the Amazonas. It runs from w. to e. for a small space, and enters the river Madera, above the \ aruba. 
a small river of the province and 
A tr E 
government of Guayana, or Nueya Andatucia, ia tJie kingdom of Tierra Firme. It rises in the scrrania of Parimc, runs e. forming a curve, and enters (lie river Parhne or Parnrna, near its source. 
|AUBIN, a s.nall island of the N. sea, close to the coast ot the island of Martinique, on the n. c. part, between the small river Salado and fort Trinidad. 
|AUCAIAMA, a settlement of the province and corregimienlo of Chancay in Pern, founded in 1551 ; in which is venerated a miraculous image of the Virgin del Rosario, which, with ornaments corresponding to it, were senl hither by the Empe ror Charles V. 
|AUCAMPI, a settlement of the province and correginuento of Yauyos in Peru, annexed to the curacy of its capital. 
|AUCIIJAPA, a settlement of the head settlement of the district and a. ca dia mayor of Tlapa in Nueva Espana. It contains 42 families of Indians, and is three leagues .v. of its capital. 
|AUCO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Yauyos in Peru, annexed to the curacy of its capital. 
|AUECIIICA, a settlement of the province of Guayana, and government of Cumana, one of the missions held here by the Catalauian Capuchin fathers ; situate on the shore of the river Cuiuni. 
|AUENARAC, a settlement of the province and government of Tucuman, in the jurisdiction of the city of Santiago del Estero, and kingdom of Peru, situate on the shore of the river Chorouioros. 
|AIJENDANO, LAG UNAS DE, lakes in the province and district of Itata, of the kingdom of Chile. They are nine in number, great and small, and are situate bctsveen the rivers Itata and Laxa. 
|AUENICO, a river of the province and govern ment of Quixos and Macas in the kingdom of Quito. It rises close to the settlement ot Yubal, runs from w. to e. and enters the Maranon. 
|AUES, an island of the N. sea, one of the Antilles, sitirite s. c. of Bonaire, l(j leagues from the coast of Venezuela, in thegulphTriste, or Coro. It is a league and a halt long, and very narrow, Laving before it some rocks, lying in the shape of a half-moon, on which, in the year 1678, the whole of the French squadron, commanded by Count d Estres, was wrecked. It has a large and convenient bay, and is called the island of Birds, (Isla de Ares), from its abounding with an infinite variety of them, and, as it were, destitute of in habitants, these consisting only of a few Dutch fishermen. Close to it is another very small island of the same name, and they are distinguished by the one being called Large and the other Small, In 
this there are some orange and lemon trees, but it is otherwise barren, and of a sandy and desert soil. Its circumference is about three leagues, and it also belongs to the Dutch. They are in long. 16, and lat. 11 56 n. 
|AUGARAS, a barbarous nation of Indians of the kingdom of Brazil, who inhabit the woods arid mountains which lie to the w. of the captains/tip of Puerto Seguro, of whom but little is known, and rare accounts been received. 
|AUGUSTA, a fort and establishment of the English, in the province and colony of Georgia, on the shore of the river Savannah ; it is the place of commerce whereto those residing in this province and that of Carolina resort, to carry on the traffic with the Indians, by means of the river, which is navigable in canoes. It is 230 miles distant from the mouth of that river, and has a good road which leads to the town of Cherokee, peopled by Indians of this nation. [Augusta, in the upper district of Georgia, was till lately the seat of go vernment. It is situated on a fine plain in Rich mond county, on the s, zo. bank of Savannah river, where it is near 500 yards broad, at a bend of the river ; 127 miles n. w. from Savan nah ; from Washington s. e. by e. and from Louisville s. zc. 50 miles; and 934 miles s. w. from Philadelphia. At the first settlement of the colony, General Oglethorpe erected a fort here for protecting the Indian trade, and hold ing treaties with the natives. In 1739 about 600 people separated themselves from the maritime settlements, and removed to its neighbourhood, to carry on a peltry trade with the Indians. Them were, however, but three or four houses in the town of Augusta in 1780, and in 1787 it contained 200. The country round it has an excellent soil, which, with its central situation, between the upper and lower countries, will bring it fast into importance. Lat. 33 19 n. Long. 80 46 zo.  
|AUGUSTA, a county of the province and colony of Virginia, sittnte between the mountains which divide it on the c. from Albemarie; bounded?/, by the territory of Lord Fairfax, and s. w. by the mountains. It is watered by different rivers ? which pass across the high road leading from Vir ginia to Maryland. [The soil is fertile, and the county contains 10,886 inhabitants,, including 1567 slaves. Here is a remarkable cascade, called the Falling spring. It is a branch of the James, where it is called Jackson s river, rising in the mountains 20 miles s. w. from the \Varru spring, or Hot spring, winch lies in lat. 38 13 ;?. long. 80 z0. At the Falling spring, the water falls 200 feet, which is about 50 feet higher than ihs 
no 
fall of Niagara. Between the sheet of wuter and the rock below, a mnn may walk across dry. The sheet of water is only 12 or 15 feet wide above, and somewhat wider below : it is broken in ils breadth in two or three places, but not at all in its height 
|AUGUSTINE, Cape ST. Sec AGUSTIV, SAN. 
|AUGUSTINE, ST. capital of E. Florida. See AGUSTIX. 
|AUGUSTINE S, Sr. a port and river on the coast of Labrador, near the straits of Bellisle and opposite St. John s bay, Newfoundland. There are two small islands in the harbour, and about two miles a. w. runs a chain of little islands, called St. Augustine s chain ; the outermost of which is a remarkable smooth rock. It is about 25 miles from Great Mccatina island. Lat. 5P J-i n. Long. 58 58 a. 
|AUGUSTINE S Square, Sr. a number of small islands on the coast of Labrador, in the gulph of St. Lawrence, the largest of which are from Shecatica bay on the n. e. to Outer island s. w. ; viz. Large, Sandy, and Outer islands. These are near the mouth of the St. Lawrence. 
|AUILA DE LOS COFANF.S, a city of the pro vince and government of Quixos y Macas in the kingdom of Quito. Its temperature is mild, and its soil fertile, but its natives cultivate only i/ucas, plantains, and maize, upon which they live. Its population is very scanty, and it scarcely deserves the name of one, owing to the invasions of the iniidel Indians, by whom it has been destroyed. It is on the shore of the river Suno, which enters the JVnpo, in lat. 28 s. 
|AUILA, a mountain of the serrania, which lies between the city of Caracas and the port of Guaira. It serves as a mark for pilots to know the port, since it is discernible at a great distance. It is called by the sailors the Ensillada de Caracas, from a fissure it has in it of the form of a saddle. 
AUIRAMAS, a settlement of the province and government of Popaytin in the kingdom of Quito. 
AUISADO, a settlement of the province and corrcgiuiiento of Chachapoyas in Peru, annexed to tiie curacy of Soritor. 
A UITAII UA, a very lofty mountain of the pro vince of Canelos in the kingdom of Quito, to the s. of Llanganate, arid n. of the river Pastaza. From its top run the rivers Alpayacu,Zhina, Chiuloaya, and Otalluc, which run from n. to s. and enter the Pastaza, in lat. 1 23 s. 
|AUIUPO, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Guayana, or Nueva Andalucia, situate on the shore of the river Caura, in the country of 4\iQ Paudacotos Indians. 
|AULLAGAS, a settlement of the province and corregimienlo of Ch ayanla in Peru. 
|AULLAGAS, a large lake of Peru, which is nine leagues distant from that of Potosi, and 28 from Ch ar eas. It is two leagues long, and four and a halt in cir cumference ; has no fish in it whatever ; and in its environs dwell the Anlhgas Indian?, from whom it takes its name. From this lake is formed the river Desagnadcro, which enters immediately into the lake Guanacache. 
|AULLAGAS, the nation of Indians aforesaid, who inhabit the .shores of the rivers Desaguadero and Tigre. It is not very numerous, nor is it much known. 
|AUNALOS, a river of the province and govern ment of Mamas in the kingdom of Quito. It rises in the territory which lies between the rivers Chambira and Tigre, runs e. forming an angle, and enters the latter, in lat. 2 6 s. 
|AUOYELES, an island of the river Colorado, in the province and government of Louisiana, near its entrance into the Mississippi, from the mouth of which it is 220 miles distant. 
|AUOYELES, a nation of Indians who inhabit the same province and government, on the shores of the river Colorado. They supply the province of Nucvo Mexico with mules, horses, and oxen, in such abundance, that they are commonly sold for the trifling sum of 20 pesetas (40 reals of silver) each. 
|AUQUILLA, a settlement of the province and carregimicnto of Vilcas Huaman in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Chuschi. 
|AUQUIMARCA, a settlement of the province and correginncnto of Chancay in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Paccho. 
|AURA, a town of the province and government of Maracubo in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, situate to the s. of the city of Truxillo, where the river Bocono has its source. 
|AUHAMBA, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of Tiripitio, and alcaldia nuti/oro Yalladolid, in the province and bishopric of Mechoacan. It contains 22 families of Indians, and two of Spaniards ; and in two estates of its district 27 of Spaniards, three of Mulattoes, and 17 of Indians. Two leagues to the w. of its head settlement. 
|AURE, a river of the province and govern ment of Guayana : one of those which enter the Apure. 
|AUREAN Academy, a respectable seminary of learning in AMHEUST, New Hampshire, which see. 
|AUREGA, a large river of the island of Cuba, 
(. ri.-es in (he surras of the 5. coast, runs s. and enters the sea between the river Artiboaito, and another of its own name : the latter is distinguished by the surname of Little ; it has the same origin and course as the other, and runs into the sea between it mid the city of Santiago. 
|AURELIUS, a military township in New York, Onond ago county, on Owasco lake, having the Cayuaga Reservation lands w. and Marccllus e. ; and nine miles c. of the ferry on Cayuaga lake. By the state census of 1796, 213 of the inhabitants are electors. See MILITARY Town ships. 
|AURORA, an island belonging to the Archi pelago of the Great Cyclades. Lat. 15*. Long. 168 30 e. from Paris, discovered by Bougainville, May 22, 176S. It is about 20 leagues long and two broad. Its eastern shore is steep, and covered w i th wood.l 
|AUSTRIA, SAX FFLIPE DE, or CARIACO, a city of the province and government of Cumana, situate upon a plain on the skirt of the serrania, and which is called the valley of Cariaco, and is About eight or ten leagues in circumference. It is very fertile, especially in maize and i/ucas, -which the natives cultivate : of the former they usually collect from 20 to 24,000 bushels, which is carried by the gulph to Cumana, and other parts of the province. This valiey has 11 cacao estates, which belong to the inhabitants of the city, and which never produce more than 100 bushels : they are, however, held in high estimation ; and when there is a deficiency in the crops of maize, great priva tions are felt throughout the settlements on the coast; for this valley is the granary of the pro vince. The population of this city is composed of 25 i families ; and it is 16 leagues from Cumana. Lat. 10 31 n. Long. 63 41 w. 
|AUSTRIA, another city, (with the dedicatory title of San Carlos), in the same province and go vernment, founded in some lofty and cold desert mountains, from whence, on account of the inva sions it continually experienced from the Cliaribbec Indians, it was afterwards removed to a warmer spot. It produces much cattle and honey, which is made by various sorts of bees; also many and exquisite kinds of wood, as Brazil wood, ebony, pomegranates, zarzaparilla, canajisicffa
 tobacco, and a great quantity of oil of Canime. Four leagues jr. ro. of Cumana. 
|AUTIS, a barbarous nation of Indians of Peru, who inhabit the mountains of the province and go vernment of Tiirn, in the e. part, and who are confederates and allies of the Chunchos Indians, through the harmony of their manners. 
117 
|AUTLAN
 an alcnldia mayor of Nueva Espaila, in the province and bishopric of Guadalaxara, of the kingdom of Nueva Galicia, bounded on the e. by that of Zayula, where it terminates in a pleasant valley, which is five leagues long; n. by the province of Guachiuango ; and just be fore the line of division is the lofty mountain of Ameca, abounding in minerals of gold of a supe rior quality, which is only worked at intervals, a great number of poor people being employed, who with a very little labour earn all they wish, that is to say, enough to maintain themselves. It is also bounded s. by the province of Agualulco. The country is very fertile in productions, and abounds in canes, from which sugar is manufactured in several mills. The capital bears the same name : it is of a warm temperature, situate 30 leagues from the coast of the S. sea: it is often filled with country shop-keepers, and is a piace of meeting for the natives and traders of other jurisdictions to merchandize in salt, which is its principal article of commerce. All tiiis part, as far as the sea, is guarded by a militia of the settlement, whenever notice is given of pirates being off the coast, or when the China fleet is expected in the months of January and February. It has a convent of monks of St. Francis. Its population consists of 400 families of Spaniards, Mustces, and Mulattoes, and of a very few Indians. In its precincts are various ranches and sugar-mills. They have a method of making up some of their grains in small round cakes, and they cultivate largely maize and French beans. One hundred and seventy-five leagues w. of Mexico. Its jurisdiction consists of the follow ing settlements : 
Zacapala, Exutla, 
Tecolotlan, Tenamaztlan, 
Zoyatlan, Ayutla, 
Mil pa, Yxthhuacar:, 
Zuchitlan, Atengo, 
Tepantla, Ameca. 
|AUYAMAS, a river of the province and go vernment of Santa Marta in the kingdom of Tierra Firme : it is very abundant, rises in the snowy sierra, traversing in a rapid course the valiey of Upar, and after running 72 leagues, it enters thec. side of the river Magda .cua. 
AV ALON, a province and colony of the Eng lish, in the island of Newfoundland, founded in 1623 by George Calvert, secretary of state, and lord of Baltimore ; to whom was ceded by ill? king of England a certain portion of land in these pans, where he established a settlement ; building a house and fort, which was the residence of Mr. Baltimore and hi* family, aud which after iiis 
118 A X A 
death descended 1u his children and heirs. This colony is a peninsula, uniting .itself to that island by a narrow ilshinus of kind, which lies s. of the b.iy of Trinity, ami n. of that of Plasencia. In the disturbances of the English, it was taken pos session of by David Kirk, but afterwards fell into (he hands of its former masters, when the king redressed and repaired all the mischiefs and damages it had su/lerec). [The e. part of this pen insula is encompassed by the Great bank, and has, besides the two fo tncr bays, the bay of Conception on the n. and the bay of St. Mary and Trepassy bay on the a. It contains several excellent har bours, bays, and capes, among which are St. Ma ry s, Pine, Race, Ballard, St. Francis, &c. 
|AYANCY, a jurisdiction subject to the bishop of Cusco, and lies four leagues n. e. of that city. Sec ABANCAV. 
|AVERIL, ;i township in Essex county, Ver mont, formerly in that of Orange. It joins Ha milton on the n. w. Canaan on the //. e. and its n. corner is the Canada line. 
|AVES, or BIRD S Island, in the West In dies, situated in lat. 15 SO n. long. (j J 15 a&gt;. named so from the great number ol birds that breed there, yet is without a tree, which obliges them to lay their eggs in the sand. There is another island of this name among the Little Antilles, between the coast of St. lago de Leon in Tierra Finne, and the island of Bonaire. 
A VINO LA PANEA, a town in the a&gt;. part of the kingdom of Leon in Nona America, be tween two of the head branches of Nassas river. 
A VOCAT, a bay of the province and colony of Nova Scotia, within the great bay of Fundy. 
|AVON, a river of Nova Scotia, which empties into the Atlantic ocean, a little eastward of Hali fax. It is navigable as far as Fort Edward for vcsfds of 400 tons, and for vessels of 60 tons two miles higher. A river called St. Croix runs into the Avon, whose source is in lakes and springs, about seven miles from its entrance, where it is crossed by a bridge on the road leading to Wind sor. It is navigable for vessels of 60 tons three miles, and for large boats seven miles. 
AW EG EN, a settlement of Indians of Penn sylvania, situr.tc on the shore, and at the source of the e. arm of the river Susquehannah. 
|AXACALA, a settlement of the head settle ment of the district of Acatlan, and ale al din may or of Sentipae, in Nucva Espana. It contains 38 families of Indians, and is seven leagues w. of its capital. 
|AXACUBA, a settlement of the head settle ment of the district of Iluipuxtla, and akaldia 
2 
mayor of Tepetnngo, in Nueva Espufu-u It con tains 76 families of Indians. 
|AXAPUSCO, a settlement of the ah-ahlln mayor of Otumba in Nueva Espana. It contains 90 families otlndians, and is half a league n. of its capital. 
|AXAS, a town in the interior part of Ne\r Albion. SeeQuiviKA. 
AXIXIQUE, a head settlement of the district of the alcald ui mayor of /ayula in Nueva Espana, situate near the shore of the sea of Chapala. It contains a convent of monks of St. Francis, and is composed of 1.30 families of Indians. Twenty leagues n. e. of its capital. 
|AXIXIQUK, another, a settlement in the head settlement of the district and akaldia mayor of Caxititlan, also situate on the shore of the grand lake or sea of Chapala, in a valley altogether fertile, and abounding in every kind of seed which is cultivated here, namely, wheat, maize, and French beans, with various fruits and pulse. 
|AXOGI, a small river of the kingdom of Bra zil, which runs n. n. w. and enters on the 5. side of the grand river of Parana. 
|AXUCHITLAN, a settlement of the akaldia mayor of Tula in Nucva Espana, annexed to the curacy of its capital, from whence it lies three quarters of a league n. w. It contains 51 families of India/is. 
|AXUCHITLAX, another, a small settlement or ward in the head settlement of the district of Santa Ana, and alcaldia mayor of Zultepcc, in the same kingdom. It is united to that of Tetcolmaloya, from whence it lies three leagues to the s. It con tains 20 families of Indians. 
A V A CORKS, a barbarous nation of Indians, who inhabit the country lying between the river Curaray to the n. and the Tigrc to the s. ; on the ti.n.w. it is bounded by the nation of the Semigaes, and s. by that of the Iquitos ; also on the e. it is close to the Puranos, and on the n. to the Yetes. Some of its tribes live in the forests upon the bor ders of the river Manay. 
|AYAHUACAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, which were formerly in Peru, but now extinguish ed. Jt made great resistance to the Jnca Tupac Yupanqui, twelfth Emperor, by whom it was sub jected and made tributary. 
|AYAUHUS, or AVAVIRIES, a barbarous na tion of Indians of Peru, who inhabited the moun tains to the n. e. of Cuzco. They were very valorous, and resisted for a long time Lloque Yupangi, third Emperor of the Incas, by whom, they were at last conquered, and so became united to his monarchy. At the present day nothing of 
them is left but (heir nanv*, from (heir having be come mixed and dispersed amongst the infinite nations of Indians which are in Peru. 
A YEN IS, a nation of barbarous Indians who inhabit Florida, of whose customs but little is known. 
|AYFI STOVTN, or AVKSTOWN, in Iurling(0:1 county, New Jersey, lies on the middle branch of Ancocus creek, 1C miles from the-mouth of the creek in the Delaware, and V) s. c. from iiurlington. 1 " 
A YRl. NU, a river of the province of Q- iixos in the kingdom of Quito. It runs from s. w. to n. c. and runs to disembogue itself into the Napo, at its .?. side, in lat. 1 3 s. 
|AZACANGO, a settlement of the he;id settle ment of the district of Atcngo, and alcaldia mayor of Chalapa, in Nueva Esp:ma. It contains 24 families of Indians, and is three leagues to the n. of its head settlement. 
|AZA.JO, SANTIAGO DF, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of Tirindaro, and alcaldia nun/or of Valladolid, iu the )rovince and bishopric of Mechoacan in Nueva Esp:\na, situ ate in a sierra crowded with pines. It is of a cold temperature, abounding in salutary Avatcrs, and inhabited by 125 families of Indians. Two leagues s. of its head settlement. 
|AZALAN, SANTIAGO DE, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of Chietlan, and alcaldia mayor of Izucar, in Nueva Espafia. 
|AZAQU ALOIA, a settlement of the head settle ment of Zitlala, and alcaldia mnynr of Chilapa, in Nueva Espana. It contains 108 families of Indians, and is two leagues to the w. of its head settlement. 
|AZAROMA, a settlement of the province and forregimiento of Carabaya in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Ayapata. 
A Z ATI AN, a river of the province and alcal dia of Tecoantepec in the kingdom of Guatemala. It runs to the S. sea, to the is. of the river Colate. 
|AZFITE, SIERRAS DEL, mountains of the province and government of Santa Maria in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, near the sea-coast. 
|AZEQl IAS, a settlement of the government and jurisdiction of Therida in the Nucvo Rev no de Granada, of a mild and healthy temperature, abounding in wheat, maize, truffles, beans, vetches, cabbages, and other productions of its climate. Its inhabitants amount to about 100 In. diansand 50 poor house-keepers; but its breeds of cattle are nevertheless very large. It is very near its capital. 
A z t us 
.A Z IT LA, SAN SIMON DE, a settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Guejocingo in Nueva Espana. It contains 30 families of Indians, and is situate to the c. of its capital. 
|AZOQl ES, a large settlement, fertile and abundant in productio is, of the province and cor* rcghmentt) of Cucnca in the kingdom of Quito, situate in the celebrated valley of Yunguilla, which is so fertile that it is wanting in nothing which can contribute to the pleasures and conve niences of life, on which account this curacy is rated at 1000 dollars ; and whosoever may be happy enough to be appointed to it, seldom wishes to be promoted &lt;o any other benefice. It has mines of quicksilver, which were formerly worked, and from which it took its name. Lately some mines of silver were discovered. In the middle of it runs a stream, in the sands of which are found most exquisite rubies. 
|AZONTAMATLAN, SAN FKANCISCO DE, a head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mat/ or of Guayacocotla in Nueva Espana. It con tains 3K) families of Indians, including those who inhabit the wards of its district. 
|AZORES, small islands of the N. sea, lying . of St. Domingo, and s.c. of the sho:d of Plata. They are many and very dangerous, and upon them great numbers of vessels have been wrecked. 
|AZOTZl, a settlement of the province and government of La Sonora in Nueva Espana. It is on the shore of the river of this name, between the settlements Harbiacora and Guspaca. 
|AZOZALCO, a head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor and jurisdiction of Tasco in Nueva Espana. It contains 40 families of Indians, and is three leagues s. s. e. of i s capital. 
|AZTACALCO, SANTA M.MUA DE, a settle ment of the alcaldia. mayor of E cat e pec in Nueva Espana. It contains 277 families of Indians. 
|AZTAIUJACAN, SANTA MADIA DE, a setr tlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Mexilcalzingo in Nueva Espana, with J05 fami lies of Indians. 
|AZTATLA, SANTIAGO DE, a head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Huamelul.i. in Nueva Espana, situate at the distance of one league from the S. sea, on the skirt of a lofty mountain plain. It is of a hot temperature, and contains 30 families of Indians. In its vicinitj runs a river, which in the wet season is very abun dant. This river unites itself with the lluamelula, and these, thus incorporated, run into the sea ; first fertilizing the arable lands and estates which lie upon their bank
. At a small distance is a lake, abounding in Jish, ami around it- the crops 
|ISO 
|AZU 
of seeds and fruits are remarkably fine. Along the coast, at the distance of four leagues, there is another lake, much deeper than the former, and indeed one of the largest to be found on thoie coasts : this communicates its waters by a natural channel with those of the lake of Las Salinas, which at certain times of the year deposits a white salt, from which greut emolument is derived, as \vell as from the fi.&gt;h found in it ; amongst other sorts are shrimps, in sullicient quantities to supply all this jurisdiction, and even those bordering upon it. Two leagues s. of its capital. 
|AZTLA, SANTA CATALINA OK, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of Coxcallan, and alcaldiu mayor of V r ailes, in Nueva Espaiia, situate upon the shores of the large river Goachigoayan, where quantities of extremely fine fish are caught. It is of u hot and moist temperature, annexed to the curacy of its head settlement, and has a magnificent parish church. It contains 300 families of Indians, who gain their livelihood by the culture and trallic of tobacco. Twenty leagues from its capital. 
|AZU, JOSEPH DE, a settlement of the pro vince and captainship of Para in Brazil, situate on the shore of the river Tocantines, near the settle ment of Carambava. 
|AZUA, or AZUCA, a town of the island and government of St. Domingo, settled by the AdcJantado Velazquez in 1504. It was called Compostela from the Comendador Gallego, who had here an inheritance. This name, however, it afterwards lost, and took that of Azua, which it had held in the time of the Indians. It is very fertile in sugar-canes, from which much sugar is made. In this district are also some mines of gold, which were formerly worked, but are at present abandoned. It has a very good port on the S. sea, and is 24 leagues from the capital of St. Domingo. 
|AZUCAR, PAN DE, a mountain of the pro vince and captainship of Espirita Santo in Brazil, 0,1 the S. side of the town of Ilha. 
|AZU 
AZI7CIIITLAN, a head settlement and capttal of the ale aid i a mayor of this name in Nueva Espana. It is of an excessively warm and dry temperature. Its commerce is in large and small cattle, in crops of maize, French beans, cotton, and some fruits peculiar to the country. Its po pulation consists of 17 families of Spaniards, 26 of Afuftees, 114 of Mulattoes, and 28o of Mexi can Indians. It is situate between two large rivers, Las Balzas, which runs w. and Las Truchas, which runs A 1 . ; and to the n. of it, at the distance of two leagues, it has a mine called De San Gregorio, of quicksilver and copper. This was for merly worked on the account of the king, but it is at present destroyed and lies waste. The settle ment is 50 leagues to the w. of Mexico. 
|AZU El, Lake of, in the island of St. Do mingo, near the coast, and in the w. head by the great lake of Enriquillo, in the line which divides the possessions of the French and Spaniards. 
|AZUELA, a large river of the province and government of Quixos and Macas in the kingdom of Quito. It rises in the vicinity of the town of San Miguel de Ibarra, and enters the Marauon. 
|AZUFRERA, Mountain of, in the island of St. Domingo, and in the French possessions, where there is a mineral of sulphur. It is on the w. shore of the river Montroni. 
AZ LJL, a large river of the province of the Apaches in Nuevo Mexico. It runs from n. to s. and enters the large river Gila, opposite the town of San Felipe. 
|AZUL, a sierra or cordil/era of mountains in the province and government of La Sonora. 
|AZULEMA, a settlement of the province and government of Antioquia in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, situate near the source of the river Cauca. 
|AZULES, SIERRAS, Cordilleras of mountains of the island of Jamaica, in the centre of the e. head. They arc thus called from appearing at sea of a blue colour. 
|BAB 
|BAB 
121 
B 
JtjAAL s River and Bay, in W. Greenland, lie between Bear sound on the s. e. arid Delft s point on th n. w. and opposite the mouth of Hudson s strait. 
|BABA, a district of the province and govern ment of Guayaquil in the kingdom of Quito, one of the seven which compose the same, and one of the largest, extending 22 leagues from the mouth of the river of its name to the skirt of the moun tain Zamborondon, bounded by the Colarados Indians, in the heights of the asiento and province of Tacunga. Its territory is low, being com pletely inundated in the winter, and it then be comes necessary to take their cattle and their other productions into what they style winter-quarters, namely, to the very summits of the mountains ; but in the summer it is fertile, and produces quan tities of pasture ; and so great is the increase of its herds of cattle, that the natives are taught to con sider these inundations as one of their greatest benefits, since hereby much cattle is carried off and destroyed, which would otherwise overstock the country. It is equally fertile in cacao, in which consists its principal commerce, since it regularly gathers to the amount of 32,000 mea sures of 81 pound weight each; also in canoes which are made of one entire trunk, and often so large as to be capable of holding 60 bushels of salt ; in different woods ; in soap, colts, horses, and some cainilla, and butter of cacao. In this district grows the tree called matapalo, which destroys every plant that may be near it, and which has been seen of the immense size of 20 geometrical feet in circumference. The inhabitants may amount to about 4000, and the capital of the dis trict has the same name. It was situated on the shores of the river, which, although it still exists, has changed its course, running at present through a distant plain, seven leagues from the town, and leaving the inhabitants in some distress for a means of watering their cacao plantations, and for this reason, the productions became much dimi nished. Twenty leagues from the capital of the province. 
|BABA, a large river of this district, rising in the mountains of Zamborondon in the province ofLatacunga. It runs 32 leagues till it empties itself into the river of Guayaquil, at its mouth. 
|BABAHOYO, a district of the province and 
|VOL. I. 
government of Guayaquil in the kingdom of Quito, one of the seven which compose the same ; bounded by the provinces of Chimbo and Riobamba. It is a tract of country so level and so low that it is commonly the first to be inundated by the swelling of the rivers in the winter, which, as they subside in the summer, leave the ground covered with a tall, rank, and thick grass called gamalole. It is very fertile, and abounding in. cattle of every kind ; in rice, cotton, soap, to* bacco, cacao, honey, and fruits, with which it carries on a great commerce, by means of its river, with the other provinces ; so that this district is, as it were, a continual fair, and is one of the richest districts of the province. 
|BABAHOYO, a capital settlement of the above dis trict, situate on the shore of the river which bears the same name, where are the custom-houses and royal arsenals, which are called bodegas, and in which are deposited, for the supply of the pro vinces of the sierra, both its own and the produc tions of the ultra-marine provinces of Peru, Chile, Tierra Firme, Guatemala, and Nicaragua, as also what is brought by the muleteers who come down from Quito, Latacunga, Ambato, Chimbo, and Riobamba ; so that a continual fair is held for the space of six months, the same being a ge neral sale of the productions of the above pro vince. Lat. 1 47 s. 
|BABAMOYO, a large river of the same district, formed by the Jilca and Caluma, which rise in the mountains of Chimbo and Riobamba, and join in the strand from whence this river takes its name. It then runs 24 leagues, until it empties itself into the Guayaquil. It is by means of this that the traffic of the whole district is carried on, and unladed in the custom-houses or royal arsenals. The embarkations are, fof the most part, effected by rafts, which are made as follows : Upon a plain of thick and tolerably stout timbers, consisting of a wood very limber and as light as cork, (corcho), from whence they take their de nomination, and which are united by strong pli able reeds, they raise some large joists of cedar, crossing each other and forming squares, at the extremities of which are fixed uprights of the same for forming the walls, roofs, &c. ; these they cover and interweave with split cane, leaving holes for the doors and windows ; then the roof 
R 
|BAG 
being covered with a stout cotton awning, which is impregnated with pitch, in order to resist the sun and rain, the whole becomes a perfect float ing house, with all its corresponding offices and conveniencies. Others are made in a less perfect manner, and with less accommodation, althoughstronger, for the purpose of carrying victuals, cat tle, and fruits ; for lading and unlading ships and other vessels which enter here to be repaired. This river, somewhat below the bodegas, and after be ing increased by the waters which it collects in the serranias of Alausi and Riobamba, is joined by the Caracol. 
|BABIACORA, a settlement of the province and government of La Sonora in Nueva Espana, on the shore of the river of this name, between the settlements of Urcs and Azotzi. 
|BABILLA, a settlement of the province and government of Santa Malta in the kingdom of I ierra Firme, situate on the shore of the river Magdalena. 
|BABILLO, a river of the province and Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It springs from three grand lakes, and waters the valley of Upar : it afterwards enters the Ce"sar or Pompatao, and terminates its course in the Magdalena. Its waters are of an ob scure green colour, and abound in excellent fish. La Matiniere, mistaking it, calls it Badillo. 
|BABONOIBA, a settlement of the mission which belonged to the religious order of St. Francis, in the province of Taraumara and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya, situate 14 leagues to the s. of the real of San Felipe of Chiguagua. 
|BABOPAS, a town in the interior part of New Albion, e. of the long range of mountains which extend n. from the head of the peninsula of Cali fornia. See QUIVIRA. 
|BABORIGAME, a settlement and reduction of Indians, of the missions which where held by the Jesuits, in the province and government of La Sonora in Nueva Espana. 
|BABORIGAMES, a settlement of the missions which belonged to the regulars of the company of Jesuits, in the province of Tepeguana and king dom of Nueva Vizcaya. 
|BABOROCO, a port of the province and go vernment of La Sonora. 
|BAC, a town belonging to the French, in New France or Canada, situate on the shore of the St. Lawrence ,and at the mouth of that of ThreeRi vieres . 
|BAC, a settlement, with the dedicatory title of San Francisco Xavier, one of those of the missions, and of the reducciones of the Indians, belonging to the Jesuits, in the province and government of La Sonora in Nueva Espana. 
|BACA, an island %&gt;f the N. sea, one of the Smaller Antilles, near the island of St. Domingo, on the n. coast, 45 leagues from the point of La Beata. Long. 301 40 . Lat. 17 2 . [Our best modern maps make no mention of this island." 
|BACA, a settlement of the missions held by the Jesuits, in the province and government of CinaI6a. 
|BACA BOB A, a mountain of the coast of Brazil, in the province and captainship of Seara, between the rivers Acuracu and Mordahu. 
|BACADE, a town of the province and govern ment of La Sonora in Nueva Espana. 
|BAG ALAR, PLAZA DE, a large and beautiful plain on the coast and in the province of the go vernment of Yucatan. 
|BACALLAOS Islands, situate opposite the coast of Newfoundland, and surrounding the Great bank. They are small and numerous : discovered by Sebastian Gabot. lie gave them this name from the abundance of cod-fish caught on their coasts. This fishery has employed yearly upwards of 400 vessels of different nations, and it is effected by angling. The fish is accustomed to bite im mediately that the hook is dropped into the water, and being hauled upon the ship s deck, a person stands ready to chop off its head ; another takes out its intestines and bones it, after which it is salt ed and barrelled, and sent to all parts of the world. TIi is fishery can be carried on only in the day, as the fish will not bite in the dark. It is also pecu liar to the spring season, and ends in September, since in the winter these fish like the bottom of the sea. Sometimes their abundance is wonderful, and it has been said that a certain person, of the name of Juan Poon, once caught 100 in the space of an hour. These islands are 70 miles distant from Tierra Firme. 
|BACANGA, a river of the province and cap tainship of Marafion in Brazil. 
|BACANORA, a settlement of the province and government of Ostimuri in Nueva Espana. 
|BACANUCHI, a settlement of the province and government of La Sonora in Nueva Espana, situ ate at the head of the river of this name. 
|BACAPA, SAN Luis DE, a settlement of the province and government of La Sonora in Nueva Espana, situate between those of Bateque and San Antonio de Uquitoa. 
|BACAREAU, PASAGE DE, a passage between the coast of Acadia and the island of Cap de Sagle. It is very narrow, and only passable for small craft, and for these not without a skilful pilot. Mr. Chabert, of the academy of sciences of raris, made here, in 1750, several astronomical obser
vations, and likewise laid down its longitude at 68*. 
|BACAREAU, a point or cape of the same coast. 
|BACAS, a small river of the province and go vernment of Buenos Ayres in Peru. It runs w. and enters the Plata. 
|BACCALOONS, a settlement of the English, in the province and country of the Iroquees Indians, and bounded by the province and colony of Penn sylvania, situate on the shore of the Ohio. 
|BACHE, a river of the province and govern ment of Popayan in the kingdom of Quito. It runs e . and enters the river Magdalena. 
|BACHILLER, Rio DEL, or Del gran Valle, a river in the strait of Magellan. It runs w. and enters the sea at the bay of San Isabel. 
|BACHOUANAN, a small river of Canada. It runs 5. w. and enters lake Superior, in the bay of its name. 
|BACHOUANAN, a bay in the e. part of lake Su perior. 
|BACK River. See BALTIMORE County. 
|BACOBERTO, a settlement of the province and government of Cinaloa in Nueva Espana. 
|BACUACHI, a settlement of the province and government of La Sonora in Nueva Espana, situ ate at the source of the river of its name, near the Bacanuchi. 
|BACUN, a, settlement of the province and go vernment of Cinaloa in Nueva Espana, situate on the shore of the river Hiaqui. It is one of the reducciones, and belongs to the missions held there of the Jesuits, between the settlements of Tor in and Cocorin. 
|BADILLO, a settlement of the province and government of Cartagena, situate on the shore of the river Magdalena. It is six leagues from the city of Zimiti. 
|BADIRAGUATO, a settlement of the province and alcaldia mayor of Copala in the kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya, situate to the e. of the real of the mines of Charcas. 
|BADIIIAGUATO, another settlement, in the pro vince of Topia, one of those belonging to the mis sions which were held here by the regulars of the company of Jesuits. 
|BAEZA, a city of the province and govern ment of Quixos y Macas in the kingdom of Quito, founded by Gil Ramirez Davalos in 1559. It was a large population, and numerous and rich in former times, and capital of the province ; but the continual irruptions of the infidels ha ve so destroyed and reduced it to such a state, that it scarcely now contains above SO families, and has been united to the curacy of the settlement of Pomallacta. It is 
123 
of the mildest temperature of any settlement in the province, and the territory is fertile, though only in cotton, which its natives manufacture. The roads which lead to it are very rugged and diffi cult, and are not to be passed without great labour. Lat. 26 s. 
|BAFFEN, a settlement of the island of Barbadoes, in the jurisdiction of the city of Bridgetown. 
|BAFFIN S Bay is the largeit and most n. gulf or bay that has yet been discovered in N. America, and lies between 70 and 80 of n. lat. It opens into the Atlantic ocean through Baffin s and Davis s straits, between cape Chidley on the Labrador coast, and cape Farewell on that of W. Greenland, both of which are in about 60 of n. lat. It abounds with whales, and on the s. w. side of Davis s straits has a communication with Hud son s bay, through a cluster of islands. It was dis covered by the navigator whose name it bears, in the year 1662. Some maps shew a communication with Hudson s bay in 70 n. lat. and in 70 w. long. 
|BAGADUCE Point, a headland within Penobscot bay, in the district of Maine. 
|BAGANIQUE, an ancient and large settlement of the nation of the Moscas Indians, in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, founded in the llanura of the same name, now called the valley of Venegas, to the e. of Santa Fe. It was discoverd by Captain Juan de San Martin in 1537. 
|BAGMA, an island of the river of Las Amazonas, opposite Ivari. 
|BAGNALS, PUNTA DE, a point on the w. coast of the island of Barbadoes, between Indian river and the bay of Carlisle. 
|BAGORES, a river of the province and cap tainship of the Rio de Janeiro in Brazil. It runs s.s.e. and enters the sea between the rivers Ostras and Salvador, near cape Frio. 
|BAGOUACHE, a small river of Canada, which rises in the n. mountains on the side of lake Supe rior, runs s. and enters the Mississippi. 
|BAGRE, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Antioquia in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, situate on the shore of the river Nechi. In its vicinity are the gold washing places, labaderosj of Penemc, San Pedro, San Pedrito, Chilona, and Olaya. 
|BAGRES, a small river of the province and go vernment of Maracaibo in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. It rises at the side of the lake Atole, runs e. and enters the great lake Maracaibo. 
|BAGUA, or ONDA, a settlement of the pro vince and corregimiento of Luya and Chillaos in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Ron. R 2 
124 
|BAH 
|BAGUACHICA, a settlement of the province and government of Jaen de Bracamoros in the kingdom of Quito. 
|BAHAIRE, a settlement of the province and government of Cartagena in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. It was in the time of the Indians a very populous city, containing upwards of 200,000 souls. It was conquered with great diffi culty by Pedro de Heredia. 
|BAHAMA, Great Island of, one of the Ba hamas, of great extent, situate on the s. side of the Little Bahama bank, and extending from the Florida stream almost to the island of Abaco. It contains a great quantity of fine timber, but which is difficult of access. It is totally uninhabited. See BAHAMAS. 
|BAHAMA Channel, or Gulph of Florida, is the passage between the island of Bahama and the continent. Its navigation is dangerous, and it has been very erroneously set down in most of the best maps. See the BAHAMAS. 
|BAHAMA, NEW, a port of the island of Cuba, on the n. coast, between those of La Ciudad del Principe and Manati. 
|BAHAMAS, Islands of the N. sea, situate to the e. of, and opposite to Florida. They are of the Lucayos, and were discovered by Columbus, in his first voyage, in 1404. From them the fine channel of Bahama takes its name, the same being formed by the above coast, the principal of these islands, and a long sand-bank of the same name, to then, of the island of Cuba, and being 16 leagues wide and 45 long. The currents in the gulpii are most violent, and in it numbers of ves sels have been wrecked. It is the direct pass into the open sea, and for the route to Europe. It was first attempted by the celebrated pilot Anton de Alaminos, who risked its navigation with immi nent hazard, when he went to Spain with the agents of Hernan Cortes, to give account to the Emperor Charles V. of the progress of the con quest of Mexico. The principal island is 13 leagues long and eight wide ; is very fertile, of an agreeable climate, and full of streams and rivulets. It formerly produced much sassafras, zarzaparrilla, and red wood; but its present productions are principally maize, birds, and a kind of rabbit ; and it procures for itself other ne cessaries from Carolina. Its principal commerce consists in supplying provisions to ships which come here for convenience. Although these islands are near 500, many of them are nothing but cliffs or rocks. 
General Description, Climate, #c. The Baha ma islands, called Lucayos by the Spaniards, com
|BAH 
prehend, under that denomination, all that chain of West India islands lying to the n. of Cuba and St. Domingo, and situate between the 21 and 28 of n. lat. and the 71 and 81 of w. long. These islands have never been regularly surveyed, nor their numbers at all ascertained. Those most worthy of attention are as follows ; and a more particular description of each will be found under its proper head. 
Abaco, Hog island, 
Acklin s island, Hog key, 
Andros island, Harbour island, 
Atwood s key, Heneaguas, 
Great Bahama, Little island, 
Berry islands, Long island, 
Biminis, Long key, 
Caicos, Mayaguana, 
Castle island, Ragged island, 
Cat island, or St. Sal- Rose island, 
vador, Royal island, 
Crooked island, Rum key, 
Eleuthera, Russel island, 
Exumas, St. Salvador, 
French keys, Turk s islands, 
Guanahani, or St. Sal- Watling s island. 
vador, 
The Bahama islands have never been correctly set down or delineated in any of the maps or charts of the West Indies. Many of them arc situated upon the Great Bahama bank, others upon the Little Bahama bank, and others out of soundings, in the Atlantic ocean. They stretch from Turk s islands (which are at no great dis tance from St. Domingo) in a n. w. direction to the n. end of the Great Bahama bank, near the coast of Florida. The climate is in general salu brious. The more n. of the islands during the winter months are rendered cool and agreeable by the n. w. breezes from the continent of America. At New Providence the thermometer, (Farenheit), in the shade, varies from about 85 or 90 in sum mer to 60 or 65 in winter. The more s. islands, however, are hotter throughout the year ; but these enjoy the cooling sea breezes that blow in the West Indies within the tropics, and which do not extend to several of the mostw. of the Bahamas. 
There is but little variety of soil throughout the Bahama islands. They are almost all low, flat, barren, and rocky. They are well provided with natural woods, generally however of a small growth. The soil is mostly either light and sandy, or very rocky and broken, with partial spots of good land. The rock is of a soft and porous na ture, but hard, and generally irregular on the sur face. The Bahamas are but ill supplied with 
|BAHAMAS. 
135 
fresh water; it is found however by digging wells in the rocks, to the depth of the sea level, and also very often by making holes in the sand along the coasts, a few feet from the surface. In several of the islands are small natural fresh- water ponds, produced by the rain collected from the rocks ; but there is not supposed to exist, through out the Bahamas, a single spring of fresh water or rivulet. 
General History. One of the Bahama islands (the ancient Indian name of which is stated to be Guanahani) has been generally fixed upon by historians and geographers as the spot where the first discovery of the new world took place, by Columbus, upon the llth of October 1492. The island was named by him St. Salvador, by which appellation, as also that of Cat island, it is now generally known. There appears, how ever, to exist some doubt with respect to the point of land first actually discovered by Columbus in the new world. The accounts of his first voyage to America generally state that his squadron kept almost a due w. course from the Canary islands (the last land from which he took his departure) across the Atlantic ; and that, for two or three days before land was discovered, he found himself in soundings. It is also stated that he landed at a secure and spacious harbour, and that the island (St. Salvador) had verdant fields, watered with many rivulets. If these accounts were true, and if the island now known by that name was ac tually the land first discovered by Columbus, it may be concluded that some great change or con vulsion must have taken place in that quarter of the world since its discovery. At present there are no soundings to the e. of St. Salvador ; and along the whole of the e. coast of that island, is a reef which would prevent any landing on that side. There is no harbour but a small one round the s. end of the island, facing the s. w. in one of the shallow Bahama banks. No verdant fields can now be found upon the island of St. Salvador, which is barren and rocky, like the rest of the Bahama islands; throughout the whole of which, as was before observed, no rivulet of any descrip tion has been discovered. There can be no doubt, however, that one of the Bahama islands was the first land discovered by Columbus. The island of Abaco is situated nearer the latitude of the Canaries, and there is a good harbour on the e. side of that island ; but there are no soundings at any distance from the shore on that side. It is perhaps more likely that Abaco (or one of the other most n. of the Bahama islands) was the first point of disco very, particularly if it be true what is stated, that 
a few days after he discovered land he touched at New Providence and Andros island (which it is said he named Fernandina and Isabella) in his way to Cuba ; and it is extremely improbable that he would touch at those islands in his way to Cuba from St. Salvador. 
The Bahama islands, when discovered by Co lumbus, are stated to have been inhabited by a numerous race of Indians, of a mild and peace able disposition, indolent in their habits, and little, if at all, accustomed to the cultivation of the soil. They are described as being of a dark and dingy hue, with long black hair, and with their bodies painted with different colours. Many thousands of these unfortunate people are stated to have been carried over by the Spaniards, in their subsequent settlements, and compelled to work in the mines of S. America. The early accounts of the Bahama islands, after their discovery, are, however, ex tremely obscure. There appears scarcely any trace of the original Indian inhabitants. The ear liest settlement of Europeans which took place in the Bahama islands, was under a patent of Charles If. (1668), which granted those islands to certain proprietary lords. Shortly after that period, some at tempts appear to have been made to cultivate several of the islands ; but, about the beginning of the last century, they were again without inhabitants. Some time afterwards, however, they became the resort of numerous pirates, Bucaniers, and free booters ; the situation of these islands, from the difficulties of the navigation, and their being near the passages through which the valuable vessels returned to Europe, being well-adapted for plun der and concealment. Among these pirates was the noted Captain Teach, known by the name of Blackbeard, who had the supreme command over them, and of whom, as well as of Captain Vane, and others who resorted to the Bahamas, a curi ous account may be found in Johnson s Lives of the Pirates, and in the History of the Bucaniers of America. 
For the purpose of protecting the trade, and destroying these nests of free-booters, Captain Woods Rogers was sent out from England as go vernor to the Bahamas, in the year 1718, and the seat of government was fixed at New Providence, upon which island Fort Nassau was built. From that period, a regular colonial administration ap* pears to have taken place ; but for a considerable time, little cultivation or improvement seems to have occurred at the Bahamas. 
The island of New Providence was taken pos session of in the American war by an Ame rican captain, ft was shortly afterwards, how- 
126 
|BAHAMAS. 
ever, abandoned by its new possessor. In 1781 the Bahama islands were surrendered to the Spaniards, and restored to the British by treaty at the end of the war. Previous, however, to the notification of the treaty, New Providence and its forts were recovered by means of a very gallant and well-conducted enterprise, under the com mand of Lieutenant-colonel Deveaux of the S. Carolina militia. After the termination of the American war, many of the British loyalists, and other planters, repaired to the Bahamas, chiefly from the s. states of N. America, from which pe riod most of the principal islands began to be re gularly settled and inhabited. 
Productions. The chief article which has been cultivated in this colony is cotton ; and for several years
 with very considerable success, though for some time past that success has greatly diminish ed, owing probably to the natural barrenness of the soil, and perhaps to the rains being less fre quent from the woods, from many parts of these hav ing been much cut down. The cultivation of sugar has been attempted, (particularly on the Caicos), but with little success. Coffee has been raised on several of the islands. Provisions, such as Gui nea and Indian corn, yams, sweet potatoes, plan tains, cassava, Indian and pigeon peas, grow in abundance. Most of the tropical fruits are found here; oranges, lemons, limes, shaddocks, pine apples, cocoa nuts, &c. &c. &c. Cattle and sheep thrive on most of the islands ; and the shores and creeks of all the Bahamas abound in turtle, and excellent fish of various sorts. Wild ducks, snipes, pelicans, gualdings, wild pigeons, flamin goes, and a variety of other birds, abound among the islands ; and among the woods are found wild hogs, agoutis, guanas
 land crabs, &c. Am bergris is frequently found cast ashore upon the coast. Various sorts of timber and dye woods are found growing in the Bahamas, such as maho gany, (generally of a small and very hard sort, commonly called Madeira and horse-flesh maho gany), brazilletto, fustick, lignum-vitae, Spanish oak, or black gregory, tamarind, lana wood, iron wood, wild cinnamon, pimento, or naked wood, yellow saunders, satin wood, pines, cedars, and many others adapted for building small vessels, and well calculated for the purposes of the mecha nic and cabinet-maker. 
The principal and most valuable article which has, perhaps, of late years been exported from the Bahamas, is salt. In many of the islands there are valuable natural salt-ponds, to which the 
attention of the inhabitants has been much direct ed, and for the subdivision and management of which, legislative and colonial regulations have been enacted. In dry and favourable seasons great quantities of salt are produced from these ponds, and exported by the Americans to the United States. 
Many of the small vessels of the Bahamas are not only employed as drogging (or carrying) ves sels among the different islands, and in catching turtle, but also among the numerous passages, (particularly towards the Florida stream), in watch ing for wrecked vessels. They are licenced for this purpose by the governor of the Bahamas. Many valuable lives are saved by the exertions of these vessels, and much property secured for the owners and insurers of the ships employed in the West India trade, and those bound from Vera Cruz and the Havanah to Europe. 
Government and Statistics. The colonial esta blishment of the Bahamas is similar to that of the other West India islands, consisting of a governor, a lieutenant-governor, a council, and a legislative assembly. The following islands send represen tatives to the house of assembly : New providence, and the town of Nassau, eight;; Harbour island, three ; Eleuthera, three ; Abaco, three ; St. Sal vador, one ; Long island, two ; Exuma, three ; Andros island, two ; Crooked island, one ; Watling s island, one ; Caicos, one ; Turk s island, two. The courts of justice are similar also to those established in the rest of the West India colonies. There are four regular ports of entry in the Bahamas, viz. at New Providence, Great Exuma, at the Caicos, and at Turk s islands. Besides the usual garrison at New Providence, there is a militia established in several of the islands. Previous to May 1?03, lands were granted by the crown in the whole of the Bahamas, to the amount of 265,381 acres, for the purpose of cultivation. The population at that time amounted to about 14,318, including 11,395 blacks and people of colour ; and it appears by a return to the house of commons in 1805, at a medium of two years to 1803, the number of slaves imported amounted to 2523, of whom 2230 were exported ; leaving a remainder of ouly 293 for the use of the colony. 
The official value of the imports and exports of the Bahamas were, in 
Imports. Exports. 
1809 .133,515 .504,567 
1810 .108,485 481,372 
B A I B A L 
* / 
And the quantities of the principal articles imported into Great Britain were, in 
127 
Coffee. 
Sugar. 
Rum. 
Pimento. 
Cotton wool. 
Brit. Plant. 
For. Plant. 
Brit. Plant. 
For. Plant. 
Cwt. 
1809, 1810, 
Cwt. 9143 
4315 
Cwt. 130 
Cwt. 12,884 6,413 
Galls. 26 11 
Ibs. 1528 
2227" 
Ibs. 1,139,793 1,348,828 
See NEW PROVIDENCE. 
|BAHIA, HONDA, a large, well sheltered, and convenient port of the island of Cuba, on the n. side, much frequented by vessels which carry on an illicit commerce. [The bay has 15 and 10 fathoms water, the entrance into the harbour eight, and anchorage in four and five fathoms. Long. 83 6 . Lat.2258 . 
|BAHIA, or BAY, sometimes applied to St. Salvador, the capital of Brazil, and to the bay of All Saints, in which captainship it is situated. See SAN ros. 
|BAHIA, DE CHETUMEL, called by the British Hanover bay, lies on the e. side of the peninsula of Yucatan in the sea of Honduras, and into which falls Honda river. It has the logwood country on the s. ; at its mouth are two large islands and a number of islets. The largest island is Amber" grise key, which runs along the mouth of the bay, and is 70 miles long. 
|BAHIAGA, a river of the island of St. Domin go, in the territory possessed by the French. It rises near the coast towards the n, and enters the sea in the bay of Manzanillo. 
|BAHIAS, CABO DE DOS, a cape on the coast, which lies between the Rio de la Plata arid the straits of Magellan, one of the two which form the bay of Camarones. 
|BAILADORES, NUESTRA SENORA DE LA CANDELARIA DE LOS, a settlement of the juris diction of La Grita in the government of Maracaibo. It is a mild and healthy country, abound ing in good water, and in all the productions of a warm climate, as cacao, sugar-cane, tobacco, maize, t/ucas 9 and other productions and fruits. It is situate at the slope of a mountain, in the way which leads from La Grita to Mericla, being some what more that eight leagues distant from the former. It contains 100 housekeepers, and has also the denomination of Bailadores, (Dancers), from the partiality exhibited by its natives for this sort of amusement in the time of its gentilism. 
|BAILADORES, a river of this province and government, which rises in the city of La Grita, and runs from s. to n. until it enters the lake of Maracaibo, through two mouths which form an island. 
|BAILADORES, a bay on ihes. coast of the island of Cuba. 
|BAILIF, a small river of the island of Guadalupe, which rises in the mountains, runs w. and enters the sea in the bay of Gros Francois. On its shores, and at its mouth, there is a good castle for defending the bay. 
|BAINE, a river of the province and govern ment of La Guayana, rising in the serrania of Imataca, and running into the sea by the e, ooast. 
|BAIRDSTOWN, or BEARDSTOWN, in Nelson county, Kentucky, is a flourishing town, of 216 inhabitants, situated on the head waters of Salt river, 50 miles s. e. from Louisville, and nearly the same distance s. w. from Danville. 
|BAIT A, a settlement of the missions of the order of St. Francis, in the province of Culiacan, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya, situate on the shores of the river Elota. It produces maize and French beans in great abundance, as also honey and wax, of which its commerce consists. 
BA JO, a cape on the coast of the province and government of Florida, between the mouth of the river Mississippi and the bay of La Ascencion. 
|BAJO, with the additional title of Nuevo, an island of the N. sea. 
|BAJU, a small river of the province and go vernment of Paraguay, which runs n. n. w. and enters the Uruguay, close to that of Jiupa. 
|BAKER, a bay on the e. coast of the island of Barbadoes, between the points Bell and Ragged. 
|BAKERSFIELD, a newly settled township in Tranklin county, Vermont, formerly in Chittenden county. In 1790 it had only 13 inha bitants. 
|BAKERSTOWN, in Cumberland county, district of Maine, contains 1276 inhal itants ; 162 miles n. e. from Boston. 
|BALANDRAN, CAYO DE LA, a small island of the coast of the island of St. Domingo, at the entrance ;&gt; the gieat bay of Samana, close to the islet tj? Levantndos. 
|BALAO, a river of the province and govern ment of Guayaquil in the kingdom of Quito. It runs info (he sea at the gulf of that name, opposite the island of La Puna. 
128 
|BALBANEDA, a small settlement of the king dom of Quito, in the jurisdiction of Riobamba, to the s. of this town, and n. of the great lake of Colta. It is called also Nuestra Senora de Balbaneda, from its having a sacred shrine of the image of our Lady of this title, which was much revered in times past. It is a population consisting of Puruayes Indians. 
|BALBUENA, SAN JUAN BAPTISTA DE, a settlement of the province and government of Tucuman, in the district of Chaco. Its popula tion consists of the Ixistinieses and Toquistineses Indians, who are a reduction made by the missions which were held here by the regulars of the com pany of the Jesuits, and at the present day are under the care of the order of St. Francis. 
|BALBUENA, a fort of the same province and government, founded on the shore of the river Salado, to restrain the incursions of the infidel Indians. 
|BALCALAR, LAOUNA DE, a lake of the pro vince and government of Yucatan. It is large and broad, and lies on the sea shore, between the bay of La Ascencion and the island of Cozumel. 
|BALCDUTHA, a settlement in the e. part of Kentucky, on the w. side of Big Sandy river. Near this is Clay Lick, and about a mile s. e. stand* Vancouver s fort, on the point of land formed by the fork of the Big Sandy. 
|BALCHO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Luya and Chilloas in Peru. 
|BALD EAGLE or WARRIOR Mountains, lie about 200 miles w. of Philadelphia, in Bedford county, Pennsylvania, and form the w. boundary of Bald Eagle valley. 
|BALD EAGLE is likewise the name of a river which runs an. e. course 44 miles, and falls into the w. branch of Susquehanna river. The head water of Huron river, which falls into lake Erie, is called Bald Eagle creek. 
|BALD EAGLE Valley, or, as it is commonly called, Sinking Spring Valley, lies upon the fron tiers of Bedford county in Pennsylvania, about. 200 miles w. from Philadelphia. It has on the e. a chain of high, rugged mountains, called the Canoe Ridge, and on the w. the Bald Eagle or Warrior mountains. This is a pleasant vale, of limestone bottom, five miles in extent where widest; and in the vicinity are great quantities of lead ore. It contained, in 1779, about 60 or 70 families, living in log-houses, who formed, in the spice of seven or eight years, several valuable plantations, some of which are remarkably agreeable on ac count of their situation. During the late war with Great Britain, lead was much wanted, and very 
difficult to be procured, which induced a coinpany, under the patronage of the state, to settle here, and establish a regular set of works. A fort of logs was erected for the protection of the miners ; and a considerable quantity of ore was produced, from which lead enough was made to give a competent idea of the real value of the mines in general. The danger of the situation, however, while an Indian war continued, occasioned the failure of the undertaking. The lead ore was of many kinds ; some in broad flakes, and others of the steely texture. Several regular shafts were sunk to a considerable depth ; one of which was on the hill upon which the fort was erected, and from which many large masses of ore were pro cured ; but not forming a regular vein, it was dis continued, and another opened about a mile from the fort, nearer to Frank s Town. Here the miners continued until they finally relinquished the business. When they first began, they found in the upper surface or vegetable earth several hundred weight of cubic lead ore, clean and un mixed with any substance whatever, which con tinued as a clue, leading them down through the different strata of earth, marl, &c. until they came to the rock, which is here in general of the lime stone kind. Among other curiosities of this place, is that called the Swallows, which absorb several of the largest streams of the valley, and after convey ing them several miles under ground, in a subterrananeous course, return them again upon the surface. These subterraneous passages have given rise to the name Sinking Spring valley. Of these the most remarkable is called the Arch springs, and run close upon the road from the town to the fort. It is a deep hollow formed in the limestone rock, about 30 feet wide, with a rude natural stone arch hanging over it, forming a passage for the water, which it throws out with some degree of violence, and in such plenty as to form a fine stream, which at length buries itself again in the bowels of the earth. Some of these pits are near 300 feet deep ; the water at the bottom seems in rapid motion, and is apparently as black as ink, though it is as pure as the finest springs can pro duce. Many of these pits are placed along the course of this subterraneous river, which soon after takes an opportunity of an opening at a declivity of the ground, and keeps along the sur face among the rocky hills for a few rods, then enters the mouth of a large cave, whose exterior aperture would be sufficient to admit a shallop with her sails full spread. In the inside it keeps from 18 to 20 feet wide. The roof declines as you advance, and a ledge of loose rugged rocks extends 
in tolerable order on one side, affording means to scramble along. In the midst of this cave is much timber, bodies of trees, branches, &c. which being lodged up to the roof of this passage, shews that the water is swelled up to the very top during freshets. This opening in the hill continues about 400 yards, when the cave widens, after you have got round a sudden turning, (which prevents its being discovered till you are within it), into a spa cious room, at the bottom of which is a vortex ; the water that falls into it whirling round with amazing force : sticks, or even pieces of timber, are immediately absorbed, and carried out of sight, the water boiling up with excessive violence, and subsiding by{ degrees, and at certain inter vals. From the top of the Bald Eagle moun tains is a fine prospect of those of the Alleghany, stretching along until they seem to meet the clouds. Much slate is found here, with strong signs of pit coal. Such as visit these parts must cross the Juniata river three or four times, from Standing Stone or Huntingdon to the fort, travelling a dis tance of about 22 miles. 
|BALD Mountains. See TENESSEE. 
|BALD Head, at the mouth of cape Fear river, N. Carolina, is at the s. w. end of Smith s island, and with Oak island forms the main entrance into the river. The light-house, which was erect ed here in Dec. 1794, bears n. n. w. from the point of cape Fear, and is 24 miles n. w. by n. from the extremity of the Frying Pan shoal. 
|BALD Head makes the s. w. part of what is called Wells bay, in the district of Maine. Between cape Neddie harbour on the s. s. w. and Well s bay, are several coves, where small vessels in a smooth time, and with a zo. wind, haul ashore, and are loaded with wood in the course of a tide, with case and safety. 
|BALDiVIA. See VALDIVIA. 
|BALDWIN, an English settlement in the island of Barbadoes, and in the district of the parish of San Juan. 
|BALINA, a river of the province and govern ment of Yucatan. It runs into the sea at the e. coast of the gulf of Honduras. 
|BALIS, Rio DE, a river in the province and government of Yucatan, which runs into the sea upon the same coast, near the strand of Bacalar, and into the bay which is formed by that strand and Long island. 
|BALISA, a port of the coast of Lousiana, by some called Balija. 
|BALISGAN, a French settlement in Canada, situate on the shore of the river of St. Lawrence, in the mouth of that of Batiscan. 
|VOL. I. 
129 
|BALISES Bay, a settlement of the island of Barbadoes, in the district of the parish of San Juan. 
|BALIZE, a fort at the mouth of Mississippi river. 
|BALLENA, PUNTA DE LA, a cape or extre mity of land of the island of Margarita, which faces the e. 
|BALLENA, PUOMONTORIO 6 PUNTA DE LA, a promontory or point in the kingdom of Quito, and on the shore of the Pacific or S. sea, to the s. s. e. of the cape of Los Borrachos, and n. n. e. of that of Palmar. On its n. side, and very close to it, the river Jama runs into the sea ; the soil is sandy and level, but of little depth. 
|BALLENA, another point or promontory, on the coast of the province and corregimiento of Quillota in the kingdom of Chile, between the river and the Quebrada de Chcoapa. 
|BALLENA, a river of the province and govern ment of Florida, which runs e. and enters the sea between the river San Juan and the island of Sapala. 
|BALLENA, a canal formed between the islands Lucaya and Bahama. 
|BALLENAS, PUNTA DE LAS, a point on the coast, and in the w. head of the island of St. Domingo, and in the territory of the French. It lies between point Irois and cape Dona Maria. 
|BALLENAS, a canal or narrow pass of the gulf of California, or Mar Roxo de Cortes, formed in the most interior part of the same. It is by the coast and the island of the Angel de la Guarda. 
|BALLESTA, PUNTA DE LA, a point on the coast of the province and government of Guaya quil in the kingdom of Quito. 
|BALLEZE, BALLIZF, or WALLIS, a river in the peninsula of Yucatan, New Spain, Avhich runs n. e. above 200 miles, and empties into (he bay of Honduras, opposite the n. end of Turneff island. By the treaty of peace in 1783, it is agreed that British subjects shall have the right of cutting and carrying away logwood in the district lying between this river and that of Rio Hondo, on the n. which falls into Hanover bay. The course of the rivers are to be the unalterable boundaries. 
|BALLTO WN, a township in Saratoga county, New York, formerly in Albany county, and con tained in 1790, 7333 inhabitants, including 69 slaves. By the state census in 1796, there appears to be 266 electors in this township. It lies 36 miles n. of Albany, has a presbyterian meeting house, and is in a thriving state. The medicinal s 
|ISO 
waters called Ballfown springs, from their being found within the limits of this town, are of great celebrity, both on account of their healing virtue and the superior accommodation found near them for valetudinarians. They are situated about 12 miles w. of Still water, 14 from that part of the banks of the Hudson famous for the victory of General Gates over General Burgoyne, 36 n. of Albany, SO s. of lake George, and 196 above the city of New York. The springs are found in the bottom of a valley, or excavation, forming a kind of basin, of about 50 acres in extent. In this hollow grow lofty pines, which are overtopped by others, and rise at a greater or less distance above the brim of this basin. The woods are pretty well cleared near the springs. There is a large house for entertainment, with neat bathing-houses and shower-baths for the convenience of invalids. These, as also the greatest part of the valley, be long to an eminent merchant of New York ; the largest spring, however, belongs to the public. Sir William Johnson made this observation when he sold this tract of land to private individuals : * In tracing the history of these medicinal springs, 1 could only learn that an Indian chief discovered them to a sick French officer in the early part of their wars with the English : but whether they were these very springs in this basin, or those at ten miles distance, properly called the Saratoga springs, I know not." The soil for half a dozen miles round this place is poor and sandy, producing little else than pine trees, shrub-oaks, fern, and mullen. In the hills in the vicinity ores have been accidentally found, especially iron and copper, or rather what the mineralogists call ferruginous and cupreous pyrites. The valley of Balltown and its environs may be made an enchanting spot, equal, nay superior, in some respects, to any of the water ing places in Europe. The Kayaderassoras river, which is about 10 yards wide, gives several hints to the man of taste, to turn its waters to the use and beauty of the future town, which these medi cinal springs will one day raise in this place. The medicinal waters which have made this spot so famous of late are remarkably limpid, considering they contain iron, a mineral alkali, common salt, and lime. They are brisk and sparkling like champaigne. In drinking they affect the nose and palate like bottled beer, and slightly affect the head of some people by their inebriating quality. They derive this exhilarating quality from what Dr. Priestley calls
.rerf#/r, and is that animating some thing which gives activity to yeast, and life to malt liquors. It is used, in the neighbourhood of the springs, instead of yeast in making bread j and 
makes it rise more speedily and effectually thaw any other ferment in ordinary use. Horses drink these waters with avidity. The ignorant country people see, with astonishment, that a candle will not burn near the surface of these waters. Fish and frogs are killed in a few minutes, and geese and ducks can only swim in them a few minutes before they expire. These waters arc apt to burst bottles when corked in very warm weather, espe cially during a thunder storm ; but with care may be transported in bottles to any distance. They boil with a very moderate degree of heat ; they are nevertheless remarkably cold ; for when the mercury in Fahrenheit s thermometer stood at 86 in the open air, and 79 in the brook running near the spring, it stood in one of these mineral springs at 49, and in the other at 51 : the first was con stantly excluded from the rays of the sun, the last always exposed without a covering. Physician* seldom direct their patients to drink more than three quarts of these waters in twelve hours ; but some drink the enormous quantity of three gallons r and even more, in a day. Cold as they are, they may be drank with safety in the hottest weather. They increase every natural evacuation, nay, they are cathartic, diuretic, and sudorific, at the same time. On the first trial they are apt to disagree with many people ; they create uneasiness in the stomach and bowels, and cause a heat in the glands of the throat, until they begin to pass off freely by the kidneys ; they then become pleasant, and operate agreeably. They blacken the teeth and also the alvine faeces : they are deemed a specific in loss of appetite and indigestion : they are highly serviceable in hypochondriac eases, in obstructions, and in the stone and gravel, and cutaneous dis orders : their credit is not so well established in the gout or rheumatism : they are hurtful in in flammatory disorders and consumptions : their use occasions heat in the glands of the throat, and stiff ness of the neck ; and in such as are subject to the tooth-ache, an aggravation of the pain : they are a powerful and precious remedy in the hands of the judicious, but ought never to be used without the advice of a skilful physician. 
|BALLSTOWN, or BALLTOWN, a township in Lincoln county, district of Maine, contain ing 1072 inhabitants. One hundred and ninetyfive miles n. e. from Boston. 
|BALSAMO, BAHIA DE, a bay on the n. coast of the island of St. Domingo, between cape La Pena and the point of Macuri. 
|BALSAQUILLO, an extensive and beautiful valley of the alcaldia mayor of La Puebla de los Angeles in Nucva Espaim, so fertile as to have no 
loss than 56 estates and country seats. It is half a league from its capital. 
|BALSAR, a settlement of the district of Daule, in the province and government of Guayaquil, of the kingdom of Quito, very fertile, and abound ing in cacao, tobacco, cotton, and sugar-cane. It is 26 leagues from the capital, on the shore of the river Daule. 
|BALSAS, SAX CHRISTOBAL DE LAS, a settle ment of the province and corregimienlo of Chachapoyas in Peru, situate on the e. shore of the Maraiion : through it lies the road to Cajamarca. Lat. 6 16 . 
|BALSAS, another settlement in the same province and corregimiento as the former. 
|BALSAS, another, in the province and govern ment of Cartagena in the same kingdom of Tierra Firme, situate on the bank of the dike which communicates the sea with the river Magdalena. 
|BALSAS, a lake thus called, in the province of Guayaquil and kingdom of Quito ; it is between the river Perdomo to the s.; n. of the river Machala, and at one league s distance from the settle ment of its name. 
|BALSO, a river of the kingdom of Quito, which flows down from the mountain called Suchahuaca-urca ; and after washing those forests, run ning from n. to s. it enters the Bobonasa. 
|BALTASAR, SAN, a settlement of the pro vince and alcaldia mayor of Zacatlan in Nueva Espana. Five leagues from its capital. 
|BALTASAR, SAN, another settlement, in the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Nexapa in the same kingdom, situated at the foot of an elevated mountain. It contains 34 families of Indians, and is four leagues to the n. e. of its capital. 
|BALTIMORE County, in Maryland, lies be tween Patapsco and Gunpowder rivers, the former dividing it from Ann Arundel county on the s. and ft. w. ; Gunpowder and Little Gunpowder separat ing it from Harford county on the e. and n. e. It has Frederick county, on the w. and n. w. Penn sylvania on the n. and Chesapeak bay on the s. e. Besides the rivers which bound it, and their branches, this county has Back and Middle rivers between the two former, but they are rather arms of Chesapeak bay than rivers. Back river, four or five miles e. of Patapsco, receives two small streams; the north-westernmost is called Herring Run. Middle river has little or no supply of fresh water. There are numerous iron works in this county ; and it contains 25,434 inhabitants, includ ing 587 slaves. Its chief town is Baltimore. 
|BALTIMORE, the chief town in the above county, is the largest in the state of Maryland. 
131 
In size it is the fourth, and in commerce the fifth in rank in the United States. It is situated on the n. side of Palapsco river, at a small distance from its junction with the Chesapeak : the entrance of the harbour is defended by Whetstone fort, hardly a pistol-shot across, and of course may easily be defended against naval force. From the head of Elk river, at the head of the bay to Baltimore, is about 60 miles. The town is built around what is called the basin, reckoned one of the finest har bours in America : the water rises five or six feet at common tides : it is divided into \vhat is called the Town and Fell s point, by a creek, over which are two bridges, but the houses extend in an irre gular manner from the one to the other. At Fell s point the water is deep enough for ships of burden, but small vessels only go up to the town. The situation is low, and was formerly thought un healthy ; but by its rapid increase, improvements have taken place which have corrected the damp ness of the air, and it is now judged to be tole rably healthy. In 1787 it contained 1955 dwellinghouses, of which 1200 were in the town, and the rest at Fell s point. It then contained 152 store houses. The number of the inhabitants of the town and precincts, in 1791, were 13,503, including 1255 slaves. The number of houses and inhabitants have been greatly increased since. Before the emigration of the French people from cape Fran&lt;
ois, and other islands, the houses had increased to 2300. Those unfortunate people, flying from their merciless countrymen, who had burned and pillag ed their cities and towns, and murdered their rela tions and friends, found here an hospitable asylum, after sufferings hardly paralleled in the annals of history. Here are nine places of public worship, which belong to Roman Catholics, German Calvinists and Lutherans, Episcopalians, Presbyterians, Baptists, Methodists, Quakers, and Nicolites, or New Quakers, who all live together in peace. It is inhabited by people from most parts of Europe. The principal street is Market Street, which runs nearly e. and zr. a mile in length, parallel with the water : this is crossed by a number of other streets, which run from the water, a number of &gt;v Inch, particularly Calvert and Gay streets, are well built. N. and e. of the town the land rises, and presents a noble view of the town and bay. In 1790, this city owned 27 ships, 1 snow, 31 brigantines, 34 schooners, and 9 sloops, total 102; tonnage 13,564. The exports in the same year amounted to 2,027,770, and the imports to 1,949,899 dollars. The exports in July, August, and September, in 1790, amounted only to 343,584 dollars; but in these months in 1795, they amouuts2 
132 
|BAN 
to 1,675,748 dollars. The affairs of the town are managed by a board of town commissioners, a board of special commissioners, and a board of wardens; the first board fills its own vacancies, and is perpetual ; the two last are appointed by electors, chosen every fifth year by the citizens. It is 53 milc
s s. a), from Elktown, J76 n.e. from Richmond in V irginia, 50 n. e. from the city of Washington, and 103 s. w. from Philadelphia. Lat. 39 19 w. Long. 76 44 a?. 
|BAMBA, a small river of the province and corregimicnto of Caxamarca la Grande. ft rises ia the valley of Condebamba, and enters the Ma ra non. 
|BAMBAMARCA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Caxamarquilla in Peru, an nexed to the curacy of the capital. 
|BAMOA, a settlement of the missions which were held here by the regulars of the company of the Jesuits, in the province and government of Ciualoa. 
|BANAIIATU, a small river of the province and government of San Juan de los Llanos in the Nuevo Reyiio de Granada ; it rises between the rivers Cinaruco and Cantanapalo, runs e. and enters the Orinoco on the w. side, between the mouths of those two rivers. 
|BANAICHI, or BANAMICHI, a settlement of the province and government of La Sonora in Nueva Espaiia, on the shore of a river of this name, between the settlements of Guspaca and Gnopique. 
|BANANA, a small settlement of the province and government of Darien ; it consists of gentile Indians, and is situate on the shore of the gulph of this name, or Uraba. 
|BANANIERES, GRAND, a river of the island of Guadalupe ; it rises in the mountains towards the e. runs e. and enters the sea between the rivers Trou, Au, Chat, and Orange. 
|BAN ARE, MARIE, a river of the province of La Guayana, in the French possessions. 
|BANASIA, SIENNA DE, a chain of mountains of the island of St. Domingo, in the French pos sessions ; they are near the n. coast, at the zo. head, and run from n. to e. for many leagues. 
|BANCHERAU, a cape or point of land on the coast of A cad ia. 
|BANCO, a settlement of the province and go vernment ot Santa Marta in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, situate on the shore of the river Magdalena, at the mouth formed by the river Cesare. 
|BANCO DE PKRDOMO, a sand bank, just appear ing above the water, in the gulph of Guayaquil, opposite to the coast of Machala, (from whence it 
|BAN 
is one league distant), and to the Punta de Arenas of the island of La Puna. It extends upwards or" three leagues from n. to n. e. to s. to s. t. 
|BANCOS, small islands or rocks of the N. sea, near the coast of the province and government of Honduras, close to the cape of Camaron. 
|BANDITS, a small river of Canada, which runs s. w. and enters lake Superior. 
|BANEGAS, a settlement of the province and government of Venezuela, situate on the shore of the river Guarico, at the mouth where this river is entered by that of Los Aceytes. 
|BANGOR, a township in Hancock county, district of Maine, on the w. side of Penobscot river, 25 miles from its mouth at Belfast bay, 65 w. w. by zo. from Machias, 63 n. e. from Hallowell, and 280 n. e. from Boston. 
|BAN I, a large and beautiful valley of the island of St. Domingo, on the s. coast. 
|BAN i, a river of the same island, rising in the mountains of the coast. It runs s. crosses the aforesaid valley, and enters the sea between the point of La Salina and the bay of Ocoa. 
|BANICA, a settlement of Hispaniola, or St. Domingo, founded by Diego Velasques in 1504, in a valley of the same name, near the river Artibonito. It has a guard of 40 men, on account of its bordering upon the limits of the French; and is seven leagues from the town of Azua, or Compostela . 
|BANICA, a valley of the island, in which is the former settlement. It is arge, fertile, and beauti ful, surrounded on all sides by the rivers of the Indians, the Artibonito, and the Neiba. 
|BANICA, a small river of the same island, which rises at the foot of two mountains near the n. coast, runs s, e. and enters the Libon. 
|BANKS, Port, a harbour on the n. w. coast of America, s. e. from cape Edgecombe, and . w. from Sea Otter sound. 
|BANN, a township in York county, Penn sylvania. 
|BANNISTER, a small river of Virginia, which runs s. e. and enters the Hicotimos. 
|BANNOS, a settlement of the province and corregitmtnto of Hunmlies in Peru. In its neigh bourhood are the vestiges of a stone road, which are also found in the immediate provinces of Conchucos, Tarma, and others : its direction is from Caxamarca towards the s. The Incas used to travel along this road, and it is said to have ex tended as far as Quito ; its remains shew it to have been a sumptuous work. Not far from hence are other monuments of antiquity, such as a palace for bathing, in which the stones of the building 
were fitted together with such nicety that it is almost impossible to discover where they were joined ; the ruins of a temple and a fort, at the summit of a mountain, which has its side watered by the Maranon ; and anothjer fort at a little dis tance. Lat. 10 10 s. 
|BANNOS, another settlement, of the asiento and jurisdiction of Arnbato, in the con-cgimiento of Riobamba and kingdom of Quito ; situate at the skirts of the mountain of Tunguragua. There are some baths here which were much frequented, and the settlement was consecrated to the religious of the order of St. Dominic, and in its church was held in high veneration the image of our Lady. 
|BANNOS, another, of the province and govern ment of Canta in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Atavillos Altos. 
|BANNOS, another, in the province and corregimiento of Cuenca in the kingdom of Quito, in the vicinity of which there is at the top of the moun tain a spring of mineral waters, sprouting through several holes of about four or five inches in diame ter : they come out boiling, so that they will, harden an egg in a very few minutes. From these waters flows a stream of very beneficial properties, which deposits on its banks a yellow colour. The Incas had their baths here, and vestiges of these are still to be seen. Two leagues from its capital, in lat. 2 56 s. 
|BANNOS, another, in the province and corregimiento of Kancagua in the kingdom of Chile. 
|BANXOS, a river of the province and corregimiento of Cuenca in the kingdom of Quito. It rises in the mountainous deserts of the cordillera, takes its name from the settlement thus called, and passes at a quarter of a league s distance from the city of Cuenca. 
|BANOMAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, who inhabit the forests of the river Maranon, in the province of Quito. They were bounded by the Omagnas and Aysuares, and were reduced to the Catholic faith, and brought to live in settlements, by the celebrated Jesuit and mathematician, Samuel Frit, in 1683. 
|BANTAN, ROCHER DE, a shoal or small rocky isle, of the s. coast of Nova Scotia, between the capes IN egre and Sable. 
|BAN TRY. See BRAINTREE. BAQUERIA DEI, MAR, a territory of the province and captainship of Rey in Brazil, and in the country of the Guanoas Indians. 
|BAQUERIA, another, an extensive territory of the province and government of Paraguay, between the rivers Alboapioni and Yucas. 
|BAR 
133 
|BAR, a small river of Nova Scotia, which runs s. and enters the sea in the bay of Fundy. 
|BARA, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Venezuela in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, situate on the sea coast, near the river Guaique. 
|BARACOA, a sea-porttown in the n. e. part of the island of Cuba in the West Indies ; 50 miles n. e. of St. Jago de Cuba. Lat. 21 n. Long. 76 10 a&gt;. 
|BARACOA, a port of the missions belonging to the Portuguese Carmelite fathers, in the country of Las Amazonas, situate on the shores of the Rio Negro. 
|BARADERO, SAN FRANCISO REGIS DEL, a settlement of the province and government of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito, one of those be longing to the Jesuits. 
|BARADERO, SANTIAGO DE, another settle ment, of the province and government of Buenos Ayres, situate to the w. of its capital, at a small distance from the river La Plata. 
|BARAnERO, a bay of the coast of Brazil, in the captainship of Rey, between the lake of Los Defuntos, and the small island of Castillos Chicos. 
|BARADEROS, a port of the coast of the pro vince and government of Yucatan, near the river Champoton. 
|BARADEROS, a bay on the n. coast of the w. head of the island of St. Domingo, in the French possessions, between the Bee de Marsowin and the Petit Trou. 
|BARADERO, a settlement of Indians, of the province and government of Buenos Ayres, found ed in 1580 by the Guaranos, in Lat. 54 46 35". Long. 59 46 30" a). 
|BARAGUA, a settlement of the province and government of Venezuela in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, situate on the shore of the river Tucuyo, and to the . of the city of Bariquisimeto. 
|BARANOA, a settlement of the province and government of Cartagena in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, situate on the banks of a stream which runs from the swamp of Turbaco into the sea. 
|BARAONA, a settlement of the province and government of Quixos and Macas in the king dom of Quito. 
|BARARAUA, a settlement of the Portuguese in the province and country of the Amazonas, situate on the shore of the river Negro. 
|BARBA, PUNT A DE, a cape on the coast of Tierra Firme, in the province and government of Santiago de Veragua, in the the S. sea, one of those which form the bay of La Soledad. 
|BARBACOA, an island of the N. sea, in the 
134 
|BAR 
province and government of Darien, situate Tvitlnn the gulph of tl&gt;e same name, near the coast, and in front of the mouth of the river Choco. 
|BARBACOA, a point of land on the coast of the province and government of Cartagena, between the month of Latuna and the island of Barn. 
|BARBACOA, a settlement of the island of St. Domingo, situate on the e, head, and on the shore of the bay of its name. 
|BARBACOAS, a city of the province and go vernment of Esmeraldas in the kingdom of Quito, situate between the rivers Pati and Guaxi, near the coast of the S. sea, is also called Nnestra Seiiora del Puerto del Nuevo Toledo. Its soil is warm and moist, and the houses, although built of wood and a certain cane called guadua, and cover ed in with large dried leaves instead of tiles, are nevertheless very commodious and of a decent construction. Its inhabitants are docile, amiable, and courteous, and of singular genius. It has many families of distinction, who possess gold mines which are worked by the Negro slaves. The gold is of the best quality, and is carried to be coined at the mint of Popayan. Victuals and clothing are very dear, since they are brought from Pasto, Popayan, the town of Ibarra, and from Quito : it is governed by a vice-governor and two alcaldes, who are elected yearly. Here is an official real and a commissary of the inquisition ; and with regard to its ecclesiastical concerns, it is governed by a vicar belonging to the bishopric of Quito. The first person who found his way Amongst these mountains, for the sake of convert ing the nation of Barbacoas, of whom but few are now remaining, was Father Lucas de la Cneva, of the abolished company of the Jesuits, in 1640. It has four dependent settlements, and lies between the river Huachi to the ?0. and the Telembi to the n. e. in Lat. 1 42 s. Long. 78 8 a&gt;. 
|BARBACOAS, a settlement of the province and government of Venezuela, lying to the s. of the city of Caroa at the source of the river Tucuyo. 
|BARBACOAS, a bay of the n. coast of the island of St. Domingo, formed by the cape of Frances Viejo and that of Samana, is very large and capacious. 
|BARBACOAS, another settlement of the province and government of Venezuela, on the shore of the lake of Maracaibo. 
|BARBADOES, an island of the N. sea, one of the Lesser Antillas, situate to the n. of that of St. Vincent, and to the s. of Martinica ; is eight leagues long and five wide, and is of an oval shape. It was discovered by William Courteen in 1625, in the reign of James 1. king of England, who was returning from Pernambuco in Brazil, 
|BAR 
and was driven hither by a tempest, when he went on shore to reconnoitre, and found the island was crowded with wood ; indeed it was supposed that there was not a clear spot of ground upon it, and it seemed altogether desert, and uninhabited even by savages. There were neither pastures, grain, or herbs to be found upon it; but as the climate was good, and the soil appeared to be fer tile, it was settled by some English of small for tunes, who, after infinite pains and difficulty, suc ceeded in clearing away some of the timber with which it was so covered : the first crops were of course but scanty, but this, however, did not cause these new colonists to give up their enter prise ; and they were afterwards kept in counte nance and joined by some of their brethren who fled hither on account of the English civil wars. It was then granted by the king as a property to his favourite the Earl of Carlisle, and it thus so far increased in population, that in 20 years afterwards, namely in 1650, it contained 50,000 whites, and a greater number of Negro slaves. The king created 13 barons in this colony, who, in 1676, had upwards of 1000 Negroes, and em ployed more than 400 vessels, from 50 to 100 tons burthen, in their commerce of sugar, indigo, cot ton, ginger, and other productions. The in crease of the English colonies in the other islands caused the extraordinary elevation of fortune and dignity then prevalent in this, in some degree, to subside ; and what did not in a less degree con tribute to its downfal, was the terrible plague which broke out here in 1692, and continued for some years. It is by nature very strong, and completely surrounded by rocks, so that it is thoroughly sheltered to the windward ; to the leeward it has many good bays, and the whole coast is defended by a line of small forts. The country has the most beautiful appearance, being a series of valleys and mountains, cultivated in all parts, and full of plantations of sugar-cane, oranges, lemons, citrons, limes, guanas, papas, aloes, and many other kinds of delicious fruits, and interspersed with country villas and dwell ings : one of the principal branches of its com merce is rum, which is esteemed of the finest qua lity ; it abounds in fish and birds, and has many great caves or caverns, some of which are large enough to contain 500 men, and are used as hid ing places by the Negroes who run away from their masters. Its temperature is very hot, espe cially in the eight summer months, and the heat would indeed be intolerable, were it not for the n. e. breeze which springs up about sun-rise, and lasts as long as this luminary is above the horizon. 
|BARBADOES. 
135 
It has only one river, called Tuigh, the waters of which are covered by a fluid similar to oil, and which is used for lamps. The island is divided into 11 parishes, which contain 14 churches and chapels. The names of the parishes of this island are, to the n. St. Lucy s, St. Peter s, and St. An drew s ; to the s. St. Michael s, Christ Church, and St. Philip s ; and in the centre, St. James s, St. Thomas s, St. Joseph s, St. George s, and St. John s, which are divided into five districts : and it contains four towns, called Bridge Town, the capital, St. James s, formerly called the Hole, Speight s Town, and Ostin s, or Charles Town. 
Barbadoes, notwithstanding what Alcedo re marks, was probably first discovered by the Por tuguese in their voyages from Brazil, and from them it received the name which it still retains. It is said not to have been noticed in any seachart before the year 1600. It is usually ranked amongst the windward division of the Charibbes, being a day or two s sail from Surinam. From its being the first discovered of any of these islands, it is called the Mother of the Sugar Colonies. It was found without occupants or claimants. The Charibbes, for reasons altogether unknown to us, had deserted it, and the Portuguese, satisfied with the splendid regions they had acquired on the continent, seem to have considered it as of little valne. Having furnished it with a breed of swine for the benefit of such of their countrymen as might navigate the same track, they left the island in all other respects as they found it. Of the English, the first who are known to have land ed in this island, were the crew of a ship called the Olive Blossom, bound from London to Suri nam in 1605, and fitted out at the expence of Sir Olive Leigh. Some years after this, a ship of Sir William Courteen s, a merchant of London, returning from Brazil, was driven by stress of weather into this island, and finding refreshments on it, the master and seamen, on their arrival in England, made so favourable a report of the beauty and fertility of the country, that Lord Ley (afterwards Earl of Marlborough, and lord high treasurer) immediately obtained from King James I. a grant of the island to himself and his heirs in perpetuity. Accordingly Wil liam Dean, with 30 settlers, under the instiga tion of Courteen, arrived here safe in the latter end of the year 1624, and laid the foundations of a town, which, in the honour of the sovereign, they denominated James Town ; and thus began the first English settlement in the island of Bar badoes. In 1627 it was made over by patent to the Earl of Carlisle, afterwards to William, Earl 
of Pembroke, in trust for Courteen, and again restored by other letters to the Earl of Carlisle. The latter person, in order completely to ruin all the interests in the colony of his competitor, pro ceeded to distribute the lands to such persons as chose to receive grants at his hands on the terms proposed to them. A society of London mer chants accepted 10,000 acres, on conditions which promised great advantage to the proprietor ; but they were allowed the liberty of sending out a per son to preside over their concerns in the colony j and they made choice for this purpose of Charles Woolferstone, who repaired to the island, accom panied with 64 persons, each of whom was au thorised to take up ICO acres of land. These people landed on the 5th of July 1628, at which time Courteen s settlement was in a very promis ing condition ; but Woolferstone declared it an encroachment and usurpation, and being sup ported by the arrival of Sir William Tufton, who was sent out as chief governor by Lord Carlisle, in 1629, with a force sufficient for the mainte nance of his pretensions, he compelled the friends of Courteen to submit ; and the interests of the latter were thenceforth swallowed up and forgotten. Owing to a civil war in England/ many people of peaceable tempers and dispositions, chiefly royal ists, took refuge in this island ; and the conse quent ruin of the king s affairs induced a still greater number, many of whom had been officers of rank in his service, to follow their example. The emigration from the mother-country to this island was indeed so great during the commotions in England, that in 1650 it was computed there were 20,000 white men in Barbadoes, half of them able to bear arms, and furnishing even a regiment of horse to the number of 1000. " These adventurers, * says Lord Clarendon, " planted themselves with out any body s leave, and without being opposed or contradicted by any body." The colony, left to its own efforts, and enjoying an unlimited freedoom of trade, flourished beyond example. In the year 1646, however, the then Earl of Car lisle, who was son and heir of the patentee, stimu lated by the renown of its wealth and prosperity, began to revive his claims as hereditary proprie tor ; and entering into a treaty with Lord Willoughby of Parham, conveyed to that nobleman all his rights by lease for 21 years, on condition of receiving one half the profits in the mean time; but justly apprehending that the resident planters might dispute his pretensions, he very readily concurred with Lord Willoughby in soliciting a commission for the latter, as chief governor, un der the sanction of regal authority. Soon after- 
136 
|BARBADOS S. 
wards the whole island became the possession of the crown, and many indeed were the disturb ances that succeeded respecting the -right of pro prietorship, until the assembly passed an act, on the 12th September 1663, entitled, " An Act for settling the Impost on the Commodities of the Growth of this Island." 
The earliest planters of Barbadoes were some times reproached with the guilt of forcing or de coying into slavery the Indians of the neigh bouring continent. The history of Inkle and Yarico, which the Spectator has recorded for the detestation of mankind, took its rise in this island ; but happily this species of slavery was soon abolished. The Barbadoes tar (the oil allud ed to by A Icedo) is a particular production of this island. It vises out of the earth, and swims on the surface of the water. It is of great use in the dry belly -ach, and in diseases or" the breast. The form of the government of this island so very nearly resembles that of Jamaica, which may be found described under that article, that it is un necessary to enter into detail, except to observe that the council is composed of 12 members, and the assemby of 22. The most important variation respects the court of chancery, which in Barba does is constituted of the governor and council, whereas in Jamaica the governor is sole chancel lor. On the other hand, in Barbadoes the go vernor sits in council, even when the latter are acting in a legislative capacity. This, in Jamai ca, would be considered improper and unconsti tutional. It may also be observed, that the courts of grand sessions, common picas, and exchequer, in Barbadoes, are distinct from each other, and not, as in Jamaica, united and blended in one supreme court of judicature. Here is a college founded by Colonel Codrington, the only institu tion of the kind in the W. Indies ; but it has not answered the intention of the founder. The houses of the planters are very thickly sown all along the country, which, with the luxuriant productions of the soil, and the gently swelling hills, form a de lightful scene. That the dreadful succession of hurricanes, with which this and the other West Indian islands have been infested, has contributed to the great defalcation of its revenues, cannot be doubted. The capital of this island was scarce risen from the ashes to which it had been reduced by two dreadful fires, when it was torn from its foundations, and the whole country made a scene of desolation, by the storm of the 10th of October 17SO, in which no less than 4326 of the inhabi tants (blacks and whites) miserably perished; and the damage to the country was computed at 
j 1,320,564, 15.?. sterling. Moreover, the trade of this and some others of the islands, suffers con siderably by a duty of 4| per cent, on exported produce; out of which, however, the governor s salary, 
2000 a-year, is paid. The crown ac quired this revenue in the reign of Charles II. which the planters agreed to, in order to secure possessions to which they had uncertain titles. 
Barbadoes is about 21 miles in length from High point, its northern extremity, to South point ; and 14 in breadth, from the Chair near Kitridge bay, e. to Valiant Royalist fort, w. ; and con tains 106,470 acres of land, most of which is un der cultivation. It lies 20 leagues e. from St. Vincent, which may be seen in a clear day, 25 from St. Lucia, 28 s. r. from Martinico, 60 n. c. from Trinidad, and 100 s.e. from St. Christo pher s. The soil in the low lands is black, some what reddish in the shallow parts, on the hills of a chalky marl, and near the sea generally sandy. Of this variety of soil, the black mould is best suited for the cultivation of the cane, and, with the aid of manure, has given as great returns of sugar, in favourable seasons, as any in the West Indies, the prime lands of St. Kitt s exccpted. We are assured, that about the year 1670, Bar badoes could boast of 50,000 white, and upwards of 100,000 black inhabitant?, whose labours, it is said, gave 1 employment to 60,000 tons of ship ping. This account is supposed to be much ex aggerated. It cannot however be doubted, that the inhabitants of this island have decreased with, a rapidity seldom known in any other country. According to the most authentic returns of the number of whites in 1724, and of its Negroes in 1753, the former consisted of no more than 18,295, the latter of 69,870. In 1786 the num bers were 16,167 whites, 838 free people of co lour, and 6 L 
,1I5 Negroes. It appears too that the annual produce of this island (particularly sugar) has decreased in a much greater propor tion than in any other of the West Indian colo nies. Postlcthwayte states the crop of sugar, in 1736, at 22,769 hogsheads of 13cwt. which is equal to 19,800 of 15 cwt. ; and the author of the European Settlements, published in 1761, cal culates the average crop at 25,000 hogsheads. As the author first quoted gives a precise num
 ber, it is probable his statement was grounded on good authority. If so, the island has fallen off nearly one half in the annual growth of its princi pal staple. On an average of eight years (from 1740 to 1748) the exports were, 13,948 hogsheads of sugar, of 15 cwt. 12,884 puncheons of rum, of 100 gallons, 60 hogsheads of molasses, 4667 bags 
|BARBADOS S. 
of ginger, 600 bags of cotton, and 397 gourds of aloes. The exports, on an average of 1784, 1785, and 1786, had fallen to 9554 hogsheads of sugar, 5448 puncheons of mm, 6320 bags of ginger, 8331 bags of cotton ; exclusive of some smaller articles, as aloes, sweetmeats, &e. of which the quantities are not ascertained. The variation in the produce of sugar is from 6000 to 13,000 hogsheads ; whilst Grenada, St. Vincent s, and Tobago, vary only as from 12,000 to 16,000 hogsheads. 
By report of privy council, 1788, the Britishproperty vested here is estimated at 106,470 taxed acres of patented estates ; and the Negroes are com puted at 60,000, at 50/. each Negro. The same report, in a general appraisement of British pro perty vested in the British colonies, makes the land, buildings, and stock, double the value of the Negroes ; and the towns, stores, and shiping, about one twenty-second part of the lands. 
Produce of the island of Barbadoes exported, for seven years, from 1786 to 1792, both inclusive. 
A. D. 
Snijar. 
Melasses. 
Rum. 
Gilder. 
Aloes. 
Cotton. 
Hds. Trees. Bark 
Hds. Trees. 
HcK Trees. Bails. 
Bags and Barls. 
Hds. Trees. Gourds. 
Bags. Ibs. 
1786 
8,659 82 34! 9 
114 
199 39 6P3 
8070 
1 409 
8,864 
1787111,929 183 2415 
87 37 
1872 27 614 
6095 
1 1 688 
10,511 
1788 
10,309 63 3674 
-;;
6 607 
5364 
303 
1,894,365 
1789 9,021 J)6 4520 
C JI72 397 
5180 
372 
1,327,840 
1790 
9,998 123 2935 
2331 261 
4565 
475 
1,287,088 
1791 11,333 60 2346 
30 
008 411 
3735 
770 
1,163,157 
1792 
17,073 12.5 269S 
188 
5064 512 
3046 
515 
974,178 
From this great increase in the export of sugar, and decrease in that of the minor staples, it seems probable that the advanced price of that article in Europe in the year 1792, had encouraged the cul tivation of that article on plantations which had formerly been abandoned or appropriated to a dif ferent line of culture. 
To the year 1736 this island returned, 
on yearly average, of sugar, - To 1761, on average crops, - ... 
To 1787, only 
To 1805, only 
lids. 
22,769 
25,000 
12,21 1 
9.554 
The official value of the Imports and Exports of Barbadoes were, in 
1809, imports .288,4)2, exports 
450,760. 
1810, 311,400, 271,597. 
And the quantities of the principal articles imported into Great Britain were, in 
Coffee. 
Sugar. 
Rum. 
Cotton Wool. 
Brit. Plant. 
For. Plant. 
Brit. Plant. 
For . Plant. 
Cwt. 1809, 3471 1810, 30S 
r\vt. 1345 9 
Cwt. 139,717 
181,440 
Cwt. 3 
Galls. 
19,764 7,1)09 
Lbs. 
1,359,823 1,453,738 
The above statements will, it is conceived, give a good general view of the commercial relations of Bardadoes from the earliest period ; and it will be found that its produce for the European market has been regularly on the decline, though some what uniform, since 1787 to the present year. In dependently of all political circumstances, to which the cau"se might possibly be traced, we shall con tent ourselves in quoting the physical causes as cribed by Sir Charles Young, " As this decrease 
(Iw observes) ff has been constant and progressive, it is to be apprehended that the cause is of certain and continued effect ; namely, diminished and di minishing fertility, if not from exhausted soil, yet from the country being over-cleared and deprived of woods, and therewith deprived of moisture, un der their shade and covert, to form reservoirs for rivulets ; and deprived too of the attraction to clouds and rain, which, in the tropical climates, are indispensable to fertility, and which the wooded} 
158 
|BAR 
hills of islands constantly afford, and are in ex ample of." To the above causes of the decline of the exports, we would have our readers bear in mind the dreadful succession of hurricanes which took place in 178-1. The state of the population of this island at different periods, will be seen by the following authentic documents. 
Account of the number of Negroes in Barbadoes, and amount of the Public Taxes for seven years, from 1786 to 1792, both inclusive. (Extracted from Bryan Edwards.) 
A.D. 
No. of Slave*. 
Do. imported. 
Amount of Taxes. 
1786 
62,115 
511 
.10,138 14 g* 
1787 
62,712 
528 
13,528 15 11| 
1788 
63,557 
1585 
8,382 12 4i 
1789 
63,870 
556 
5,534 18 3 
1790 
64,068 
131 
13,482 19 
1791 
63,250 
426 
6,203 2 11| 
1792 
64,330 
744 
9,443 19 3 
|BAR 
The taxes thus levied on the public consist of a capitation tax on Negroes ; a tax on sugarmills, dwelling-houses, and carriages ; together with an excise, &c. on wines imported. Besides all which, there is a parochial tax on land, amounting, on average throughout the island, to about two shillings per acre, and an assessment in labour for the repair of the highways. The whole is altogether exclusive of the heavy duty of 4| per cent, to the crown. 
By report of privy council, 1788, and by subse quent estimates, the population amounted to 
1787 1805 
Whites. 
People of Colour. 
,&gt; 
Slaves. 
16,127 15,000 
2229 2130 
64,405 60,000 
By return to the house of commons, March 18th, 1790, the following was the Slave Trade from Africa to this island in the undermentioned years. 
it K Arrivals from Africa. 
Negroes exported. 
Years. 
Number of Vessels. 
Tonnage. 
Total number of Negroes im ported. 
To Foreign West ndies, in British Bottoms. 
To the 
States of America. 
Total Exported. 
Negroes re tained for cultivation. 
1787 
7 
831 
713 
85 
__ 
85 
628 
1788 
8 
801 
1099 
356 
6 
362 
737 
And the Import of Slaves into Barbadoes, by re port of privy council, 1788, at a medium of four years, and by a return to house of com mons in 1805, on a medium of two years from 1803, were, 
Average of 
Four years to 1787 Two years to 1803 
Imports, 
Re-exports. 
Retained. 
367 1050 
5 
28 
362 1022 
Barbadoes is situate in 13 10 n. lat. and in 59 w. long. 
|BARBARA, SANTA, a settlement of Indians, of the missions belonging to the religion of St. Do mingo, in the jurisdiction of the townof San Christobal in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It con sists of 100 Indians, is of a hot temperaturey and lies on the shor of the river A pure. 
|BARBARA, another settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Coautitlan in Nueva Espana, annexed to the curacy of its capital. It contains 218 fami lies of Indians, and is a little more than a quarter of a league distant from its capital. 
|BARBARA, another, of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Marinalco in the same kingdom, is of a cold and moist temperature, inhabited by nine families of Spaniards and Mustees, and 69 of Indians, who are accustomed to make pulque, (a liquor prepared of a species of aloes), and to sow some seeds and fruits which are peculiar to the climate. Close to this settlement is an estate in which dwell 10 families of Spaniards ami 13 of Indians. It is somewhat more than two leagues distant from its head settlement. 
|BARBARA, SANTA, another, of the head settle ment of Ahuacatlan, and alcaldia mayor of Zacatlan, in the same kingdom. One league from its head settlement. 
|BAR 
|BAR BAB A) SAN, another, of the head settle ment and alcnldia mayor of Cholula in the same kingdom, contains 36 families of Indians, and is a quarter of a league n. of its capital. 
|BARBARA, SAN, another, of the province and corregimiento of Angaries in Peru. 
|BARBARA, SAN, another, of the province and corregimiento of Barbacoas in the kingdom of Quito. 
|BARBARA, SAN, another, of the missions \vhich belonged to the regulars of the company of Jesuits, in the province of Tepegnana and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya, situate on the shores of the river Florido ; is six leagues to the 5. of the settlement and garrison of the valley of San Bartolome. 
|BARBARA, SAN, another, of the island ofCura
oa, situate on the w. coast, opposite the island of Tierra Firme, and near to the e. extremity. 
|BARBARA, SAX, another, in the above island, situate on the s. coast. 
|BARBARA, SAN, another, of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of Je suits, in the province and government of Alainas, of the kingdom of Quito, and in the country of the Ardas Indians. 
|BAIIBARA, SAN, another, of the missions which were held by the same regulars of the company of Jesuits in Orinoco, is composed of Indians of the nation of Saruca, having been founded between the rivers Sinaruco and Meta in 1739. 
|BARBARA, SAN, another, of the province and .government of Maracaibo, situate on the shore of the river Pariba. 
|BARBARA, SAN, another settlement and rra/ of the mines of the province of Tepeguana and king dom of Nueva Vizcaya, situate close on the s. e. side of the settlement of Parral. [In its vicinity are very rich silver mines. It lies 500 miles n. w. of the city of Mexico. 
|BARBARA, SAN, another, of the province of Barcelona and government of Cumana in the king dom of Tierra Firrae ; one of those which are un der the care of the religious observers of St. Fran cis, of the missions of Piritu ; situate in the serrania, on the shore and at the source of the river Unare. 
|BARBARA, SAN, another, of the province and government of Sierra Gorda, in the bay of Mexi co arid kingdom of Nueva Espana ; founded in the year 1750 by the Count Sierra Gorda, Don Jo seph de Escandon, colonel of the militia of Querataro. 
|BARBARA, SAN, a town of the island of Laxa, in the kingdom of Chile, situate on the shore of the river Biobio, near its source, with a fort of the 
|BAR 
139 
same name to restrain the Indians. It was foundby the president Don Joseph de Rozas, Count de Poblaciones, who thus called it, out of respect to the queen Doiia Maria Barbara of Portugal, who reigned at that time. 
|BARBARA, SAN, another town, of the province and government of Valparaiso, in the same king dom of Chile, and to the e. of the capital. 
|BARBARA, SAN, a channel in the strait of Ma gellan, by which this communicates itself with the S. sea, from the island of Luis el Grande, on the w. side of the Tierra del Fuego. 
|BARBARA, SAN, a fort of the province and government of Tucuman. 
|BARBARA, SAN, another fort, in the province and government of Guayana, of the kingdom of Tierra Firme ; situate on the shore of the Orinoco. 
|BARBE, 8 ANTE, a small island of the e. coast of Newfoundland, opposite Green bay. 
|BARBE, SANTE, a bay on the w. coast of the same island of Newfoundland, at the entrance of the strait of Bellisle. 
|BARBON, a town of the province and govern ment of Guayana in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. 
|BARBOSA, an island of the coast of Tierra Firme, in the government of Maracaibo and pro vince of Venezuela, is of a triangular form, and sit uate opposite to the mouth of the lake of Mara caibo. 
|BARBUDA, an island of the N. sea, one of the Lesser Antilles, in the English possessions, and situtuate n. of Antigua, or Antego, is five leagues long, and of a fertile soil, abounding in cattle and fruits, especially in cocoa-trees, which are here extremely fine. It also yields cotton, pepper, tobacco, indigo, ginger, and sugar-cane ; not to mention the other fine productions of exquisite woods, herbs, and roots, with which it is plenti fully stocked. The English, however, derive but little advantage from it, from the frequent attacks made against them by the Charibbee Indians ; and by these they are frequently put to death. Here grows the sensitive plant, which withers as soon as touched. It abounds in different kinds of snakes ; and amongst these there is a certain species which is of a yellow and red colour, and having a flat head, the bite of which produces certain death, if recourse be not had to immediate remedy. It is 12 leagues to the n. e. of Antigua, and 24 to the n. n. e. of St. Christopher s. It belongs to the fa mily of Codrington, to which it is worth upwards of 5000/. per annum. It abounds in swine, sheep, and in birds; and its natives employ themselves in the breeding of the former. The inhabitants should amount to 1200, and they merchandize to the 
T2 
140 
|BAR 
neighbouring parts. [They have since increased to upwards of 1500. Lat. 17 36 n. Long. 61 46 w.l 
|BARBUDO, a settlement of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, founded by Francisco Henriquez, on the shore of the river of La Magdalena, in 154 1 , in the province of the Malebueyes : it was a large population, and rich in gold mines : these are close in its vicinity, but are not worked at the pre sent day, upon which account it has fallen into the utmost state of misery and decay. 
BAltBUDOS, a barbarous nation of Indians, who inhabit the woods to the s. of the river Marafion, and to the e. of the Guallaga. They are ene mies of the Aguanos and of the Cocamas ; but they are at present for the most part united, and re duced to a settled population by the missionaries, the Jesuits of Mainas. 
|BARBURES, a barbarous nation of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, inhabiting the mountains close to the city of Pamplona. They are descendants of the Chitarcros, but are at present very few in number, and are but little known. 
|BARBUE, a river of Canada. It rises from a lake, runs ay. between the rivers Raisin and Marameg, and enters the lake Nichigan. [Us mouth, CO yards wide, lies 72 miles n. by w. from fort St. Joseph. 
|BARBUE, the name of a river which empties into lake Erie, from the n. by e. 40 miles w. n. w. from the extremity of Long point in that lake, and 22 e. by s. from Tonty river. 
|BARCA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Pariain Peru, annexed to the cura cy of Toledo. 
The settlements of the jurisdiction are, San Pedro, Quisco, 
O cat Ian, Totan, 
Ponzitlan, San Luis, 
Atotonilco, Sula. 
Zapotlan, 
|BARCAS, the alcaldia mayor of the kingdom of Nuera Galicia, but of the bishopric of Mechoacan. Its capital, which bears the same name, is a large town, having a numerous population of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattoes. Its vicinity ateo is well stocked with inhabitants, and near it &gt;are many country-houses, estates, farm-houses, and grazing lands for cattle of the large and small sort. It is very pleasant and fertile, and in its confines runs the large river of Guadalaxara, from whence it lies 25 leagues to the e. s. e. 
|BARCELLOS, or SAN CAYETANO, a city of the province and country of the Amazonas, in the Portuguese possessions, is on the shore of the 
abundant river Negro, opposite the second deep chasm of Varaca, the same forming one of the arms by which this river is entered by that of Paravinanas, or Parime. 
|BARCELONA, a province of the government of Cumana, one of the three which compose that, government; bounded on the w. by Cuniaua, e. by Caracas, and s. by the river Orinoco, which also divides it from Guayana. All the front looking to the n. is a part of the serrania, which commences at the Punta de Paria, and runs as far as Santa Marta. At the distance of nine leagues to the back of this province, begin the extensive llanos, which beaf i(s name, and which, uniting with those of Caracas, run s. as far as the Orinoco ; but these llanos are nothing more than barren wastes, pro ducing no herbs, though they are nevertheless well stocked with cattle, which breed here in great abundance, and which derive their food from the rank herbage which grows upon the banks of the rivers ; and when these suffer from drought, the fa tality amongst these poor creatures is, of course, ter rible. The temperature here is the same as that of Cumana, though not so unhealthy. This province produces nothing but maize, yucas, plantains, and such other fruits as are found in the above-mention ed province, and even these in nogreat abundance. It is however noted for its cattle ; and the inhabi tants have a method of salting down meats, which they call tasajo, and which they export to the islands of Margarita, Trinidad, and to other parts. With regard to the skins, a third part of them are sent to St. Domingo and Puertorico, and the rest are exported by the Dutch ; and it is calculated that not less than from 8 to 9000 head of cattle are killed here annually. Its coast abounds in fish, but they are neither so plentiful, nor of so fine a fla vour, as upon the coast of Cumana. It has four small salt-pits, of which the natives make free use, and this without any other trouble than that of merely extracting the salt. Its principal rivers are those of Barcelona and Unare, both of which run n. A species of palm is very common throughout the whole province ; it resembles the date-tree, which is called here moricke, producing every year a rivulet of water, and many of them toge ther a very tolerable stream, from a tendency which has been discovered in this plant to ab sorb the moisture from the earth. This province contains 32 settlements, viz. three head-towns, the capital of its name, Aragua, and Concepcion de Pao, 15 consecrated villages, and 17 of mission* or reducciones of Indians, which arc as follows .: Pozuelos, Clarines, 
San Miguel, Caigua_, 
|BARCELONA. 
141 
San Bernardino, Pilar, 
Piritu, Tocuyo, 
San Francisco, San Pablo, 
San Lorenzo, Purey. 
And of the missions, Quiaraare, Platanar, 
Gary, Santa Barbara, 
Candelaria, Unare, 
Micures, Santa Rosa, 
Santa Ana, Alapirire, 
Guazaiparo, Cachipo, 
Margarita, Arivi, 
Chamariapa, San Joaquin. 
Santa Clara, 
The above province, on or before the 7th De cember 1811, had declared for independence. See VENEZUELA. 
The capital was founded in 1634 by Don Juan de Urpin, on a level upon the shores of the river of its name, at half a league s distance from the sea. Its soil is very uneven ; and as it is not paved, it becomes in the winter extremely rugged and incon venient, through the rains, as also dusty and dis agreeable in the summer, on account of the dust, which flies about in all directions, if the wind blow ever so mildly. It is an open town, without any fortification, small, and containing 500 house keepers, who are masters of 50 small estates, some of which are of cacao, situate in the valley of Cupira, in the province of Caracas, and from whence the productions are not allowed to be ex ported. The other estates are of the larger cattle, in which are counted upwards of 40,000 head, which would be sufficient completely to enrich any other country where they might not be rated at so low a price ; for it is common for one head to bring no more than two dollars and a half, if paid in real money, and four if in effects ; and this may be considered the cause why this place is so poor, notwithstanding that its natives are the most industrious of any in the province. It con tains, besides the parish church, which is not yet finished, another, with a hospital for the religious Franciscansof the missions of Piritu. Twelve leagues from the capital, Cumana; but this distance, on ac count of the badness of the roads, and unevenncss of the country, should be estimated at no less than 0. [Its population, according to Depons, is 1 1,000 souls, and it has only one parish church, and an hospital for the Fnuicjscans, who bear the expence of the missions to these parts. The great number of hogs that are bred here cause in the city infectious sewers, which corrupt the air and en gender diseases. The cabildo, whose principal oftics is to watch over the salubrity of the inhabi 
tants, leave them indifferently exposed to all the malignity of the infectious effluvia , the danger of which they themselves partake. However, towards the end of 1803, M. Cagigal, the commander of the place, took some wise measures to rid the city of an infection which could not but be fatal to per sons staying there. This ci(y was originally peopled by inhabitants from Si. Christophe de Cumanagoto, for which it has been in some manner substituted. Agriculture is much neglected in Barcelona and the environs. The most cultivated valleys are those of Capirimal and Brigantin. There are others as fertile,which have never receiv ed the plough-share. Depons asserts, that they do not yield above 3000 quintals of cacao, with some little cotton ; and Humboldt admits, at an average of four years, from 1799 to 1803, the quantity of cacao exported from hence to have amounted to 5000 fanegas. This part of the country is almost without slaves ; they compute but 2000 on a surface which would employ 600,000, and one half of the 2000 are occupied in domestic services. Besides the horned cattle that they sold for the use of the country, or for exportation, the inhabitants killed a prodigious quantity, which they salted and sold in the neighbouring islands, and at the Havannah, at a profit of cent, per cent. The tallow and hides were also a considerable article of traffic. At present this resource is great ly diminished, without being destroyed. The robbers, who, since 1807, commit with impunity their devastations on the herds, have reduced this province to such a scarcity in animals, that they have hardly enough for their butchers shops. 
The population of Barcelona is composed of one half whites and the other people of colour. The latter are as useless in agriculture here as every where else. Among the whites there are some Catalonians, who are entirely merchants, whose specu lations are in prohibited as well as in la-.yful goods. By their frequent voyages to the ports of Trinidad, they bring in return only contraband goods, for which Barcelona is the emporium, and which af terwards are diffused throughout the provinces, as well by sea as by land. It is computed that 400,000 piastres fortes are annually exported from Barcelona for this clandestine trade. The city lies in Lat. K; 10 . Long. 64 47 
 . 
|BAIIGKI.O.N r A, a river of the above province and kingdom. It rises in the loftiest part of the serranifi of Cumana, and collecting the waters of smaller rivers, which descend from the table-land of Guanipas, takes a course from n. tos. and en ters the &ea close to the ci&lt;y ot its name. In the winter it is accustomed to prodigious overflow
 
142 
|BAR 
and in the summer it is deep enough to be navi gated by bilanders ; but neither at one time nor the other is it accessible except for small craft, on account of the sand bank which lies at its en trance. 
|BARCO, PEVA DEL, a point of the*, coast, in the w. head of the island of S. Domingo, in the territory of the French, between the bay of Judio and that of Los Collados. 
|BARECIES, a barbarous nation immediately upon the shores of the river Paraguay, at no great distance from the lake of Los Xareyes. 
|BARICHARA, SAN LORENZO DE, a settle ment of the jurisdiction of the town of San Gil and corregimiento of Tunja, in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It was annexed to the curacy of the above town, and was separated from it in 1751 ; is of a hot though healthy temperature, but very subject to strong currents of air. It produces sugar-cane, cotton, plantains, rice, and a mo derate quantity of tobacco. From these, and from the making of cotton garments, the inhabitants derive their principal source of commerce ; and they should amount to 700. It is nearly upon the shore of the river of the Mochuelo, two leagues from the town of San Gil. 
|BARIMA, a small river of the province and government of Cumana in the kingdom of Tierra Firme ; it rises in the middle of the sierra of Imataca, runs n. and enters the sea at the same mouth of. the Orinoco, which, on account of its size, is called De Navios. 
|BARIMA, a point or strip of land of the same province and government ; it is one of those which form the principal mouth of the river Orinoco, and is on the left side. 
|BARINAS, a city of the government of Maracaibo, founded in 1576 by Juan Varela, on the shore and at the source of the river of St. Domin go, is famous for the tobacco which it produces, and which is esteemed the very best ; is of an ex tremely hot temperature, but very fertile, and abounds in the above article and cacao, both of which are carried to Caracas, and sold at the rate of 20 dollars a cargo.. It abounds in neat cattle, and in some of its estates are upwards of 30 or 40,000 head, and an equal number of horses and mules of an excellent quality ; also in sugar-cane : and it has many mills for the manufactures of this article and brandy. There are quantities of maize, plantains, yucas y uyamas, potatoes, curas, and names i which latter is a species of root like truf fles, grows spontaneously, and comes to such a size as to be of a pound weight : it is, consequent ly, the custom to cut away parts of it for use, with
out pulling up the whole root at once : of cas is made cazane, which is the common bread. In the level plains are found a remarkable number of pines, water melons, which are called palillas / other melons, annonus, tucuraguas, of a very fine smell, and which have the property of causing fe vers ; and plaintains of many sorts. In the moun tains are woods of cacao trees, which grow with out being sown, the nuts of which are small. There are also found groves of limes and oranges, exten sive mountains of exquisite woods, some of dolicious fragrance and aromatic gums, others of an excessive hardness and durability, such as cedars, granadillos, red and black, here called canaguate, &lt;\nd many herbs, fruits, and medicinal roots ; the espongilta fruit, which being infused in water, is an excellent and certain purgative ; the pasalla root, and the zarzaparilla. This territory has many navigable rivers, and in them an abundance of excellent fish, trout, tortoises, morrocoyes, seacalves, and alligators. The parish church is good, but the city is reduced, owing to its inhabitants, who amount to about 300 house-keepers, having agreed, for the most part, to remove themselves to a spot at some distance, and to their having already in a great measure put their design into execution. In its jurisdiction, and in the jurisdiction of the town of Pedraza, are eight settlements of missions or reducciones of Indians, which are under the care of monks of St. Dominic. Notwithstanding all the advantages this city enjoys, it is much infested with swarms of mosquitoes of various sorts, spi ders, snakes, lice, and various other sorts of noxious and filthy vermin. Its heat also is ex cessively troublesome. This city had formerly the name of Altamira de Caceres, from the governor Francisco de Caceres ; and at his order it was founded by Juan Varela, at the top of a sierra, which served it as a wall. It had only two en trances, the one leading out to the llanos to the $. e and the other to the n. w. which facilitated the communication with the cities of Merida and Truxillo. After some years, when the infidel Indians retired from its territory, the inhabitants removed tht settlement to the s. side of the river St. D6mirigo, upon a spacious table-land theretofore called Moromy, but afterwards Barinas, this be ing the name of that territory. There it remained until the year 1646, when some of the religious order of St. Dominic, having pacified the Indians who remained, established different estates, and founded various settlements, under the assistance of an escort of troops. Again the Captain Miguel de Ochagavia, native of this city, in 1634, having discovered the navigation oi the rivers Apure and 
|BAR 
Orinoco as far as Guayana and the island of Tri nidad ; the inhabitants, as well to deliver them selves from the plagues of the venomous serpents, ants, mosquitoes, and other insects, agreed to-betake themselves to a certain level plain, and actu ally departed in 1752, under the permission of Don Joseph de Sol is, viceroy of Santa Fe. The city was then founded on a spacious plot of ground, of an healthy temperature, of a pure air and atmos phere, at the distance of a quarter of a league from the river of St; Domingo, which runs to the n. of the city, the king approving this translation in the letters patent of 1760. In the old city there was a house of entertainment belonging to the monks of St. Augustine, which was broken up in 1776, and two hermitages, called El Calvario and San Pedro, which were ruined by an earthquake in 1740. At the present day it has only, in addition to the parish church, one hermitage, with the de dicatory title of Santa Barbara ; being however authorised to build another, with the title of Nuestra Senora del Carmen. In the former year, 1785, the king thought it worthy to be erected into a province and government, independent of, and situate from, that of Maracaibo, subject to the intendancy and captainship-general of Venezuela, and in its ecclesiastic concerns, to the bishopric newly erected in Merida. Its district abounds in neat cattle, mules, and horses ; also in sugar, to bacco, cotton, and some cacao; and, for some little time past, there have been here some rich establish ments of indigo, which, for its quality, is highly esteemed in all parts. Its missions have always been of the religious order of St. Dominic, of the province of Santa Fe. Sixteen leagues to the e. of Merida. [The chief officer at Marinas has but the title of political commander, although his functions in his district are the same, in civil, military, and religious matters, as those of other governors. His salary is also the same as theirs, 4000 piastres fortes. The increase, of late years, of this part of the province, open to invasion by the navigable rivers which flow into the Orinoco, was the reason of the establishment of this government ; and for its better defence, a militia was formed in 1803, and the city was furnished with a garrison consisting of a company of troops of the line newly raised, and composed of 77 men. The city of Barinas has been long known in the European markets for its tobacco, which, from prejudice, is considered su perior to all other, but, in reality, it is inferior in every respect to that cultivated in other places, and particularly in Cumanacoa in the province of Cuiuana. The prepossession in its favour is never theless ;so, great, .that at Amsterdam or Hamburgh, 
|BAR 
143 
tobacco of any other description, whatever may be its quality, sells for 20 or 25 per cent. less. The Spaniards ixung aware of this, ail tobacco, from whatever province it may be produced, is shipped by them under this recommendatory title, and the European purchaser experiences no loss from the deception. It is observed of late, that the tobacco of Barinas is more subject to spoil than any other. Hardly is the last process of preparation finished when a destructive worm gets into the heart of the plant, corrodes the interior of it, and converts it into a powder ; the surface appears but slightly in jured, and the injury is therefore more difficult to discover. The inhabitants, for a long time intent solely on the cultivation of tobacco, conceived that the country was not capable of yielding any thing else, but at present they grow, or endeavour to grow, every thing. The produce is transported in a great degree by water to the Guayana : the place of loading is on the Portuguese river, five leagues below the city, and is called Torunos. The air of the city is very pure, although Reaumur s thermo meter is seldom below 24. The inhabitants are computed at 10,000. Barinas lies 100 league* s. s.e. of Caracas. Lat. 7 35 n. Long. 70 15 a&gt;. BARINAS, with the additional title of Nueva, another city of the same province and government, founded on the shore of the river of St. Domingo, as is also the other, but lower down than the former. 
|BARIQUISIMETO, or NUEVA SEGOVIA, a city of the province and government of Venezuela in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, founded in 1552 by Captain Juan de Villegas on the shores of the river Buria, with the name of Nueva Segovia, in the vicinity of the gold mines which are in the val ley of Mirua, to the e. of Tucuyo ; but its bad climate and scarcity of every necessary induced the Governor Villacinda to remove it two leagues from Tucuyo ; from whence it was again removed by Pablo Collado to a spot lying between the riven Turbio and Claro ; and a third time, by the Go vernor Manzaneda, to where it still remains, on some lofty llanuras. These are very open, and abound in all the fruits peculiar to Castillc, in ex cellent wheat, which is gathered in the valley of Quibon. The soil of this valley is extremely hot, but pleasantly irrigated by a stream flowing from a chasm or cleft in the serrama, where the native* often betake themselves during the summer nights to repose, on account of its refreshing coolness. It has a very good parish church, in which there is a very fine and miraculous image of our Savioulr crucified, and to which singular respect is paid ; also a convent of Francisnw moats. This city 
144 
|BAR 
is notorious, from being the place \vherc Lope de Aguirre met with his death, and where he put a period to his cruelties ; lor being the country of I)on Fray Gasper dc Villaroel, the very learned Archbishop of Charcas in Peru. Lat. 9 40 n. Lori"-. 69 28 re. See BARQUISIMETO. 
|BARK A DARES, the name of a part of the log wood country, on the e. side of the peninsula of Yucatan, through which the river Balize ruiis in to the se of Honduras. It has Hicks keys on the .v. and S. Lagoon on the n. 
8ARKHAMSTEAD, a township in the n. pan of Connecticut, in Litchtield county, having Haartland on the n. and Granby e. About 25 miles zo. of Hartford. 
|BARLOVENTO, LACUNA DE, a lake of the kingdom of Chile, in the province and corregimifnto of Copiapo, between the settlement ancl the mountain of this name. 
|BARM A, PUNT A DE, a point on the coast of the province and government of Cumana in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, one of those which form the mouths of the Orinoco, and that which runs furthest into the sea. 
|BARNABY, ST. a settlement of Nova Scotia, or Acadia, situate on the shore of the river St. Lawrence. 
|BARNARD, a township in Windsor county, Wrmoiit, containing 673 inhabitants. It has Stockbridge w. and gives rise to the n. branch ofWaterqneche river, and is 65 miles n. e. of Bennington. 
|BARNAWELDT, or S. BERNARDO, a small island, which is barren and uninhabited, on the*, of the Tierra del Fuego, and n. of the island of Diego Ramirez. It Avas discovered by the Dutch, under the command of Captain Henry Bnm, in 1616 ; they built upon it a small fort, which they immediately abandoned. 
|BARNEGAT, OLD, an island of the coast of New Jersey, between that of Beach and the port of Little Egg. 
|BARNEGAT Inlet, called in some maps New In let, is the passage from the sea into Flat bay sound, on the s. e. coast of New Jersey, 68 miles n-.e. from cape May. Lat. 39 43 n. Barnegat beach lies below this inlet, between it and Little Egg harbour, 16 miles distant s. zw.J 
BA UN EG AT, the name of a small village of eight or ten houses on the e. bank of Hudson river, five miles- s. of Ponghkeepsie, and 75 n.of New York. The sole businessof the few inhabitants of this place is burning lime, from the vast quantities of lime stone which are found here. Their lime is market ed in New York, whither they carry it in great annually. 
|BAR 
|BARNET, a township in Caledonia county, Ver mont, formerly in Orange county, containing 477 inhabitants, and 112 miles n. e. from Bennington. The lower bar of the Fifteen-M ile falls in Connecticut river is situated at the n.e. corner of this town ship. Into that river it sends Stephens river, which rises in Peachum, the adjoinging town on the w.l 
|BARNSTABLE Bay, a large and beauti ful bay of New England, in the colony and pro vince of Massachusetts, which gives its name to a county and capital city, situate at the n. extremity, near the cape and the shore of the river Tloyenas. 
Barnstable, the Mattacheese, or Mattacheeset, of the ancient Indians, is a port of entry and post town, and is the shire town of Barnstable county. It extends across the peninsula, and is washed by the sea on the n. and s. having Sandwich, and the district called Marshpee or Mashpee, on the w. : is about five miles broad and nine long : 67 miles . e. from Boston. Sandy Neck, on the n. shore, runs e. almost the length of the town, and forms the harbour, embosoming a large body of salt marsh. The harbour is about a mile wide and 4 long, in which the tide rises from eight to fourteen feet. It has a bar running off n. e. from the Neck several mites, which prevents the entrance of large ships, but small vessels may pass any part of it at high water ; and where it is commonly crossed, it seldom has less than six or seven feet at low water. There is another harbour on the s. called Lewis s bay ; its entrance is within Barnstable, and it extends almost two miles into Yarmouth. It is commodious and safe, and is completely landlock ed, and has five feet water at a middling tide. A mile or two to the w. and near the entrance of Lewis s bay, lies Hyanis road ; it is formed prin cipally by an island joined by a beach to Yarmouth, which together make the outside of the bay before mentioned. The s. head of this island is called point Gammon. Oyster bay, ?&gt;par the s. w. limit of the town, admits small vessels, and which, with Lewis s bay, has in years past produced excellent oysters in great quantities,though they are now much reduced. There are about 20 or 30 ponds in Barnstable. The land here produces about 25 bushels of Indian corn to an acre, and rye and other grain in proportion. Wheat and flax are cultivated, the latter with success. From 12 to 18,000 bushels of onions are raised for the supply of the neigh bouring towns. Upwards of 1UO men are employ ed in the fishery, which is yearly increasing. VV hales seldom come into Massachusetts bay now, and that fishery is discontinued. No quarrels with the ancient natives of the-country are recorded 
P&gt; A R 
in the accounts of tins town, where the English settlors of New England first landed, Nov. Jl, 16 iO. The people, 2610 in number, are generally healthy, and many instances of longevity are to be met with. Numbers of the farmers are occa sionally seamen ; and this town has afforded, and continues to furnish, many, masters of vessels and mariners who sail from other ports. Lai. 4143 w. Long. 70 15 a&gt;. 
|BARNSTABT-E County lies upon the peninsula, the point of which is cape Cod, the s. e. point of Massachusetts bay, opposite cape Ann. Cape Cod gives name to the whole peninsula, which is surrounded by water on all sides, except the w. where it is bounded by Plymouth county. It is 65 miles long, as the road runs, from the isthmus, between Barnstablc and Buzzard s bays to Race point; and its breadth for 30 miles not more than three, and above half the remainder from six to nine miles. It contains 11 townships and the plantation of Marshpee, having 2343 houses, and 17,354 inhabitants. Barnstable was made a shire in 1685. See CAPE COD. 
|BARNSTEAD, a township inStraftbrd county, New Hampshire, containing 807 inhabitants ; 32 miles n. to. of Portsmouth, and 16 e. by s. from Canterbury, on Connecticut river. 
|BARNWEL, a fort of N. Carolina, 20 miles n. w. of New Bern, in the county of Craven. 
|BARQUE, a small river of the province and government of Louisiana. It runs s. w. between those of Sioux and Sureau, and enters the Missouri. 
|BARQUE, a bay of the island of Guadalupe, on the w. coast, between the rivers Pottel and Petit village. 
|BARQUE, another bay of the same island, distinct from the former, on the s. coast, opposite the island of Marigalantc, between Los dos Diamantes, and the Puerta De los Castillos. 
|BARQUISIMETO or BAIUQUISIMETO. This city was (according to Depons) founded 15 years before the city of Caracas: it lies on a plain of such an elevation as to allow it the enjoyment of every refreshing breeze that blows ; and owing to this for tunate situation, the excessive heat experienced here becomes supportable. The thermometer of Reau mur rises to 28 or 2S whenever the rays of the fcun do not meet, in the atmosphere, any thing to moderate their heat. The most prevalent wind is the n. e. The inhabitants find in the plains, the valleys, and on the hills forming the environs of the city, the means of exercising, according to their inclination, their industry and application. The excellent pasture in the plains renders the rearing of all sorts of animals for commerce easy. 
|VOL. i. 
|BAR 
14,5 
A great many people prefer this kind of specu lation, and find it to their advantage ; they also cultivate the sugar-cane and wheat. The valleys by their verdure, preserved to them by means of canals, produce abundantly the best cacao, and the hills have for some time past been planted with coffee, which, to be excellent, only requires a more careful preparation. To consider merely the vast quantity of fertile land in the neighbourhood of Barquisimeto, which can be watered and which remains uncultivated, one would be inclined to accuse the inhabitants of indolence : but in ex tending our views to the plantations of all sorts of produce, and to the animals spread over the plains; in contemplating too the great difficulty in the carriage of merchandize to the sea-ports, the nearest and most frequented of which is at a distance of 50 leagues, one is rather inclined to think favour ably of their industry. The city consists of 3300 persons, who live very comfortably ; the houses are well built, the streets in parallel lines, and wide enough for the free circulation of air. The paro chial church is handsome, and the duty is per formed by two curates. A cabildo and a lieute nant of the governor perform the functions of the police, and of the administration of justice. It is 80 leagues w. s. w. of Caracas, 150 leagues n. n. e. of Santa Fe, and 15 leagues n. e. of Tocuyo. See BAIUQUISIMETO. 
|BARK A, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Maracaibo, in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, in the island Pajara, at the mouth of the great lake. 
|BARRACAN, a settlement of the province and government of Buenos Ayres in Peru, situate by the bay of its name, at the mouth of the river La Plata. 
|BARRACAN, a small river of the same province and government, which runs n. and enters the river La Plata, forming a bay or port, serving as a place to take in water for vessels, and likewise to give advice of their arrival. It has on its shore a watch-tower. 
|BARRAGUAN, a very lofty mountain of the province and government of Guayana,or Nueva Andalucja. It is upon the shore of the Orinoco, close to the settlement which belonged to the mis sionaries, the regulars of the company of St. Joseph de Otomacos. It is said, that after the name of this mountain, the Orinoco was anciently called. 
|BARRANCA DE MATEO, a settlement of the province and government of Santa Marta in the kingdom of Tierra Fhme, founded on the shores of the grand river of the Magdalena ; is the port where are embarked all the goods which arc 
|BAR 
brou wlit to and carried from the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is 30 leagues n. e. of Cartagena, 20 from Santa Marta, and six from the sea. 
|BARRANCA, another settlement of the province and corregimiento of Chancay in Peru. 
|BARRANCA, another, called Barranca Nueva, in the same province and government, situate near the sea shore on the s. side. 
|BARRANCA, another, called Barranca Vieja, in the same province and government, situate very near the former, between that and the Bar ranca of Yucal. 
|BARRANCA, another, or chasm caused by moun tain floods, called Del Roy, in the same province and government, on (he shore of the river of La Mngd;ilena, where there is a port and lading place for goods, which are sent in great quantities to the Nuevo Reynode Granada* 
|BARRANCA, another, also of the same pro vince and government, situate in the road which leads down to the river of La Magdalena. 
|BARRANCA, a river of the province and corre gimiento of Chancay in Peru. It rises in the proAinceof Caxatambo, and runs into the sea close to the settlement of Pativilca. 
|BARRANCAS, NUESTRA SHNORA DE CinQUINQUIRA DL LAS, a settlement of the province and government of Barinas, situate on the side of a chasm which gives it its name, between the rivers Yuca and Masparro. In its district are many cultivated estates and forests, which abound in cedar and oilier esteemed woods, some cacao estates, some of indigo and sugar-cane, and par ticularly tobacco, to the cultivation of which the natives are much inclined. 
|BARRANCAS, another settlement, with the dedi catory title of San Joseph, in the province of V r enczuela, situate on the shore of the river Tiznado. 
|BARRANCO, a settlement of the province and captains/tip of the Rio Grande in Brazil, situate on the shore of the river Caxabatang. 
|BARRANQUILLA, a settlement of the pro vince and government of Cartagena in the king dom of Tierra Firme, situate on the shore of the river Magdalena. 
|BARRANQUILLA, another, with the dedicatory title of San Nicolas, in the same province and government. 
|BARRAZO, VALL.E DE, a valley of the pro vince and corregimiento of Coquimbo in the king dom of Chile, on the shore of the river Limary. 
|BARRE, a township in Worcester county, Massachusetts, containing 1613 inhabitants, 24 miles n. w. of Worcester, and 66 w. of Boston, deriving its name from Col. Barre, a distinguished 
|BAR 
member of the British house of commons. This town has good pastures, and here are fatted mul titudes of cattle, and it is supposed more butter and cheese is carried from hence to the market annually, than from any other town of the same size in the state. 
|BAR RE, a township in Huntingdon county, Pennsylvania. 
|BARRELL s Sound, on the n. &. coast of America, called by the natives Conget-hoi-toi, is situated about six leagues frorn the southern extremity of Washington or Charlotte islands, in a n. w. direction. It has two inlets, one on the e. the other on the w. side of the island ; the latter is the best, the other is dangerous. The shores are of a craggy black rock; the banks lined with trees of various kinds, as pines, spruce, hemlock, alder, &c. Mr. Hoskins, in the summer of 1791, measured one of these trees, which was 10 fathoms in circumference. On one side of it a hole had been cut, large enough to admit a man; within was a spacious and convenient room, which had apparently been dug and burnt out with much labour. Mr. Hoskins concluded that it must have been occasionally inhabited by the natives, as he found in it a box, fire-works, dried wood, and several domestic utensils. This sound was named after Joseph Bar roll, Esq. of Chariest own, Massachusetts, and was first visited by Capt. Grey, in the Washington, in 1789. 
|BARREN Creek rises in the n. w. corner of Delaware state, runs about nine miles s. w. and empties into Nanticoke river. A triangular tract of land in the n. part of Somerset county, Mary land, is enclosed between this creek on the s. ; Delaware state, e. ; and Nanticoke river on the w. and n. w.~ 
|BARREN River. Both Big and Little Barren rivers are s. e. branches of Green river, in Ken tucky. BLUE Spring lies between these rivers, which see. 
|BARRKN island, a small isle in Chesnpeak bay, n. e. from the mouth of Patuxent river, which is separated from Hooper s island by a narrow channel on the e.~\ 
|BARRERAS, CABO OK LAS, a cape on the coast, which lies between the river La Plata and the straits of Magellan, between the bay of San Julian and the port of Santa Crnz, in 50 s. lat. 
|BARRKRA", a settlement of the province and captainship of Rio de Janeiro in Brazil ; situate upon the coast, between the rivers Irutiba and Taprana. 
|BARREROS, a river of the province and cap tainship of Espiritu Sunto in Brazil. It is small, 
|BAR 
|BAR 
147 
rises near the coast, runs e. and enters the sea l&gt;et\veen the island Tiburgo, or Tiburon, and the isl /id Del Reposo. 
|BARRETEROS, SAN SIMON DE LOS, a settle ment of the alcaldia mayor and real of the mines of Temascaltepec in Nueva Espana, contains 49 families of Indians, who work the mines with small crows or bars of iron ; it is annexed to the curacy of its capital, and in its vicinity are two cultivated estates, containing 11 families of Spa niards and Mustees ; is one league a;, of its head settlement. 
|BARRETO, a settlement of the province and government of Tucuman, situate on the shore of the river Dulce. 
|BARRETO, another settlement of the province and captains/tip of Pariba in the kingdom of Brazil, on the shore of the river Aracav. 
|BARRETSTOWN, a plantation "in Hancock county, district of Maine, having 173 inhabit ants. 
|BARRINGTON, a township in Queen s county, Nova Scotia, on the s. side of the hay of Fundy, settled by Quakers from Nantucket island. 
|BARRINGTON, a township in Strailbrd county, N. Hampshire, about 22 miles n. w. from Ports mouth, incorporated in 1722, containing 2470 inha bitants. Alurn is found here ; and the first ridge of the first hills, one of the three inferior summits of Agamenticus, is continued through this town. Its situation is very healthy ; and 14 of the first settlers in 1732 were alive in 1785, who were between 80 and 90 years old. 
|BARRINGTON, a township in Bristol county, Rhode Island, on the .v. &. side of the n. zo. branch of Warren river, little niore than two miles and a half w. w. of Warren, and about seven miles s. e. from Fox point, in the town of Providence. It contains 683 inhabitants, including 12 slaves. 
|BARRINGTON, GREAT, is the second town ship in rank in Berkshire county, Massachusetts. It contains 1373 inhabitants, and lies 140 miles a;, from Boston, and s. of Stockbridge, adjoining. 
|BAR ROSA, a lake of the province and govern ment of Tucuman, in the jurisdiction of the city of Cordova, close to the lakes of Los Porangos. 
|BARROW Harbour is an extensive bay in that of Bonavista, Newfoundland island, divided by Keel s head on the e. from the port of Bona vista, and from Bloody bay on the w. by a large peninsula, joined to the island by a narrow isthmus, which forms Newman s sound ; which, as well as C .ocle sound, are within Barrow harbour. 
|HART, a port on the s, coast of Nova Scotia. 
|BART, a township in Lancaster county, Penn~ sylvan in. 
|BARTHOLO, a settlement of the province and corregimienlo of Porco in Peru, eight leagues from Potosi. 
|BARTHOLO, another settlement, of the province and corregimiento of Cuenca in the kingdom of Quito, is on the shores of the river Paute, near its source, and in the w. part of its district. It has an estate called La Borma. 
|BARTHOLOME, SAN, a settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Toluca in Nueva Espana. It contains 89 families of Indians, and lies at a small distance to the s. of it* head settlement. 
|BARTHOLOME, SAN, another settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Tepeaca in the same kingdom, five leagues distant from its capital. 
|BARTHOLOME, SAN, another, of the head settle ment of Huatnzca, and alcaldia mayor of Cordova, in the same kingdom. It contains 66 families of Indians, and is 12 leagues to the n. n. e. of its capital. 
|BARTHOLOME, SAN, another, of the head settle ment of Toxtepec, and alcaldia mayor of Tecali, in the same kingdom. It contains 54 families of Indians. 
|BARTHOLOME, SAV, another, of the head settle ment of Taxirnara, and alcaldia mayor of Maravatio, in the same kingdom, and of the bishopric of Mechoacan. It contains 115 families of Indians, and is three leagues to the s. of its head settlement. 
|BARTHOLOME, SAN, another, of the head settle ment of the Rincon,and alcaldiamayor of Maravatio, in the same kingdom, and of the bishopric of Mechoacan, to the e. of its head settlement. 
|BARTHOLOME, SAN, another, of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of Jesuits, in the province and government ofMainas of the kingdom of Quito, on the shore of the river Napo. 
B A RTHOLOMF,S
N, another, of the province and government of Antioquia v: the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, on the shore of th? grand river of La Magdalena. 
B A RT n o LOM E, SAN, another, of the province and corregimienio of Tunja, in the same kingdom. 
|BARTHOLOMF, SAN, another, of the province and alcaldia mayor of Zacapula in the kingdom of Guatemala. 
|BARTIIO; OME, SAN, an island of the N. sea, one of the Antilles, inhabited by the French, who es tablished themselves here in 1648. It is eight leagues in circumference, very fertile in sugar. u2 
148 
|BAR 
cotton, tobacco, cazave, and indigo; is s. of the island of St. Martin, and n. of that of St. Chris topher. Its trees of the highest estimation are the soup or a/or, the calebuck, the canapia
 from which a gam of excellent cathartic qualities is extracted, and the parolane, the branches of which growing downwards, afterwards turn up, thus causing an impenetrable barrier or defence to any one at tacked. The coast is full of other trees, whicli are called marine trees, the branches of which entangle themselves one amongst the other. In this island breeds the star of the sea, ( estrelln del mar ) 
 and the bee of the sea, (abeja del mar), and a great variety of birds. There is also found here a species of lime-stone, which is carried into the other islands. [They have plenty of lignum- vit;e and iron wood. Its shores are dangerous, and the approaching them requires a good pilot ; but it has an excellent harbour, in which ships of any size are sheltered from all winds. Half its inhabitants are Irish Roman Catholics, whose predecessors settled here in 1666 ; the others are French, to whom the island lately belonged. It was ceded by France to the crown of Sweden in 1785. They depend on the skies for wat r, which they keep in cisterns. It was a nest for privateers when in the hands of the French, and at one time had 50 British prizes in its harbour. It was for a short time possessed by the English, having been taken by two privateers of that nation in 1746, but was restored to the French by the treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle. Lat. 17 53 n. Long. 62 54 a?. 
|BAUTHOLOME, SAN, a settlement, with the sur name of Valle de, a garrison of the province of Tepeguana and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya, in which reside a captain, lieutenant, ensign, and 27 soldiers. Its situation is in a pleasant valley, which gives it its name. It is inhabited by more than 500 fami lies of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattocs, who are agriculturists, and masters of some very con siderable and luxuriant estates, in which, by help of irrigation, they grow vast crops of wheat, maize, &c. In their gardens they have abundance of garden herbs, fruit trees of America and of Castille, and also vines, of whicli they make much wine. In other estates there are considerable herds of large and small cattle, and of swine. This valley was anciently infested by the extortions, murders, and robberies of the infidel Indians, the Cocoyoraes ; but this race having been rooted out, it enjoys at present a state of tranquillity. Long. I04 J 38 . Lat, 27 7 . 
|BARTHOLOME, SAN, a river of the province and government of Antioquia in the Nuevo Reyno de 
turning 
valley of Corpus enters the Mair
c. 
Granada ; it rises near the Christi, runs n. and dalena. 
|BARTHOLOME, SAN, another river, of flic pro vince and government of Venezuela ; it rises in the province of Cumana, and enters the lake Caicara. 
|BARTHOLOME, SAN, a mountain of the province and ale a(dia mayor of Tlaxcala in Nueva Espana. 
|BARTHOLOME, SAN, a large island of the S. sea, discovered in 1525 by Alfonzo de Salazar. [Lat. 15l5 w. Long. 164 e. SeeNsw HEBRIDES. 
|BARTHOLOMEW, ST. a parish in Charlestown district, S.Carolina, containing 2 138 persons. By the census of 1790, it contained 12,606 inha bitants, of whom 10,338 were slaves. It sends three representatives and one senator to the state legislature. Amount of taxes, 1566/. 10s. 4rf. sterling. 
|BARTHOLOMEW, Cape, ST. is the southernmost point of Staten Laud in Le Maire straits, at the .?. end of S. America, and far surpasses Terra del Fuego in its horrible appearance. 
|BARTLET, a plantation in Hillsborough county, New Hampshire, having 248 inhabitants. 
|BARTON, a township in Orleans county, Vermont, formerly in that of Orange, lies s. vs. of Brownington, six miles s. w. by w. from Willoughby lake, and 140 w. e. from Bennington. 
|BARTRAN, a port of the 5. coast of the island of Newfoundland, between the two bays of De spair atid Fortune. 
|BARU, SAN BERNARDO DE, a large island of the N. sea, in the province and government of Cartagena, and kingdom of Tierra Firme. It forms a bay which serves as a watering place to foreign vessels, from the convenience of its port, and from its vicinity to Cartagena. It is well peopled, and abounds in fruits and herbs, which are carried to supply the city. The water is scarce, but wholesome. It is the residence of a curate and a lieutenant-governor. 
|BAItUCO, SIERRAS DE, a chain of very lofty and rugged mountains of the island of St. Do mingo, on the *. coast, on a lon
 slip or point of land, which runs into the sea in this direction. 
|BARUTA, a settlement of the province and government of Venezuela, famous for its rich gold mines ; these have yielded immensely, but are now destroyed. It is three leagues distant from Caracas. 
|BAS-CHATEAU, a settlement of the English, in the province and colony of New York, situate on the shore of the river Schoharie. 
|BASILIO, SAN, a settlement of the province 
and government of Cartagena in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. situate in the mountains of the dis trict of Maria, near the channel of the dike (cano del dique). It is one of the new settlements which were founded in 1776 by the Governor Don Juan tie Pimienta. 
|BASIN OF MINAS is a body of water of con siderable extent and irregular form, situated in Nova Scotia, at the e. end of the bay of Fundy, and connected with its n. e. branch by a short and narrow strait. The country on its banks is gene rally a rich soil, and is watered by many small rivers. The spring tides rise here 40 feet. 
|BASKINRIDGE, in Somerset county, New Jersey, lies on the w. side of a n. w. branch of Passaic river, nearly six miles n. e. from Pluckemin, and seven s. s. w. from Morristown. It was here that Colonel Harcourt surprised and made a prisoner of General Lee, December 13, 1776. 
|BASOCHUCA, a settlement and real of mines, of the province and government of La Sonora in Nueva Espana. 
|BASON, a small river of the land or country of Labrador. It runs s. and enters the river St. Lawrence. 
|BASO\ Harbour lies on the e. side of lake Cliamplain, in the township of Ferrisburgh, Ver mont, four miles and a half s. a?, from the mouth of Otter creek. 
|BASQUE, S . a bay on the n. coast of Royal island, or Cape Breton, between the bay of Idiot and the river Salmon. 
|BASQUES, Rio DR, a river in the province and government of Costa-rica in the kingdom of Guatemala. It rises near the coast of the N. sea, runs w. and enters the sea between the rivers Anzuclos and Matina. 
|BASS Harbour, district of Maine, a harbour of Massachusetts, Desert island, seven miles from Soil cove. 
|BAS
E-TERRE, the chief town in the island of St. Christopher s in the West Indies, situated at the s. c. end of the island. It consists of a long street along the sea shore ; is a place of consider able trade, the seat of government, and is defended by three batteries. Lat. 17 17 n. Long. 62 46 s?. 
|BASSF.-TERRE, FORT DE I.A, a castle of the island of Guadalupe, situate on the w. const, on the shore of the bay of Gallion, and of the river Herbes. [This is also the name of a part of the same island, between a point of which, called Grosse Morne, to that of Antigua in the Grande Terre, tlic basin called the Great Cul de Sac is five or 
|BAT 
149 
six leagues in length, wherein is safe riding for ships of all rates. 
|BASSE VILLE, a settlement of the province and colony of N. Carolina, situate on the shore of the river Chio. 
|BASTIMENTOS, a port formed by some islands of the coast of Tierra Firme, by the side of that of Portovelo. It serves as a watering place for vessels carrying on an illicit commerce. These islands are very near the coast, being not further off th;tn 500 paces. They are two of them large, and the other so small as indeed rather to deserve the name of a rock : inasmuch as they are barren they are not inhabited, but they nevertheless afford convenient shelter to vessels in distress, as hap pened in the case of the English Admiral Hosier, with his squadron, and to cruisers in the time of war. [It is a very unhealthy station, and proved fatal to the grealer part of the crews of Admiral Hosier s fleet. The bottom of the straits lying be tween these islands and the shore is extremely level and good, and the islands abound in fi:ie timber. 
|BASYILLE, a city of Hispaniola, or St. Do mingo, in the French possessions. It has a con venient and capacious port. 
|BAT, a settlement of the province and colony of N. Carolina, in the district and upon the shore of the river Pamticoe. 
|BATABANO, a town on the s. side of the island of Cuba in the West Indies, situated on the side of a large bay, opposite Pinos isles, and about 50 miles s.u\ from the Havannah. 
|BATACAO, a settlement of the province and government of Merida in the Nuevo Reyno, situate in the road which leads down to Maracaibo. 
|BATACOSA, a settlement of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of Jesu its, in the province of Cinaloa in Nueva Espana. 
|BATAND, a cape of the s. coast of the island of Newfound In ml . It is the extremity which looks to the zo. close to Race cape. 
|BATAVANO, a port of the island of Cuba, on the s. side, suited only for small vessels, for the de fence of which it has a battery manned by a guard which is sent from the Havannah, from whence it is 14 leagues distant, being separated by a plain and beautiful road, made at the expence of the commercial company of that city, and covered vrith lime tret s. 
B ATA VI A, a settlement in New York, at the head of Schoharie creek, about 39 miles from its mouth, and 38 s. &. from Albany, and as far . tc 1 . of Esopus. 
150 
|BAT 
|BATCHOUEN, a small island of the coast of the river St. Lawrence, in the country of Labra dor, opposite the island St. Anticosti, and between that of Geniveve and the point of .Esquimaux. 
|BATECA, a settlement of the government and jurisdiction of Pamplona in the Nuevo Rev no de Granada. It is also called Vallede las Angustias, awl.cornmonly Do los Locos. Its situation is in a hollow : the country is mild, pleasant, and fertile, abounding in sugar-cane, maize, cotton, plantains, and in mounts of oranges and other fruits. In its church is venerated an image of the Virgin, paint ed on linen ; and the tradition goes that it renews its colours, whenever they fade, in a miraculous manner ; and on account of this image the settle ment is frequently visited by foreigners and reli gious devotees. It is 12 leagues to the e. of Pam plona; the road all around it is very bad, but there is nevertheless a short cut to it through a rocky pass. 
|BATEPITO, a settlement of the province and government of La Sonora in Nueva Espana. 
|BATEQUI, a settlement of the province and government of La Sonora in Nueva Espana, situate near the coast of the gulph of California, or Mar Roxo de Cortes, opposite the large island of the Angel de la Guarda. 
|BATEROS, a settlement of the province and government of Antioquia in the Nuevo Key no de Granada, situate between two mountains. 
|BATH, a township of Lincoln county, district of Maine, containing 949 inhabitants. It lies on the a\ side of Kennebeck river, about 13 miles from Wiscasset, GO n.e. from Portland, 32 from Ilallowell, 13 from Pownalborough, and 165 n, e. from Boston. Lat. 43 52 . 
|BATH, a county of Virginia, about GO miles in length, and 50 in breadth ; bounded e. by the counly of Augusta. It is noted tor its medicinal springs, called the Hot and Warm springs, near the foot of JACKSON S Mountain, which see. 
|BATH, a thriving town in Berkley county, Vir ginia, situated at the foot of the Warm Spring mountain. The springs in the neighbourhood of this town, although less efficacious than the Warm springs in Bath county, draw upwards of 1000 people here during summer from various parts of the United States. The water is little more than milk-warm, and weakly impregnated with minerals. The country in the environs is agreeably diversi fied with hills and valleys ; the soil rich and in good cultivation. Twenty-five miles from Martinsburgh. and 269 miles s. w. from Philadel phia.  
|BAT 
|BATH, a township in Grafton county, New Hampshire, containing 493 inhabitants. It lies on the e. bank of Connecticut river. Thirty-five miles n. e. by n. from Dartmouth college, and 97 n. w. from Portsmouth. 
|BATH, or PORT BATH, an ancient town in Hyde county, N. Carolina, on the w. side of Tar river, about 24 miles from Pamplico sound, 61 s. by w. of Edenton, and in the port of entry on Tar river. It contains about 12 houses, and is rather de clining. 
|BATH, a village in the e. parish of St. Tho mas, in the island of Jamaica in the West In dies. It has its rise and name from a famous hot spring in its vicinity, said to be highly efficacious in curing the dry belly-ache. The water is sul phureous, and flows out of a rocky mountain about one mile distant, and is too hot to admit a hand be ing held in it. 
|BATH, a village in the county of Renssalacr, New York, pleasantly situated on the e. bank of Hudson s river, nearly opposite the city of Albany, at the head of sloop navigation. A mineral spring has been discovered here, said to possess valuable qualities; and a commodious bathing-house has been erected, at a considerable expence, contain ing hot, cold, and shower baths. 
|BATH, a thriving post town in New York, Steuben county, of about 50 houses, situate on the n. bank of Corihocton creek, a 77. head-water of Tioga river ; 42 miles s. e. from Williamsburg, on Chenesse river, 18 w. w. from the Painted post, 120 from Niagara, 59 w. from Geneva, and 221 w. of Hudson city. Lat. 42 13 n. Long. 77 28 w. 
|I3ATHTOWN, a small settlement of the coun ty of Craven in N. Carolina, situate on the shore of the river Pantejo, in lat. 35 30 n. and long. 7G 10 a&gt;. 
|BATISCAN, a river of Canada. It runs from the lake of Santa Cruz, in the country of the Algonovins Indians, runs s. and enters the river St. Lawrence. 
|BATOBY, a town of the province and goment of Buenos Ayres, situate in Lat.. 30 36 . Long. 54 46 24" a&gt;. 
|BATOPILAES, a settlement of the province and government of Nueva Vizcaya in Nueva Espana. 
|BATOPILAS, SAN PEDRO DE, a settlement of the intendancy of Durango in the kingdom of Nueva Espana, formerly celebrated for the great wealth of its mines, to the w. of the Rio de Conchos. Its population is 8000 souls. 
|BATSO, a settlement of the English in the island of Barbadoes, of the jurisdiction of the city of Bridgetown. 
|BATTEN Kill, a small river which rises in Vermont, and after running n. and n. w. about SO miles, falls into Hudson, near Saratoga. 
|BATTLE River, in New South Wales, runs n. e. into Saskahawen river, s. e. from Manches ter house. Its course is short. 
|BATUBA, a river of the province and capiamship of Maranan in Brazil. 
|BATUCO, a settlement of the province and government of La Sonora in Nueva Espana. 3 [BAULEM S Kill, a western water of Hudson river, ei&lt;rht miles and a half below Albany. 
BAlJRES, a river of the province and govern ment of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito. It rises w. of the mountain Tiririco, runs n. many leagues, and then turning a little to the n. n. w.. enters with a large stream into the Itenes, and in the midst of its course forms a lake. 
|BAURIGAME, a settlement of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of Jesuits, in the province of Topia, of the king dom of Nueva Vizcaya. 
|BAUROS, a barbarous nation, anciently can nibals, of the province of Moxos, to the e. n. e. of Santa Cruz de la Sierra, dwelling on some large plains, which have the rivers Guazimire to the e . and Iraibi to the w. These plains are very fertile, though, on account of their dampness, unhealthy. This nation was discovered by the Father Cipriano Barrera, of the company of Jesuits, in J701, when he lost his life at their hands. The mission aries, however, continued their labours here until the year 1767. 
|BAURUM, or BAURUMA, a river of the pro vince and government of Guayana. It rises in the serrania of Imataca, and enters the sea on the e. coast. 
|BALJYA, SAN ANTONIO BUCARELI DE LA, a settlement and garrison of the province of Coaguila, established by the viceroy of Nueva Es pana, Don Antonio Bucareli, who gave it his name in 1776. 
|BAXA, PUNTA, a point on the s. coast of the strait of Magellan, at the entrance of the second narrow pass called La Barranca de S. Simon. 
|BAXADA, a town of the province and go vernment of Buenos Ayres, situate on the Parana near Sante Fe, on the opposite side of the river, in Lat, 31 44 15". Long. 60 44 30" w.l 
|BAXANE8, orBAXANAS, a [jort of the island of Cuba, on the n. coast, between the bay of Xavara and the river of Las Palraas. 
|BAY 
151 
|BAXOS DE BABUCA. See ABROJOS. 
|BAY OF FRI-.SH WATER, in the n. part of the gulph of Mexico, lies 5. of Ascension bay. 
|BAY OF FUND v washes the shores of the British provinces of New Brunswick on the n. and Nova Scotia on the e. and s. This bay is 12 leagues across, from the gut of Annapolis to St. John s, the principal town of New Brunswick. The tides are very rapid in this bay, and rise at Annapolis basin about 30 feet ; at the basin of Minas, which may be termed the n. arm of this bay, 40 feet; and at the head of Chignecto chan nel, an arm of this bay, the spring tides rise 60 feet. See FUNDY. 
|BAY DE ROCHE FENDE lies on the w. side of lake Champlain, and in the state of New York, 17 miles above Crown point. 
|BAY OF ISLANDS lies on the w. side of New foundland island, in the gulph of St. Lawrence. This bay is very extensive, having three arms, by which several rivers empty into it. It has several islands, the chief of which are called Harbour, Pearl, and Tweed. 
|BAY OF ST. Louis, on the Labrador coast, has cape St. Louis on ihe n. and cape Charles on s. It hns many small islands, the largest of which is Battle island, in the mouth of the bay. 
|BAYACONI, a settlement of the province and government of La Sonora in Nueva Espana. 
|BAYAGOULAS, a settlement of Indians of the province and government of Louisiana, situate on the shore of the river Mississippi, between this and the lake Ovachas. 
|BAYAGUANA, a settlement of the island of St. Domingo, situate at the source of the river Macoris, and in the middle of the e. head of the island. 
|BAYALA, a river of the island of St. Domingo. It rises near the n. coast, and the settlement of Dondori, in the limits of the French possessions in that part ; it runs s. s. e. and enters the Neiva. On its shores are established two bodies of guards, who are called De la Angostura, and Del Pie del Indio, as a warning to the French not to penetrate farther in that part. 
|BAYAMO, a town of the island of Cuba, founded by Diego Velasqucs. It is of a good temperature, and abounds in vegetable productions, especially tobacco. It has a large and handsome church, a convent of monks of St. Francis, an hospital, with the title of La Misericordia , and a school tor studies, founded by Francisro Parada. Twenty-five leagues from Santiago de Cuba. 
|BAYAMO, a town in the "e. part of the island of Cuba, having the town of Almo w. and 
St. Barbara on the s. It lies on the e. side of Kstero river, about 20 miles from the sea. 
|BAYAMO Channel, in the island of Cuba, rims between the numerous small islands and rocks called Jardin de la Reyna, on (he n. w. and the shoals, and rocks which line the coast on the s. e. side of it, from the bold point called Cabo de Cruz. This channel leads to the bay of Estero, which receives two rivers ; the southernmost of which leads to the town of Bayamo. 
|BAYANA, a small port of the island of Cuba, on the n. n. e. coast, and in the e. head, between those of Sebasos and Taragua. 
|BAYAJNO, a large river of the kingdom of Tierra Firme, in the province and government of Panama. It rises in the province of Darien, and runs 26 leagues from e. to w. afterwards to n. n.ro. and then s. emptying itself into the sea, opposite the island of Chepillo, 8 leagues from the bay of Panama ; and gathering in its course the waters of many other rivers, it is thereby at length navi gable by large vessels. It takes its name from a fugitive Negro slave, who having fled to the mountains, was joined by a number of unhappy creature s who were in the snme condition of life as himself. These in time began to treat the Spa niards so cruelly, whenever, in their rencounters, they happened to meet with them, that the Mar quis de Cafiete, viceroy of Peru, was under the necessity of giving orders, with the sanction of the court, to Captain Pedro de Ursua, to destroy and chastise these enemies ; which orders were com pletely executed, after a tedious and difficult campaign in 155.3; and the memory of this suc cess is perpetuated by the name of the river. Its mouth is in Long. 78 55 . Lat. 9 3 . 
|BAYAS, a settlement and asiento of the mines of the alca/dia mayor of Guanajuato in Nueva Espaiia, of the province and bishopric of Mechoacan. 
|BAY E, Gw AND, a large bay of the island of Guadalupe, on the n. coast, between the island of Cochon and that ot Los Diamantes. 
|BAYO, a small river of the province and go vernment of Buenos Ayres, which runs s. and enters the Tepuonga. 
|BAYNET, a town and bay on the .?. side of the island of St. Domingo, 4| leagues from Petit Goave, on the n. side of the island. It is about eight leagues w. of Jackmel. Lat. 18 17 . 
|BAZARACA, a settlement of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of Jesuits, in the province and government of La Sonora in Nueva Espaiia. 
|BEACH, a small island of the province and colony of New Jersey. 
|BEACH Fork, a branch of Salt river, which rises in Nelson county, Kentucky. A fine clay is found on this river, which might, it is thought, be manufactured into good porcelain. 
|BEACON, a point on the s. coast of the island of Jamaica, between the point or cape Yallah and Port Royal. 
|BEALSBURG, a small town in Nelson county, Kentucky, on the e. bank of Rolling Fork, whick contains 20 houses, as also a tobacco warehouse. It is 15 miles tc.s.ze. of Bairdstown, 50 s. w. of Frankfort, and 890 from Philadelphia. 
|BEAR, a small river of the province and colony of Nova Scotia. It runs w. and enters the sea in the port of Annapolis real. 
|BEAU Cove lies on the e. side of the s. e. corner of Newfoundland island, at the head of which is the settlement of FORMOSE, which see. Reneau s rocks lie between Bear cove and Fresh Water bay on the s. 52 miles n. from cape Race. 
|BEAR GRASS Creek, a small creek on the e. side of Ohio river, a few hundred yards w. of the town of Louisville in Kentucky. This is the spot where the intended canal is proposed to be cut to the upper side of the Rapids. From the mouth of the creek to the upper side of the Rapids, is not quite two miles. This would render the navigation of the Ohio safe and easy. The coun try on the sides of this creek, between Salt river and Kentucky river, is beautiful and rich. See RAPIDS OF THE OHIO. 
|BEAR Lake, GREAT, in the n. w. part of N. America, lies near the Arctic circle, and sends a river a w. s. w. course. 
|BEAR Lake, BLACK, in New South Wales, lies in lat. 55 50 n. long. 105 40 w. It lies n. w* from Cumberland House. 
|BEAR Lake, WHITE, lies due w. from an other small lake called Bear lake, both in lat. 46 38 n. and the long, of the former is 96 w. These are said to give rise to the Mississippi river. 
BrAR Town, in Caroline county, Maryland, lies about seven miles n. from Greensburgh, and about 15 s. e. from Chester town. 
|BEAR Creek, a water of Tennessee river. See OCCOCHAPPO. 
|BEARDSTOWN. See BAIRDSTOWN. 
|JBEATA, CABO DE LA, a point of the island of St. Domingo, on the s. coast, and running a great way into the sea. It is 85 leagues from the city of St. Domingo. Long. 71 18 . Lat. 17 42 . 
|BEATA, a river of the province and govern ment of Maracaibo. It rises n. of the city of Gibraltar, runs w. and enters the Great lake. 
|BCATA, a small island close to the s. coast of the island of St. Domingo, and opposite the point of its name. 
|BEAUCIIESNE, a desert island of the sea of Magellan, which took its name from a French captain, who arrived here in the year 1701. Some believe it to be one of the Malviri isles. It lies 5. of the Sibaldes isles, almost in front of the t. moutli of the strait of Magellan, from which it is 152 leagues distant. 
|BEAUER, an island of the lake Michigan in New Prance, or Canada, opposite the Grand bay. 
|BEAUFORT, a city of the island of Port Royal, in the county of Granville, of the province and colony of Carolina, is small, but pleasantly situate, fertile, and rich. The English, after the separation of their colonies, made this the capital of the province, from the convenience of its port, and owing to its affording an harbour for their squadrons. It is 50 miles from Purrisburg, and 45 from Charlestown, to the s. w. [The courts which were formerly held here, are now removed to the town of Coosawhatchie, on the river. It is a little pleasant town of about 60 houses, and 200 inhabitants, who are distinguished for their hos pitality and politeness. It has a fine harbour, and bids lair to become a considerable town, and is noted for its healthy situation. Lat. 32 SO n. Long. 80 46 a?. 
|BEAUFOBT, a settlement of Georgia, situate on an island at the mouth of the river Consuhatche, or Port Royal. 
|BEAUFORT, a sea-port town in Carterct county, cm the n. e. side of Core sound, and district of New Bern, N. Carolina. It contains about 20 houses, a couit-house and goal, and the county courts are held here. It is 55 miles s. by e. of New Bern, and about 27 from cape Lookout. 
|BEAUFORT District, in the lower country of S. Carolina, lies on the sea-coast, between Combahee and Savannah rivers. It is 69 miles in length, and 37 in breadth, and is divided into four parishes, viz. St. Helena, St. Luke, Prince William, and St. Peter, which contain 18,753 inhabitants, of whom only 4346 are whites. The northern, part of this district abounds with large forests of cypress ; the lands, however, are fit for raising rice, indigo, &c. It sends 12 representa tives and four senators to the state legislature ; each parish sending an equal number. Amount of taxes, 3022/. 2s. Lid. sterling. 
|VOL. I. 
|BEAUGENDRE, a river of the island of Guadalupe. It rises in the w. mountains of La Basse Terre, runs ts. and enters the sea between the rivers Potel and La A nee de la Barque. 
 BEAUHARNOIS, a port of Canada, in lake Superior. 
|BEAUMONT, a settlement of Canada, situate on the shore of the river St. Lawrence, 10 leagues from the capital of Quebec. 
|BEAUSEJOIR, a settlement and fort of the English in Nova Scotia, on the shore of the most interior part of the bay of Funrly. 
|BEAVER Creek runs inio lake Erie at its e. end, about seven miles s. e. from fort Erie. 
|BLAVER Creek, B.G, falls into the Aileghany river, after having received several branches from the n.e. about 28 miles n. w. from Pittsburg, It rises in the s. runs n. about six miles, thence n. e. 12 more to the Salt lick town, then past the Mahoning town and Salt springs, 34 miles s. c. to the Kishkush town, from which to its mouth is 22 miles s. : in all about 74 miles. 
|BEAVER Dam, a township in Pennsylvania, on the 02. side of Susquehannah river. See NOR THUMBERLAND County. 
|BEAVER Kill is a s. e. arm of the Popachton branch of the Delaware. Its mouth is 17| miles e. from the Cook house, and 24| n. a\ from Kush*ichton falls. 
|BEAVER Lake, in New South Wales, lies in about lat. 54 30 . and long. 102 10 w. A little w. e. from it is the source of Churchill river ; s. e. from it is Cumberland house, on Grass river, which has communication by lakes with Nelson river; s. w. of it is Saskashawen river, on which, towards its head, area number of houses belong ing to the Hudson s bay company. 
|BFAVEK S Town, at Tuskarawas, lies be tween Margaret s creek, an upper n. zo. branch of Muskingum river, and the n. branch of that river; at the head of which n. branch there is only a mile s portage to Cayahoga river. Beaver s town lies about 85 miles n. w. from Pittsburg. A little below this, a fort was erected in 1764. 
|BEAZA, the chief town of the district of Quixos, in the province of Quito in Peru, and the residence of the governor. It was built in 1559 by Don Rameirod Avilos. The chief ma nufacture here is cotton cloth. 
|BEBARA, SAN ANTONIO DE, a settlement of the province and government of Choco in the 
kingdom of Tierra Firme, situate on the shore of the river of its name. 
|BEBARA, the river which rises in the great 
154 
|BED 
sierras of the same province, runs w. and enters the Atrato. 
|BECAUAS, a barbarous nation inhabiting the forests to the w. of tlue river Aguarico. It is very numerous, and is continually at war with the Encabellados. 
|BECIIAI, a small river of the province and go vernment of Paraguay. It runs s. and enters the Uruguay, between the rivers Igau and Ibicuy. 
|BECKET, a township in Berkshire county, Massachusetts, containing 751 inhabitants. It is 10 miles c. of Stockbridgc, 17 from Lenox, and 130 w. from Boston. 
|BECOYA, a river of the province and go vernment of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito. It runs nearly due s. from n. parallel to that of Carnboya, and enters the Napo. 
|BECOYA, an island of the N. sea. It is one of the Lesser Antillas, situate to then, of Gra nada. 
|BEDE Point is the eastern cape at the mouth of Cook s river, on the n. w. coast of N. Ame rica. 
|BLDEC, a settlement of the island of St. John, in the province and colony of Nova Scotia, situate on the w. coast, and in the strait formed with that coast. 
|BEDFORD, a province and county of Vir ginia. [It is separated from that of Amherst on the n. by James river ; lias Campbell e. Botetourt t. and Franklin county on the s. It is 34 miles long, 25 broad, and contains 10,531 inhabitants, including 2754 slaves. It has a good soil, and is agreeably diversified with hills and valleys. In some parts chalk and gypsum have been discover ed. Its chief town is New London. 
|BEDFORD, a township in Hillsborough county, New Hampshire, which was incorporated in 1750, and contains 898 inhabitants. It lies on the w. bank of Merrirnack river, 56 miles w. of Ports mouth. 
|BEDFORD, a township in Middlesex county, Massachusetts, containing 523 inhabitants, 13 miles n. from Boston. 
|BEDFORD, NMV, is a flourishing town in B ristol county in fi so same state, containing 3313 inhabitants, 58 miL s s. of Boston. It lies at the head of navigation on Accushnet river. Lat. 40 35 n.~ 
|BEDFORD, a township in W. Chester county, "New York, containing 2470 inhabitants, includ ing 38 slaves. It lies contiguous to Connecticut, 12 miles n. from Long island sound, and 35 from the city of New York. In the state census of T796, there appears to be 302 electors. 
|BEG 
|BEDFORD, a town on the tz&gt;; end of Long island, New York, four miles n. w. from Jamaica bay, and six e. from the city of New York. 
|BEDFORD, a village near the Georgia side of Savannah river, four miles above Augusta. 
|BEDFORD County, in Pennsylvania, lies on Juniatta river ; has part of the state of Maryland on the s. and Huntingdon county n. and n. e. It contains 13,124 inhabitants, including 46 slaves; and has one half of its lands settled, and is divided into nine townships. Its chief town, Bedford, lies on the 5. side of Raystown branch of the same river, 25 miles e. of Berlin, and 210 w. of Philadelphia. It is regularly laid out, and the inhabitants, who live in 41 log houses and nine of stone, have water conveyed in wooden pipes to a reservoir in the middle of the town. They have a stone gaol; the market-house, court-house, and record-office, are built of brick. Bedford was incorporated in 1795, and their charter is similar to that of Chester. Lat. 40 n. Long. 78 32 w.l 
|BEDIES. These are Indians of N. America, dwelling on the Trinity river, about 60 miles to the .9. of Nacogdoches ; have JOO men, are good hunters for deer, which are very large, and plenty about them ; plant, and make good crops of corn; their language differs from all other, but they speak Caddo ; are a peaceable, quiet people, and have an excellent character for their honesty and punctuality. 
|BEDMINSTER, in Somerset county, New Jersey, is a township containing 1197 inhabitants, including 169 slaves. 
BEfiF Island, one of the Smaller Virgin islands in the W. Indies, situated between Dog island on the w. and Tortula on the c. It is about five miles long and one broad, in Sir Francis Drake s bay. 
|BEEKE, a settlement of the island ofB.arba* does, in the parish and district of St. George, near the e. coast, and at the s. extremity of the same. 
|BEEKMAN, a considerable township in Duchess county, New York, containing 3597 inhabitants, including 106 slaves. In the state census of 1796, there appears to be 502 electors in this township. 
|BEETLE, a settlement of the island oFBarbadoes, in the parish and district of St. George
 situ ate upon the e. coast. 
|BEFIEN, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Arica in Peru, annexed to tlie curacy of Copta. 
|BEGA, a settlement of the province and go
rernment of Venezuela in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, situate near the coast, in the district of Caracas, from whence it is distant six leagues to the s. 5 to the s. w. 
|BEGON, a lake of Canada, formed by "the drains of those of St. Peter and Miskouaikane, in the country of the Chemonchovanistcs Indians. 
|BEH RING S Bay, on the n. w. coast of N. America, is separated from Admiralty bay on the n. by a point of land, and lies n. w. from Cross sound. See ADMIRALTY Bay. 
|BEHRING S Straits, separate Asia from Ame rica, are so called from the Russian navigator, Captain Behring, who, with Tshirikow, sailed from Kamptschatka in Siberia, on the Asiatic coast, in quest of the new world, in a quarter where it had perhaps never been approached. They both discovered land within a few degrees of the n. w. coast of America. But the more re cent discoveries of Captain Cook, and his succes sor, Clarke, have confirmed the near approxima tion of the two continents. Cape Prince of Wales is the most westerly point of the American conti nent hitherto known. It is situated in lat. 65 46 n. long. 168 15 e. and is 39 miles distant from the e. coast of Asia. The sea, from the s. of Behring s straits, to the crescent of isles be tween Asia and America, is very shallow. It deepens from these straits (as the British seas do from Dover) till soundings are lost in the Pacific ocean, but that does not take place but to the s. of the isles. Between them and the straits is an increase from 12 to 54 fathoms, except only off St. Thaddeus Noss, where there is a channel of greater depth. From the volcanic disposition, it has been fudged probable, not only that there was a separa tion of the continents at these straits, but that the whole space from the isles to that small opening had once been dry land ; and that the fury of the watery element, actuated by that of fire, had, in very remote times, subverted and overwhelmed the tract, and left the islands to serve as monumen tal fragments. The famous Japanese map places some islands seemingly within these straits, on which is bestowed the title of Ya Zue, or the Kingdom of the Dwarfs. This gives some reason to suppose that America was not unknown to the Japanese ; and that they had, as is mentioned by Kav. pfer and Charlevoix, made voyages of dis covery ; and, according to the last, actually wintered upon the continent, where probably meeting with the Esquimaux, they might, in comparUon of themselves, and justly, distinguish them by the name of dwarfs. 
|BEJIREQUE, a settlement of the province 
|BEL 
155 
and government of Cartagena, situate on one of the islands which are formed by the river Cauca. It is four leagues n. n. zo. of the city of Zimiti. 
|BEJUCAL, a small city, but beautifully and well situate in the island of Cuba, is of a good temperature, fertile, and abounding in fruits and cattle, particularly in tobacco, of which it has considerable crops. It belongs to the domain and lordship of the Marquises of San Felipe and San tiago, who reside in the Havannah, from whence it is divided by a level and agreeable road, and is seven leagues distant. 
|BEKIA, or BBCOUYA, or BOQUIO, a small British island among the Granadillas, 55 miles n. e. of Granada, and 65 leagues from Barbadoes. It was called Little Martinico by the French, and has a safe harbour from all winds, but no fresh water. It is only frequented by those who catch turtle. The soil produces wild cotton, and plenty of water melons. 
|BELADERO, PLJNTA DEL, a point on the coast of Cartagena, of the kingdom of Tierra Firme, near Santa Marta, where there is a small fort and a watch-tower, for the purpose of giving notice when vessels appear, and this is done by striking a bell fixed there for the purpose. 
|BELCHER, a township in Hampshire coun ty, Massachusetts, containing 1485 inhabitants, who subsist chiefly by farming. It lies 12 miles e. of Hartley, and 85 w. of Boston. 
|BELEN, a settlement of the province and correfrimiento o[ Carangasin Peru, of the archbishopric of Charcas, annexed to the curacy of that of Andamarca. 
|BLLEN, another, in the province and corregimiento of Porco, also of the archbishopric of Charcas and kingdom of Peru. It has a celebrat ed sanctuary, whither numbers of people repair in October. 
|BELEN, another, of the province and corregimiento of Lucanas in the same kingdom, annex ed to the curacy of Cahuanca. 
|BELEN, another, of the province and corregimiento of Paria in the same kingdom, annexed to the curacy of Toledo. 
|BELEN, another, of the province and akaldia mayor of Ostimuri in Nueva Espaiia, situate at the mouth of the river Hiaqui, and at the point of Lobos, in the gulf of California. 
|BKLEN, another, of the province and correginiiento of Ornasuyos in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Achacache. 
B;LEJV, a town, with the dedicatory title of Nuestra Senora, in the province and government of Paraguay, on the shore of the river of this name. 
x 2 
B E I, 
at the mouth of the river Ipane-guazu, in Lat. 23 26 17" TO. Long. !&gt;7 8 a\ 
BE LENT), a river of the province of TMacas in the kingdom of Quito. It rises at the foot of the Paramo of Sangay, runs from w. to e. and enters the C ura ray, or rather changes its name here before it enters the Napo. 
|BELEZ, a city of New Grenada, Tierra Firme, S. America. 
|BELFAST, a township and bay in Hancock county, district of Maine, both situated in what is called the WaUlo patent, at the mouth of Penobscot river and on its 10. side ; 38 miles n. e. by e. from Nallowell, and 246 n. e. from Boston. The town contains 215 inhal)itants. The bay, on the n. zo. part of which the town stands, runs up into the land by three short arms. Isleborough island lies in the middle of it, and forms two channels leading to the month of Penobscot river. 
|BELGRADE, a township in Lincoln county, district of Maine, incorporated in Feb. 1796. It was formerly called Washington plantation. It lies w. of Sidney, and between Androscoggin and Kennebeck rivers. 
|BELHAVEN, the former name of Alexan dria, in FAIIIFAX County, Virginia, which see. It lies 14- miles n. e. of Colchester, 86 s. w. of Win chester, SO o&gt;. of Annapolis, and 2 14 s. w. of Phi ladelphia. 
|BELII7LE, a settlement of the province and corregtmiento of Chumbivilcas in Peru, situate on the shore of the river Apurirnac. 
|BELIM, or PA HA, a town in Brazil. See PA HA. 
|BELL, a point on the e. coast of the island of Barbadoes, between the point of Consets and Baker bay. 
|BELT,, a settlement of the same island, in the parish and district of St. George. 
|BELLA, POBLACIOV, a settlement of the pro vince and captainship of Los Ilheos in Brazil, on the sea-shore, and close to the port called Bello, which is formed by the mouth of the river Dulce. 
|BELLACO, ARROYO, a small river of the province and government of Buenos Ayres. It runs w. and enters the Uruguay, between the rivers Negro and Santa Rosa. 
|BELLACON, a small river of the prorince and captainship of Rey in Brazil. It runs s. and enters the Jacuaron. 
|BELLAIRE, a post-town near the centre of Hartbrd county, Varyland, and the chief of the county. It contains a court-house and gaol, and is tliinJy inhabited ; distant from Harford 6 miles 
2 
|BEL 
n. w. 29 n. e. from Baltimore, and 86 o&gt;. s. w. from Philadelphia. 
|BELLA VISTA, SAN JOSEPH DE, a settlement of the province and corrfgimiento of Cercado in Peru ; founded near the sea by the Count of Superunda, viceroy of the kingdom, in 1747, a quar ter of a league from the spot wfure Callao stood. It has a good castle, called San Fernanda, with a sufficient garrison for the defence and security of the bay. This is covered on the 
. zo. by a barren island, called S-m Lorenzo, where all the vessels cominsr from the s. ports of America, as well as from Europe, cast anchor. It is two leagues from Lima. 
B
Lr.AViST \, a river of the kingdom of Brazil, which runs n. n. e. and enters that of Tocantines on the i0. side. 
|BELLEALJ, PUERTO rE, a port in the strait of Magellan, and in the third narrow pass, called El Pasaije, or the Passage. 
|BELLE DUNE, LA, or HANDSOME DOWN, a long, projecting, barren point on the s. side of Chaleur bay, about 8 leagues n. n. w. of Nipisiguit, where temporary cod and herring fisheries are carried on by different people; there being no established trader at the place. 
|BELLGROVE, in Bt-rgen county, N. Jersey, on the road to Albany, lies within half a mile of the line which separates New York from New Jer sey, which extends from Delaware river to that of Hudson. It is three miles n. from Brabant, and 24 n. by za. from New York city. 
|BELLICHASSE, a settlement of Canada, situ ate on the shore of the river St. Lawrence, not far distant from Quebec. 
|BELLICHASSE, a river of the above country, which rises to the e. of the bay of Saguinarn, runs *. e. in a serpentine course, and enters lake Huron, at the mouth where this communicates itself with the lake Erie. 
|BELLINGHAM, a small farming township in Norfolk county, Massachusetts, containing 735 inhabitants, 20 miles n. from Providence, and 34 s. from Boston. 
|BELLINGA, a settlement of the province and corregimienlo of Parinacochas in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Salamanca, in the province of Condesuyos de Arequipa. 
|BELLISLE, an island at the mouth of the straits of this name, between the country of the Esquimaux, or New Britain, and the n. end of Newfoundland island, which straits lead into the gulf of St. Lawrence from the n. e. The island is about seven leagues in circumference, and lies 16 
|BEL 
miles from the nearest land 0:1 the coast of Labra dor, or New Britain. On the n. za. side it lias a harbour for fishing vessels, or small craft, and on the r. point it has a cove which will admit shal lops. Lat. 51 58 n. Long. 55 15 a&gt;. 
BrLLisiE, an island of the e. side of the n. part of Newfoundland island, e. of Canada head. 
Br.LLisLE, another island of thee. const of the Ksland of Newfoundland, distinct from the others, between the islands of Grois and Casronge. 
|BMLLISLE, a strait formed by the coast of the county of Labrador, and the Island of Newfound land. It runs from s. ay. to n. e. 
|BELLO, REAL, a settlement of the province and captainship of Rio Janeiro in Brazil, on the shore of the river of Los Muertes. 
|BELL S MILL, a settlement in N.Carolina, near the Moravian settlements, at the source of Deep river, the north-westernmost branch of the n. w. branch of cape Fear, and about 50 miles w. of Hillsborough. 
|BELLUDA Sierra, a chain of mountains of the kingdom of Chile, in the territory of the infi dels. It runs nearly due 5. from n. in the country of the Pehuenchcs Indians, from the settlement of Puren to the volcano of Callaqui. 
|BELPRE, a post-town and small settlement in the territory n. w. of the Ohio, on the n. w. bank of Ohio river, between the Hockhocking and Muskingum rivers, and opposite the mouth of the Little Kanhaway, about 14 miles below Marietta, and 480 s. i. by zo. from Philadelphia. 
|BELSAMITE, a river of Canada. It rises from different lakes in the country of the Papinachois Indians, runs s. e. between the rivers Missipinac and Outardes, and meets the river St. Lawrence at its mouth or entrance into the sea. 
|BELSAMONT, a settlement of the country and land of Labrador, situated on the coast, at the mouth of the strait of Bellisle. 
|BELTRAN, a settlement of the jurisdiction of Tocaima, and government of Mariquita, in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, situated on the shores of the Rio Grande de la Magdalena, annexed to the curacy of Ambolayma ; is of a very hot tem perature, and much infested with mosquitoes, lice, and other insects. Its population is scanty, and con sists of only 80 housekeepers ; its productions are merely sugar-canes, yucas, maize, and plantains. It is 14 leagues to the 5. o&gt;. of Santa Fe. 
|BEL VIDE RE, a new township in Franklin county, Vermont. Also a village in New Jersey, in Sussex county, situated on Delaware river, at the mouth of Pequest river, and 11 miles above Easton in Pennsylvania. 
|BEN 
157 
|BLANDISH, a settlement of the island of Barbailors, in the district of the parish of Sail Felipe. 
|BENEDIC r,atownin Charles county, Mary land, on Patuxent river, opposite Mackall s ferry ; w. from port Tobacco 16 miles, as the road runs through B yrantown ; 30 s. e. from the Federal city, and 20 from Drum s point, at the mouth of the river. 
|BENEI1ISSA, a river of the province and government of Quixosy Macas in the kingdom of Quito, and of the district of the second. It runs from the n. n. w. to s. s. e. and enters the river Santiago. 
|BENET, or BAINKT, a town of the French, in their possessions in the island of St. Domingo, situate on the s. shore of the river of its name. This river rises near (he s. coast of the same island ; it runs s. ami enters the sea between ihe cape of its name and the point of Moral. The above cape is also on the same s. coast, between the former river and the cape of Tres Latanniers. 
|BENI, a large and navigable river of the pro vince and corregitniento of Cuzco in the kingdom of Peru. It rises near the settlement of Los Reyes in the cordillera, and runs from e. to zo. until it enters the Ucayale. According to Cruz, it rises from the river Chinquiavo, or De la Paz, and runs continually n. collecting the waters of several other rivers, when in a very large body it enters the Ucayale. It is also called De la Serpiente, and Mr. D Anville names it Amarumayu, to agree with the Inca Garcilasco, who maintains that it was ex plored by order of the Inca Yupanqui, for the discovery and conquest of the province of Musu, or De los Moxos. On its shores are many reduc* clones or settlements made by the missions of the Moxos. 
|BENITEZ, JUAN, a river of the province and government of Maracaibo in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. It rises in the mountains which lie between the coast and the lake of Maracaibo, runs s. and enters this lake at the side of the mouth or entrance of the same. 
|BENITO, SAN, a settlement of the corregimiento of the jurisdiction of Velez in the Nuevo Reyno. It is of a healthy but very hot tempera ture, producing fruits peculiar to the same. It contains 200 housekeepers, and somewhat fewer families of Indians. Annexed to its curacy is a chapel, called De las Juntas, where there is a small neighbourhood. 
|BKNITO, another settlement, of the province and corregimiento of Cajamarca in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Guzmanga. 
158 
|BEN 
|BENITO, another, of the province and govern ment of Cartagena in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, situate in the road which leads down to |the river of La Magdalena, between this and the city of Car tagena. 
|BENITO, another town, with the surname of Abad, in the same province and government ; situate near one of the arms of the river Cauca. 
|BENITO, another settlement of the province and captainship of Pernambuco in Brazil ; situate on the coast, between the river Piratununga and the port Calvo. 
|BENITO, another, of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of the Jesuits, in the province of Cinaloa in Nueva Espana. 
|BENITO, a river of the kingdom of Brazil. It is small, runs n. and enters that of Preto, or La Palma, opposite the mouth of the river Claro. 
|BENNETS, a small river of the province and colony of Virginia ; it runs s. and enters the Chowan. 
|BENNETS, a point or cape of the coast, in the province and colony of Maryland and bay of Chesapeak. 
|BENNINGTON, a county in the s. w. corner of Vermont, having Wind ham county on the e. and the state of New York on the w. ; into which state it sends Batten kill and Hoosack rivers, which both rise here, and fall into Hudson river, 14 miles apart. Rutland comity lies on the n. and the state of Massachusetts on the s. It contains 19 townships, of Avhich Pennington and Manchester are the chief. It has 12,254 in habitants, including 16 slaves. The mountains here furnish iron ore in abundance, and employ already a furnace and two forges. 
|BENNINOTON, the shire town of the above county, and the largest town in the state of Ver mont, having about 160 houses in the compact part of the town, is situated at the foot of the great mountain, near the s. w. corner of the state, 24 miles e. from the junction of Hudson and Mohawk rivers, and about 52 from the s. end of lake Champlain, at the confluence of the e. and s. bays ; and lies 35 miles from Rutland, 202 miles n. e. from New York, and 300 in the same direction from Philadelphia. Lat. 42 52 n. Long. 73 4 w. Bennington has several elegant buildings. Its public edifices are a congregational church, state-house, and gaol. It is the oldest town in the state, having been first settled in 1764, and is in a flourishing condition, containing 2400 inhabitants. Within the township is mount An thony, which rises very high in a conical form. Two actions were fought in or near this town in 
one day, Aug. /6, 1777, in which the British suf fered a considerable loss. This disaster contri buted in a great measure to the subsequent sur render of General Burgoyne s army. 
|BENSON, the north-westernmost township in Rutland county, Vermont, is situated on the e. side of lake Champlain, 57 miles n. n. w. of Ben nington, and has 658 inhabitants. Hubberton river passes through Benson in its way to East bay. Cockburne s creek, which feeds the same bay, rises here. 
|BEPITANGA, an island of the coast of Brazil, in the province and captainship of Rey. 
|BEQUIA, an island of the N. sea, one of the Lesser Antilles, between the islands of St.Vincente and Granada. It is 12 leagues in circumference, and has a good bay, frequented only by the Cliaribbee Indians, who inhabit this island, and by the English of the island of St. Vincente, who come hither to fish for tortoises. It produces wild cot ton trees, and abounds in water melons ; but it is ill supplied with water, and is filled with vipers, snakes, and venomous insects. Lat. 13 2 w. 
|BERABZAN is a long lake in New North Wales, lying w. and s. and narrows gradually from its n. end, till it mixes with the waters of Shechary lake at the s. end, where these -waters form Seal river, which empties into Hudson s bay at Churchill fort. The middle of Berabzan lies in lat. 60 10 n. and in long. 97 w. See SHECHARY Lake, and CHURCHILL River. 
|BERBICE, a river of the province and govern ment of Guayana, or Nueva Andalucia, in the Dutch possessions, this being the only river in this country. It however renders the land very fer tile, and causes it to produce cotton in abundance. It rises in the sierra of Tumucuraque, , runs from s. tow. and enters the sea about a league in breadth. The territory upon its shores lies low, and is covered with groves. Its mouth is divided into two arms by an island, which is called by the Dutch Krabben ; and through that of the e. side moderate-sized vessels only can pass, as the water does not exceed two or three yards in depth. A little beyond the aforesaid island the waters of the small river Canse join this river, increasing its depth to five yards, when it becomes navigable as far up us the fort of Nassau, which is situate upon the e. shore, at the distance of 10 leagues from (lie river s mouth ; though by water, owing to the river s winding course, the distance is at least 20 leagues. The shores on both sides are covered with houses and plantations belonging to the Dutch, for upwards of 30 leagues. It enters the sea in lat. 6 25 n. 
|BERBICE, the capital of the Dutch colony, taking the name of the former river, by which it 
159 
1763 the Negro slaves made an insurrection here, but this was suppressed in the following year. 
is washed. It is fortified, and is the residence of [This settlement, with the other adjoining ones of the governor, who maintains here a tolerable gar rison. The town is reduced and was badly built. Its principal commerce is in cotton and sugar. In 
Surinam and Essiquibo, surrendered to the Bri tish in 1796. 
The official value of the Imports and Exports of Berbice were, in 
1809, imports ,193,663, exports .49,662. 
1810, 191,556, 51,785. 
And the quantities of the principal articles imported into Great Britain were, in 
Coffee. 
Sugar. 
Hum. 
Cotton wool. 
Brit. Plant. 
For. Plant. 
Brit. Plant. 
For. Plant. 
Cwt. 
1809, 17,665 1810, 2 J,532 
Cwt. 
Cwt. 
7760 3827 
Cwt. 
Galls. 20,355 6,193 
Lbs. 
1,874,196 1,656,057
|BERENGUELA, SAN JUAN DE, a settlement find real of the mines of silver, which were for merly worked in the province and corregimiento of Pacajes in Peru. They were the richest and most renowned of any in the kingdom, having 700 veins ; and from the vestiges which appear here at the present day, there must have been no inconsiderable population of Spaniards. 
|BCRENGUELA, another settlement of the pro vince and corregimiento of Cochabamba in the same kingdom. 
|BERGANS, an island of the s. coast of New foundland, at the entrance of the gulf of St. Lawrence. 
|BERGANTIN,CERROS DEL, mountains of the province of Barcelona, and government of Cumana. They run nearly in a straight line from s. to n. for the space of many leagues. 
|BERGEN, a city and county of the province and colony of New Jersey, above the river Hud son, opposite New York. It was the first spot on which plantations were made. The greater part of its inhabitants are Dutch; Three miles from the city of New York. 
|BER.GEN County, in New Jersey, on Hudson river, lies opposite New York, on the e. and was first planted by the Dutch from New York. It contains six townships, of which the chief are Bergen and Hackinsack, and 12,601 inhabitants, including 2301 slaves. Here are seven Dutch Calvinist churches, and two of Dutch Luther ans. There is a copper mine here, which, when worked by the Schuylors (to whom it belonged) was considerably productive; but it has been neglected for many years. It is a mountainous; 
See SURINAM. 
rough, and hilly county, 30 miles long, and 25 broad. It forms part of the e. and n. end of the state 5 and its n. w. extremity meets the n. e. part of Sussex county ; so that these two counties embosom Morris and Essex counties, ex cept on the s. w. and form the whole breadth of the state in that quarter. 
B ERG EN Neck is the southern extremity of the above township. 
|BERITO, a small river of the island of St. Do mingo. It rises near the . coast, in the valley of Inojtielo, runs e. and enters the Balala. 
|BERKHEMSTEAD, or BARKHEMSTEAI&gt;, a township in Litchfield county, Connecticut, hav ing Hartland n. and New Hartford s.~\ 
|BERKLEY, a township in Bristol county, Massachusetts, containing 850 inhabitants; 50 miles s. of Boston. 
|BERKLEY, a county and city of S. Carolina, situate n. of the county of Colleton, near the rivers Cooper and Ashley : to the w. it has another small river, called Bowal, which forms an island in the middle of a small bay. Opposite the coast are other islands, called Casia and Sullivan, and be tween this and the river Bowal is a chain of moun tains, called Sandy. The river Wanda washes the n. w. part of this county, and afterwards en ters the Cowper, both of these joining the Ashley .in Charlestown. [In the census of 1791, it was called St. John s parish in Berkley county, and contained 752 free persons and 5170 slaves. 
|BEKKLEY County, in Virginia, lies w. of the Blue Ridge, n. of Frederick county, and separated from the state of Maryland, on the n. and e. bj Potowmack river. This fertile county, about 40 
166 
miles long and 20 broad, has 16,781 free inhabi tants and 2932 slaves. Martinsburgh is its chief town.J 
|BERKLEY S Sound, on the n. w. coast of N. America, lies on the e. side of Quadras isles. The land on its e. side is opposite cape Flat tery, and forms the n. side of the straits de Fuca. 
|BERK S County, in Pennsylvania, has North ampton county oa the n. e. Northumberland on the n. zo. part of Luzern o;i the n. Dauphin and Lancaster counties s. a?, and Chester and Montgomery s. e. It is watered by Schuylkill river, and is 53 miles long and near 29 broad, con taining 1,030,400 acres. Here iron ore and coal are found in plenty, which supply several iron works. The n. parts are rough and hilly. Berks contains 30,179 inhabitants, of whom 65 only are slaves. It has 29 townships, of which Readingis the chief. 
|BERKSHIRE County, in Massachusetts, is bounded to. by New York state, s. by the state of Connecticut, e. by Hampshire county, and n. by the state of Vermont. It thus runs the whole extent of the state from n. to s. and contains 26 townships ; the chief of which are Stockbridge, Lenox, Great Barrington, Williamslown, and Pittsfield ; and the number of inhabitants 30,291. AVhite and clouded marble is found in several towns in the rough and hilly parts of this country. In February 1796, the legislature passed an act to establish a college in VVilliamstown, by the name of Williams College. 
|BERKSHIRE, a newly settled township in Franklin county, Vermont, 
|BERLIN, a neat and flourishing town of York county, Pennsylvania, containing about 100 houses. It is regularly laid out, on the s. w. side of Conewago creek, 13 miles w. of Vorktown, and 101 w. of Philadelphia. Lat. 39 56 n. 
|BKRLIN, a township in Orange county, Ver mont, on Dog river, a branch of Onion river from the s. ; which las&gt;t separates Berlin from Montpelier on the n. n. w. Berlin contains 134 inhabi tants, and is about 94 miles n. e. from Bennirigton. 
B RLIN, a township in Hartford county, Connecticut, 12 miles s. s. w. of Hartford, 42 n. zs. of New London ; and 26 n. n. e. of New Haven. 
|BERLIN, a township in Worcester county, Massachusetts, containing 512 inhabitants; 34 .miles w. of Boston, and 15 n. e. of Vv orcester. Hops have been cultivated here lately, and pro mise to be a valuable article of husbandry. 
|BERLIN, in Somerset county, formerly in that 
of Bedford, Pennsylvania, lies on a branch of Stoney creek, a s. water of Conemaugh river, on the w. side of the Allegliany mountain ; 25 miles w. of Bedford, 23 n. w. of fort Cumberland in Virginia, and 200 w. of Philadelphia. Stone creek, the chief source of Kiskeminitas river, rises n.n.c. of Berlin. Lat. 39 54 n. 
|BERMEJA, LA, a shallow of the bay of Campeche, near the coast. 
|BERMEO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Chichas and Tarrija in Peru. It is of the district of the former, annexed to the curacy of Tarija. 
|BERMUDA, a city of the province and colony of Virginia. 
|BERMUDA Hundred, or CITY POINT, as it is sometimes called, is a port of entry and post-town in Chesterfield county, Virginia, situated on the point of the peninsula formed by the confluence of the Appamattox with James river, 36 miles zo. from Williamsburg, 64 from point Comfort in Chcsapeak bay, and 315 5. w. by s. from Philadel phia. City Point, from which it is named, lies on the s. bank of James river, four miles s. s. w. from this town. The exports from this place, chiefly collected at Richmond, 20 miles above it, amounted in 1794 to the value of 773,549 dollars; and from the first of October to the first of De cember 1795 were as follows: 15 kegs of butter, 578bbls. S. fine flour, 101 half do. "789 fine do. 3931bs. indigo, 10 tons pig iron, 100 Ibs. sassa fras, 80,320 hhd. staves, 66,300 bbl. staves, J819 hhds. tobacco, and 3 kegs manufactured do. Total exports, 90,859 dollars, 45 cents. There are about 40 houses here, including some ware houses. It trades chiefly with the West Indies, arid the different states. City Point, in James river, lies in Lat. 37 20 n. Long. 77 31 } w.  See. RICHMOND. 
|BERMUDAS, islands of N. America, in the N. sea ; thus callid from having been discovered by Juan Bermudez in 1522. They are more than 400 in number, and for the most part desert and uninhabited. The largest is S. George, which is five leagues long and one broad ; and it is on ac count of its comparative consequence that this alone is treated of. The English who inhabit it call it also Sommers, on account of Sir George Summers having been shipwrecked upon it soon after its discovery. It has different ports, and two castles, called Dowre and Warwick ; but so surrounded are they by rocks, and so defended by nature, that it is with difficulty that a vessel of 10 tons burthen c;m enter the roads, or at least with out considerable caution and assistance. Tht&gt; 
|BERMUDAS. 
161 
temperature is so good, that it is spring nearly tlie whole year round, tlie fields ami trees being clad in eternal green ; but the tempests of thunder and lightning, together with the hurricanes, are at times tremendous. They are, however, antici pated by the inhabitants, who can tell their ap proach by watching the circle of the moon. These i -lands are so fertile that it is usual to gather in two crops or harvests in each year. They pro duce much amber, pearls, cochineal, and abun dance of turtles, the flesh of which is a great deli cacy among the English. This island abounds in swine, and in birds of different species : among these is that which, among naturalists, is called the crane, being a marine bird, and building its nest in the holes of the earth. Ttic climate is so healthy, that scarcely any one is observed to die except through old age. In these islands are found no species whatever of venomous animals ; and they abound with a sort of cedar, of which are built brigs and other small craft, which arc much prized in America ; and this wood forms one p irt of its commerce The English established them selves here in 1612, and formed a colony, which was enlarged by Captain Turquer in 1
16, lie being the first who planted in it tobacco and wheat. From this time the prosperity of it in creased daily ; and shortly after, a fresh supply of 500 men arrived under the direction of Captain Butler, who divided the island into counties and parishes. Its population, however, was at the highest during the civil wars of England, when a hr
e portion of the English nobility betook them selves to America, and among the rest, the poet Waller to this island, who afterwards wrote a de scription of it in a beautiful English poem. I(s inhabitants may amount to about 5000. Formerly it carried on a great traffic in the article of hats made of palm-trees, and which were much esteemed by the ladies in all parts ; but this has greatly fallen to decay. [They lie in the form of a shepherd s crook, and are distant from the Land s End in England 1500 leagues, from the Madei ras 1200, from Hispaniola 400, and 200 from cape Ilatteras in Carolina, which last is the nearest land to them. The islands are walled with rocks ; and by reason of these, together with shoals, are diffi cult to approach. The entrances into the Inrbours and channels are narrow as well as slioullv, and are more dangerous by reason of the strong cMirrent which sets to the n. e. from the gnlf of Florida. The Bermudians arc chiefly sea-faring men, aixl the Negroes are very expert mariners. Jn Ihe late war there were at one time between 15 
VOf-. I. 
and 20 privateers fitted out from hence, which were manned by Negro slaves, who behaved irre proachably ; and such is the state of slavery here, and so much are they attached to their masters, that such as were captured always returned when it was in their power; a singular instance of which occurred in the state of Massachusetts. The ship Regulator, a privateer, was carried into Boston, and had 70 slaves on board : 60 of them returned in a flag of trace, 9 returned by way of New York, one only was missing, who died. The government is conducted under a governor, named by the British crown, a council, and a general as sembly. There are nine churches, of which three clergymen have tlie charge ; and there is one Presbyterian church. These islands contain from 12 to 13,000 acres of poor land, of which nine pirfs in ten are either uncultivated, or reserved in woods, which consist chiefly of cedar, for the supply of ship-building. There are about 200 acres laid out in cotton. The main island is about 16 miles long, and from one to two in breadth. The parish of St. George is an island to the e. of the main land, in which stands the town of St. George s, containing about 500 houses. Contigu ous to that is St. David s island, which supplies the town with provisions. The air is healthy, and a continual spring prevails ; and most of the pro ductions of the West Indies might be cultivated here. The houses are built of a soft stone, which is sawn like timber, but being washed with lime, it becomes hard ; these stones are greatly in request throughout the West Indies for filtrating water. The houses are white as snow, which, beheld from an eminence, contrasted with the greenness of the cedars and pasture ground, and the multitude of islands full in view, realize what the poets have feigned of the Elysian fields. In the present war the Bermudas have been the usual winter station of the British naval force in the American seas ; and even ships of 74- guns have lately been car ried into and out of the harbour, notwithstanding the extreme narrowness of the entrance. The climate is delightful in winter, but very hot in summer. Some accounts say that these islands contain from 15 to 20,000 inhabitants ; but Mr. Edwards says the number of white people is 5462, of blacks 4910. Old writers observe that there were 3009 English in these islands in 1623. Three or four hundred go annually to Turk s island to rake salt, which is carried to America for provisions, or sold to such as may call for it there for cash. Lat. 32 J2 n. Long. 64 40 *. 
162 
The official value of the Imports and Exports of Bermudas were, in 
1809, imports \ 1,648, exports rf34,279. 
1810, 1,137, 36,613. 
And the quantities of the principal articles im ported into Great Britain were, in 
Coffee. 
Cotton Wool. 
Brit. Plant. 
For. Plant. 
Cwt. 
1809, 8 1810, 
Cwt. 
988 
Lbs. 
21,656 9,095 
|BERNA, NEW, a settlement of N. Carolina, in the district of Craven, on the shore of the river Pampticoe, or Pantego, in lat. 35 18 n. and long. 77 17 a), and near to the mouth of that river. 
|BERNABE, S. a settlement of the province and alcaldia mayor of Capanabastala in the king dom ol Guatemala. 
|BERNABE, S. another of the province and eorregimiento of Loxa in the kingdom of Quito, situate on the skirt of a mountain to the to. of its capital. 
|BERNABE, S. another, which is a village of the province and captainship of the Rio Janeiro in Brazil. 
BE UN ABE, S. a bay on the coast of the province of California, at the back of the cape of San Lucas, and opposite the coast of Nueva Espana. It is here that the vessels coming from Felipinas, or Philippines, touch to take in water and pro visions. 
|BERNABE, S. a point on the s. coast of the strait of Magellan, which looks to the w. of the island of Luis el Grande. 
|BERNAB: , S. a small island of the gulf of Cali fornia, or Mar Roxo de Cortes, situate in the in nermost part of that gulf, near the coast. 
|BERNALILLO, RANCHO DE, a small settle ment belonging to the religious of St. Francis, in Nuevo Mexico. 
B; RNAM : T-O, a river of the same kingdom. 
|BERNARDINO, S. a settlement of the mis sions held by the religious order of St. Francis, in theprovince
araumara, of the kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya: lying six leagues to the s. of San Andres. 
|BERNARDINO, S. another settlement of the pro vince of Barcelona, and government of Cumana, in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, situate by the 
side of the settlement of Pilar, and to the s. of the city of Barcelona. 
|BERNARDINO, S. another, of the head settlement of Santa Isabel, and alcaldia mayor of Cholula, in Nueva Espana. It contains 40 families of Indians, and is two leagues to the ra. of its head settlement. 
|BERNARDO, SAN ABAD, a settlement of the province and government of Cartagena ; one of the new settlements which were founded in 1776 by Don Juan Pimienta. It is near the sea-coast, be tween the points of Piedras and V enados. 
BP-RNARDO, SAN ABAD, another, of the province and government of Nicaragua in the kingdom of Guatemala, situate on the shore of the lake. 
|BERNARDO, SAN ABAD, another, with the sur name of Arcos, in the province and government of Buenos Ayres, on the shore of the river Feliciano, and at the mouth where it enters the Parana. 
|BERNARDO, SAN ABAD, a bay on the coast of the province of Texas, in the bay or gulf of Mexico. The passage into it, between several islands, is called Paso de Cavallo. 
|BERNARDO, SAN ABAD, a point in the coast of the province and government of Cartagena, oppo site tiie islands of the same name. It forms one of the extremities of the bay ofTolu. 
|BERNARDO, SAN ABAD, some islands in the N. sea, of the province and government of Carta gena, situate near the point of this name. They are many in number, and lie at the outer part of the bay of Tolu, at the distance of five leagues. They are inhabited by some poor families. 
|BERNARDSTOWN, in Somerset county, New Jersey, contains 2377 inhabitants, including 93 slaves. 
|BERNARDSTOW.N, also the name of a township in Hampshire county, Massachusetts, containing 691 inhabitants ; distant 110 miles w. from Boston. 
|BERNE, a township in Albany county, New York. By the state census of 1796, it appears there are 477 -of the inhabitants who are electors. 
|BERRACOS, PUNTA DE, a point on the s. coast of the island of Cuba, between the port of this city and that of Guantanamo. 
|BKRRERJSSA, a river of ihe province of Quito. It runs amongst the woods inhabited by the nation of the Kibaros, in a direction from n. to .?. and enters the river of San Jacome on the n. side. 
|BERRY Islands, a cluster of small islands among the Bahamas, situate to the n. 70. of New Providence, and upon the s. side of the channel communicating with tiie Florida stream. See BA HAMAS. 1 
|BET 
|BERSCHOOR, a port on the w. coast of the island of Maire, between the cape of St. V incente and that of Diego. 
|BERTIE, a maritime county in N. Carolina, in Edenton district, with the Roanoke its s. boun dary, and Albernarle sound on the e. In it is situated the ancient Indian tower of Tuscarora. It contains 12,606 souls, of which number 5141 are slaves. 
|BERWICK, or ARBOTSTOWN, a neat town in York county, Pennsylvania, at the hend of Conewago Creek, 13 miles w. of York, 26 s. s. w. of Harrisburgh, and 103 w. by s. of Philadelphia. The town is regularly laid out, and contains about 00 houses, a German Lutheran, and Calvinist church. Lat. 39 52 . 
|BERWICK, or NEW BERWICK, a small town of Northumberland county, Pennsylvania, on the n. w. side of the e. branch of Susquehannah river, opposite Nescopeck falls and Nescopeck creek, 32y miles n. e. from Northumberland and Sunbury, at the junction of the e. with the zw. branch of Sus quehannah, and 160 n. w. of Philadelphia. Lat. 41 4 w. 
|BERWICK, a township in York county, district of Maine, containing 3894 inhabitants. It has an incorporated academy, and lies on the e. side of Salmon fall river, 7 miles n. w. of York, and 86 e. of n. from Boston. 
|BETA, CIENEG A DE, a large lake formed by the waters of the river Cauca, the river Peries, and many other streams. It is also called La Raya. 
|BETA, a settlement and real of mines of the alcaldia mayor of Fresnillo, and of the province of Zacatecas, in Nucva Espana, It is two leagues from the real of Zacatecas. 
|BETANCOUR, a settlement of Canada, situated on the shore of the river St. Lawrence, near the lake of St. Pierre. 
|BETANZI, MONTANAS DE, mountains in the province and government of Cartagena : they run from n. to s. between the rivers of Sinu and Cauca. 
|BETANZI, an arm of the river Sinu, in the same province and government, which has no place of disemboguement, and forms a large pool or lake. 
|BETANZOS, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Asangaro in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Arapa. 
|BETAS, a settlement and real of mines of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, in the. territory of the government of Pamplona, and of the jurisdiction of the; alcalde mayor of the mines, who resides in Bocaneme. The mines of this settlement have been most rich and abundant, but they are at present de
|BET 
163 
serted, on account of their immense depth, and of the consequent expence and labour of working them. Its temperature is very cold. 
|BETAS, a port of the coast of the kingdom of Chile, in the district of the province and corregimiento of Copiapo. Lat. 25 33 s. 
|BETAZA, a settlement and head settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Villalta in Nueva Espana. It is of ahot temperature, and contains 65 families of Indians ; is lour leagues to the s. of its capital. At three leagues distance there is another settle ment, in which dwell 122 families, \vho exercise themselves in the cultivation of maize. 
|BETEITIVA, a settlement of the province and corregimie.Hto of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of a moderately cold tempera ture, producing fruits natural to such a climate ; contains 150 housekeepers, and a very few Indians. Fourteen leagues n. of its capital. 
|BETEO, a small river of the province and go vernment of Merida in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra nada. It runs from w. to e. and enters the Apure close to its source. 
|BETHABARA, the first settlement of the Mo ravians in the lands of Wachovia in N. Carolina, begun in 1753; 6 miles n. of Salem, and 183 so. of Halifax, in lat. 36 9 n. It is situated on the w. side of Graffy creek, -which unites with the Gargales and several others, and falls into the Yadkin. It contains a church of the United Bre thren, and about 50 dwelling houses. 
|BETHANY, or BETHANIA, a Moravian settlement and post town in the lands of Wachovia in N. Carolina, begun in 1760 ; 9 miles n. a?, of Salem, 4 n. w. of Bethabara, and 568 s. w. by s. of Philadelphia. It contains about 60 houses and a church built on a regular plan. See WA CHOVIA. 
|BETHE, SAN Luis DE, a settlement of the province and government of Darien in the king dom of Tierra Firme, situate at the mouth of the river of its name, and on the shore of the Atrato. 
|BETHE, a river of the same province and go vernment, rises in the mouutains of Choc6, rum from e. to w. and enters the Atrato. 
|BETHEL, a small Moravian settlement on Swetara river, in Pennsylvania, 12 miles from Mount Joy. A township in Dauphin county. 
|BETH;:L, a townhip in Windsor county, Ver mont, containing 473 inhabitants ; n. n. w. of, and bounded by Stockbridge, and about 67 miles n. n. e. of Benninglon. It gives rise to a small branch of White river. 
|BETHEL, a township in Delaware county, Penn. sylvania. 
Y 2 
164 
|BET 
|BETHLEM, a settlement of the province and government of Tucuman, and of the jurisdiction of the city of Bioxa, in the kingdom of Peru. 
|BETHLEM, a valley of the same province and government, bounded by the kingdom of Chile. 
|BETHLEM, another settlement of the province and district of Catamarca. It is SO leagues from that place, and in its district arc four small settle ments of Indians towards the valley of Calchaqui ; also some very abundant salt mines. 
|BETHLEM, another settlement of the missions \vhich were held by the regulars of the company of Jesuits, in the province of Cinaloa in Nueva Espana. 
|BETHLEM, another settlement of the province of Ostimuri in the same kingdom of Nueva Espana. 
|BETHLEHEM, a town in Albany county, New York, very fruitful in pastures, and has large quantities of excellent butter. By the state cen sus of 1796, 388 of the inhabitants arc electors. 
|BETHLEHEM, a township in Berkshire county, Massachusetts, having 261 inhabitants. It lies about 10 miles s. of e. from Stockbridge, 10 from Lenox, and 130 from Boston. It borders on Tyringham and Loudon, 
|BETHLEHEM, a township in Hunterdon county, New Jersey, situated at the head of the s. branch of Rariton river. It contains 1335 inhabitants, including 31 slaves. Turf for firing is found here. 
|BETHLEHEM, a township in Lit ch field county, Connecticut, joins Litchfield on the n. and Woodbury on the s.~\ 
|BETHLEHEM, a post town in Northampton county, Pennsylvania, is a celebrated settlement of the Moravians, or United Brethren, of the Pro testant Episcopal church, as they term themselves. It is situated on Leigh river, a western branch of the Delaware, 53 miles n. from Philadelphia, and 12 5. from the Wind Gap. The town stands partly on the lower banks of the Manakes, a fine creek, which affords trout and other fish. The situation is healthful and pleasant, and in summer is fre quented by gentry from different pails. Irv 1787 there were 60 dwelling houses of stone, well built, and 600 inhabitants. Besides the meeting-house, are three other public buildings, large and spa cious; one for the single brethren, one for the single sisters, and the other for the widows. The literary establishments, as well as the religious re gulations here, deserve notice. In a house adjoin ing to the church is a school for females ; and since 1787, a boarding school was built for young ladies, who are sent here from different parts, and are in structed in reading and writing, (in the English and German tongues) , grammar, arithmetic, geography, 
needle-work, music, &c. The minister of the place has the direction of this as well as of the boys 7 school, which is kept in a separate house, where they are initiated in the fundamental branches of literature. These schools, especially that for the young ladies, arc deservedly in very high re pute ; and scholars, more than can be accommo dated, are offered from all parts of the United States. There is at the lower part of the town a machine, of simple construction, which raises the water from a spring into a reservoir, to tho height of JOO feet; whence it is conducted by pipes into the several streets of the town. There is a genteel tavern at the n. end of the town, the profit arising from which belongs to the society. There is also a store, with a general as~ sortment of goods, an apothecary s shop, a large tan-yard, a currier s and a dyer s shop, a grist mill, a tulling-mill, an oil-mill, and a saw-mill, and on the banks of the Leigh a brewery. Lat. 40 57 . Long. 75 23 aC 
|BETOIES, a settlement of Indians of this na tion in the Nucvo Ileyno de Granada ; reduced and formed by the regulars of the company of Je suits, in the beginning of this century, in 1717, on the shores of the large river of Casanare ; is very numerous, but pays no tribute whatever to the king. It produces wheat, maize, and many other productions; is in the limits of the province of Caracas, and one of the six which compose this mission, which is at present under the care of the religious of St. Domingo. 
|BETQN*ij a division or small diskict of the province and government of Santa Mar-fa- in the Nuevo Key no de Granada. It abounds in all the friuts peculiar either to Europe or America, and is not without some mines of the very finest gold, copper, and emeralds ; but none of them are worked, from the scarcity of labourers, the territory being almost depopulated. 
|BEUEK, a small river of the island of New foundland, in the .v. part. It runs w. and enters the sea between the buy of St. Genevieve and the port V ieux-a-choix. 
B
|UER, another Fiver of Canada,, which rises in a small lake to the s. of lake Erie, runs s. and enters tlve sea. 
|BLUER, another, of the province and colony of Pennsylvania, which runs from s. to w. and en-tecs the Ohio. 
BE II F, Tli vi ERE A u, empties e. into Mississippi river, about 48 miles, by the course of the river, above the month of the Illinois, and 7 miles s. from Riviere Oahaha. 
15t:ur, SMALL LE. See LE BOEUF/} 
, a township and post (own in Essex county, Massachusetts, containing 32f)0 inhabi tants, is separated from Salem by a handsome bridge, and is about 20 miles e. of u. of Boston, and 22 s. to. of Ne\vburyport. It has two pa rishes. In the parish next the harbour, are a num ber of handsome houses, exhibiting the cheering rewards of enterprise and industry, and the inha bitants are devoted to the fishery and olhcrbranches of navigation. In the other part of the town, which is chiefly agricultural, is a cotton manu factory. The bridge mentioned before is 1500 feet in length, erected in 17S8, and connects this town with Salem. It has a draw for vessels. 
|BEVERLY S MANOR, or IRISH TRACT, in Vir ginia, is a tract of land, in lat. 38 10 n. at the head of Masanuten s river, a w. branch of the Shenandoah, which rises here by three branches, viz. Middle river, Le\vis and Christian creeks. It lies between the Blue and the North ridge. The road from Yadkin river, through Virginia to Phi ladelphia, passes through here. 
|BEXAR, S. ANTONIO DE, a garrison and ca pital settlement of the province of los Texas, or Nuevas Felipinas. It is of a mild temperature, and is the residence of a captain, lieutenant, and ensign, with aserjeant and 47 soldiers, to restrain the infidel Indians. It is 122 leagues distant from La Monclova, and 360 n. n. e. of Mexico. 
|BEZANI, a settlement and garrison of the pro vince and government of La Sonora, situate at the source of the river of ils name. 
|BEZANJ. This river rises in the Primeria Alta, runs s. and enters the sea in the gulf of Cali fornia. 
|BEZANT, a settlement of the English in the island of Barbados, of the district and parish of St. Thomas. 
|BIABOMA, a river of the province of Maraiian. It runs from e. s. e. to ic. n. o\ in the woods which lie s. of the river Maranon, and on its e. side enters thnt of the Guallaga. 
|BIB 1 RICE, a large river of the kingdom of Brazil, in the province and captainship of Pernambuco. It runs from u\ to e. and enters the sea near Olinda. 
|BIBLIAN, a settlement of the province and corrcginncnto of Cuenca in the kingdom of Quito, situate n. of the paramo of Burgay. 
|BIBORILLAS, a settlement of the mission which belonged to the regulars of the company of Jesuits, of the province of Tepeguana, and king dom of Nueva Vizcaya. BIG, a small river of Nova Scotia, or Acadia. 
165 
It runs from n. to &. and enters that of St. Law rence. 
|BICAN, a settlement of the province of Ostimuri in Nueva Espana, situate on the shore of the river Iliaquij between the settlements of Potan and Torin. 
|BICHADA8, a large river of the province and government of San Juan de los Llanos in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It rises in the serranius of Tunja, and after, in its extended course, receiving into its bed the tributary streams of very many other rivers, enters tlie Orinoco. Its shores are peopled by the Charibbee Indians. In the lastccntury (17th) the missions of the regulars of the com pany of Jesuits established themselves here, but they were cut off by these infidels, when the fol lowing suffered martyrdom, viz. Ignacio Fiol, Caspar Bee, and Ignacio Teobast, Francisco Figucroa, Francisco Castan, and Vicente Loberzo
 with the Captain Don Lorenzo de Medina. 
|BICIIE, a very small island of the N. sea, situate within the bay of the Gran Cul de Sac, in the island of Guadaloupe. 
|BICMES, ISLA E, an island of the coast of Guayana, and in the French possessions, at the en trance of the river Ovapoco. 
|BICH UQUEN, a river of the province and corregimiento of Itata in the kingdom of Chile, be tween the port of La Navidad and the point of Tacopalma. 
|BIDAIE, a settlement of the province and srovernmcnt of Texas, situate in the country of the Cenis Indians, on the shore of the river Trinidad . 
BlDDEF()RD,a port of entry and post town in York county, district of Maine, on the s. w. side of Saco river, on the sea coast, 14 miles s. zo. from Portland, 24 n. e. from York, and 105 from Boston. It contains 1018 inhabitants; and here the county courts are held, as likewise at York. Lat. 43 23 w. 
|MIDDLES, a settlement on a branch of Lick ing river, in Bourbon county, Kentucky, about 6 miles n. z?. from Millers, on the n. e. side of the same branch, and 32 miles n. n. e. from Lexington. 
|BIEQUE, a small island of the N. sea, one ot the Lucayas, situate close to the port of Puertorico. 
|BICQUE Island, or BOUIQUEN, or CRAKS Isle, one of the Virgin isles, 2 leagues from Porto Rico, 6 leagues long and 2 broad. The English settled here twice, and have been driven away by the Spaniards, whose interest it is to let it remain desolate. It has a rich soil, and a good road on its s. side. Lat. 18 7 n. 65 21 a?. 
|BIG 
|BIEZMES, orALconoN, a settlement of the province and corregimicnto of Caxaiuarquilla in Peru. 
|BIG BONE Creek, in Wood ford couniy, Kentucky, falls into the Ohio from the e. in about lat. 38 29 . long. 84 33 w. It is very small in size, and has three brandies ; the north-western most interlocks with Bank Lick creek, which falls into Licking river. It is only noticeable for the large bones and salt licks near it. 
BiG BONE Licks, The, lie on each side of the abovementioned creek, a little below the junction of the two e. branches, about 8 miles from the mouth of the creek. These, as also the other salt springs in the w. country are called licks, because the earth about them is furrowed up in a most cu rious manner by the buffaloes and deer which lick the earth, on account of the saline particles with which it is impregnated. A stream of brackish water runs through these licks, the soil of which is a soft clay. The large bones found here, and in several other places near Salt licks, and in low soft grounds, thought to belong to the mammoth, still puzzle the most learned naturalists to determine to what animal they have belonged. A thigh-bone found here by Gen. Parsons measured 49 inches in length. A tooth of this animal is deposited ki Yale college. Bones of a similar kind have been found in other parts of America. A skeleton, nearly complete, and above 11 feet high, which was found near Hudson s river, was brought to England some years ago ; and another of nearly the same size is preserved in the college of New Jersey. Of this animal the natives have no tra dition, but what is so fabulous that no conjecture can be aided by it, except that the animal was carnivorous ; and this is the general opinion, and was admitted by the late Dr. Hunter of London, from an examination of the tusks, &c. 
|BIG HILL Creek runs w. into Kaskaskias ri ver, 25 miles below Beaver creek, 17 above Blind creek, and 26 n. from the mouth of Kas kaskias. 
|BIG ROCK, a large rock on the s. e. bank of Au Vaze river, about three miles . e. from its mouth in the Missisippi, and about eight miles s. e. from cape St. Antonio on that river. 
|BIG ROCK Branch, the n. e. head-branch of Alleghany river. The branch called Big Hole Town joins it, and forms the Alleghany, 85 miles n. e. from and above Venango fort.J 
|BIG SALT Lick, a garrison in the state of Teuessie, near the Salt lick, on Cumberland river ; 115 miles from Knoxville, 80 from South-west 
|BIO 
point on Clinch river, 32 from Bledsoc lick, and b S from Nashville. 
|BIG SANDY River, orToiTEUVY, has its source near that of Cumberland river, and separating Vir ginia from Kentucky, empties into the Ohio, op posite the French purchase of Galiopolis, in about n. lat. 38 30 . Vancouver s and Harmar s forts stand on this river. On its banks are several salt licks and springs. Little Sandy is a short small river, which falls into the Ohio, about 20 miles w. of Big Sandy river, in Mason county, Kentucky. BIGGIN Swamp. See SANTEE River. BILLERICA, a township in Middlesex county, Massachusetts, incorporated in 1655. It has 1200 inhabitants ; nor has there been much variation in the number for half a century. It lies 20 miles n. of Boston, and is watered by Concord and Shawsheen rivers, which run n. e. into Merrimack river. 
|BILLINGSPORT, on Delaware river, lies 12 miles below Philadelphia, was fortified in the late war for the defence of the channel. Opposite this fort, several large frames of timber, headed with iron spikes, called chevaux-de-j rizes, were sunk to prevent the British ships from passing. Since the peace, a curious machine has. been in vented in Philadelphia to raise them. BILLET. See HATBOROUGH.J BILLYMEAD, in Caledonia county, in Ver mont. 
|BILOCI, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Louisiana, situate on the coast, to the e. of the mouth of the river Pascagoula. 
|BIMINI, a small island of the N. sea, one of the Lucayas, situate opposite the coast of Florida, and one of those which form the mouth of the canal of Bahama. It is five leagues in length, covered with beautiful groves, and inhabited by savage Indians. Its coasts are very dangerous for vessels, on account of the numerous rocks with which they are surrounded. [The Biminis are more properly a cluster of small uninhabited islands, situated on the Florida stream, and near the n. w. extremity of the Great Bahama bank. See BAHAMAS. 
|BINAPA, a settlement of the province of Culiacan, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya, one of those of the missions which were held there by the religious order of St. Francis, situate on the shores of the river Elota. It produces maize, beans, and abundance of honey and wax. 
|BINNEI, a settlement of the English in the island of Barbadoes, in the parish and district of St. George. BIOBIO, a large river of the kingdom of 
Chile ; it rises in the cordillera of the Andes, and enters the S. sea two leagues from the bay of Concepcion, passing through minerals of gold and xarsa, upon which acc6tmt its waters are very salutary. It is celebrated for having been con tinually the theatre of war between the Spaniards and Araucanians, whose numerous feats of valour and prowess have been exhibited on either side of its banks : it is the line or boundary of the country possessed by cither party, and is so acknowledged by the latter. The Spaniards have several forts built upon its banks, called San Rafael, Puren, and Santa Barbara ; and near its mouth, or en trance into the sea, those of San Pedro and Calcura, between which two a famous battle Avas fought by the Spaniards and the Araucanians. On the shores of this river are found quantities of fine cedar, fit for building. 
|BIOBIO, TJLTAS DE, two mountains of the same kingdom near the coast, at the entrance of the former river. 
|BIPOS, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Tucuman in Peru, situate on the shore of the river of its name. 
Biros. This rivers runs s. s. e. and enters the Choromoros. 
|BIRD Fort, on Monongahela river, 40 miles 5. of fort Pitt. 
|BIRDS Keys, a rock or island among the Virgin isles in the West Indies: it is round, and lies about two leagues .. of St. John s. It has its name from the quantities of birds which resort there. 
|BIRU, a town 10 leagues from Truxilla, in the S. sea, in the empire of Peru, inhabited by about 80 Indians, Spaniards, Mulattoes, and Mustces. It is very fertile, and well watered by canals cut from the river, and so conveyed to great dis tances, as at Truxilla. Lat. 8 35 *. 
|BISCAS, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Canta in Peru, annexed to the curacy of A rah nay. 
|BISCAY. SeeViscAY. 
|BISSI, TOUR DE, an island or shoal situate close to the n. coast of the Mai vine or Falkland isles. 
|BLACK Lick lies in Westmoreland county, Pennsylvania, about 36 miles e. of Pittsburgh
 
|BLACK Log, a town of the province and co lony of Pennsylvania, on the shore of the river Jumata. 
|BLACK Log, a river of N. Carolina, which runs in a very abundant stream from s. e. and then turn ing s. enters the river of cape Fear, near its en trance into the sea. 
167 
|BLACK Point, and BLUE Point, are capes within those of Elizabeth and Porpoise, in the dis trict of Maine. 
|BLACK River. There are two small rivers of this name in Vermont; one falls into Connecticut river at Springfield, the other runs n. into lake Mcmphremagog.  
|BLACK River, in New York, interlocks with Canada creek, and runs n. w. into Iroquois river, boatable 60 miles. Also a long river which rises in Virginia, and passes s. e. into Nottaway river, in N. Carolina. 
|BLACK River, a British settlement at the mouth of Tinto river, 20 leagues to the e. of cape Hon duras, the only harbour on the coast of Tierra Finne from the island of Rattan to cape Gracias-aDios, and was for more than 60 years the refuge of the logwood-cutters, when the Spaniards drove them from the forests of East Yucatan, which oc casioned adventurers of different kinds to settle here, where the coast is sandy, low, and swampy : higher up, near the rivers and lagoons, which are full of fish, the soil is more fertile, and produces plantains, cacao trees, maize, yams, potatoes, and a variety of vegetables ; and the passion for drink ing spirits made them plant sugar-canes. The forests are full of deer, Mexican swine, and game; The shores abound with turtle, and the woods with mahogany, zebra-wood, sarsaparilla, &c. ; and in deed the whole settlement flourishes spontaneously without cultivation. See HONDURAS. 
|BLACK Kiver, in the island of Jamaica, passes through a level country, is the deepest and largest in the island, and will admit flat-bottomed boats and canoes for about 30 miles. 
|BLACK-ROCK, a city of the island of Barbadoes. 
|BLACK-WATER, a river of the province and colony of Virginia : it runs s. e. arid afterwards turning s. enters the sea in Albernarle straits. 
|BLACKSTONE, a small river which has its source in Ramshorn pond, in Sutton, Massachu setts, and after passing through Providence, empties into Narragansct bay, at Bristol, receiving in its course a number of tributary streams. 
|BLACKININGO, a river of S. Carolina, in the county of Craven. It runs s. e, and enters the Pedi. 
|BLADEN, a county of N. Carolina, in Wil mington district. It has 5084 inhabitants, includ ing 1676 slaves. 
|BLADENSBURGH, a settlement of the pro vince and colony of Maryland, in the county of Frederick, oa the shore and at the head of the c. arm of the river Patowmack. [It is nine miles 
from its mouth at the Federal city, 58 s. w. from Baltimore, and 12 n. e . from Alexandria in Vir ginia. It contains about 150 houses, and a ware house for the inspection of tobacco. 
|BLADWEL, MONTAGNC DK, a mountain of the island of Cayenne, on the skirts of which the French have an establishment. 
|BLAIZE, Cape, on the coast of West Florida, in the gulf of Mexico, is a promontory which separates the bay of Apalache on the c. from that of St. Joseph; into which last it turns in the shape of a shepherd s crook. 
|BLANC, Cape, of the -coast of Nova Scotia, one of those which form the bay of Tor. 
|BLANCA, an island of the N. sea, near the coast of Tierra Firme, and n. of La Margarita. It is five leagues in circumference, and abounds in lizards and turtles. It is desert, and inhabited only by some fishermen. Long. 313. Lat. IP 56 . 
|BLANCA, a small inland, close to the coast, which lies between the Rio de la Plata and the straits of Magellan, at the entrance of port Desea do. 
|BLANCA, a river in the province of Chiapa, in the audience of Mexico in New Spain, North America. Its water is said to have a petrifying quality, yet is clear, and docs no harm to man or beast that drinks of it. 
|BLANCA, a piece of land of the coast of the ulcaldia viuyor of Tampico in Nueva Espana, be tween the river Nauta and the bay of Piedras. 
|BLANCA, a point of the coast of the S. sea, of the province and government of Veragua in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, between the point of Mercalo and the settlement of Snn Pablo. 
|BLANCA, an island, also called De lobos Marines, or of Marine Wolves, in the S. sea, near the coast of Peru, in the province and corregimienlo of Caiictc, opposite the port of Sangallo. 
|BLANCA, a sierra, or chain of mountains, of the province and corrcifimicnto of Cuyo in the kingdom of Chile. They run from n. u\ to 5. e. ; and upon their skirts are the estates of Uanchillos, Piramidales, Estancia de Salinas, and Arbol del Mf:lon. 
|BLANCHE, a small river of New France. It rises near the lake Erie and the fort of Sandoski, runs s. and enters the Ohio. 
|BLANCHE, another river of the same province, which rises from the lake Ostandckcrt, runs n. and enters the great lake of Erie, or Oswego. 
|BLANCHE, a bay on the e. coast of the island of Newfoundland, between the capes Argente and Den. 
|BLANCHE, a point or cape of the e. coast of Nova Scotia, one of those which form the entrance of the strait of Canseau, or Canso. 
|BLANCHE, another point of the s. coast, in tha same province, between the two bays of Paspe and Sante Marguerite. 
|BLANCHE, another small river of New France, which runs w. between the bay of Saguinam and the lake Michigan, the latter of which it enters. 
|BLANCHES, islands of the s. coast of Nova Scotia: they are various, all of them small, and lie between the port of Castors and the islands of Liscomb. 
|BLANCHES, with the additional title of Femmes, a settlement of Indians, of New France, situate on the shore of the river of its name. 
|BLANCO, CAYO, a small island of the N. sea, situate s. of the island of Cuba, opposite the bay of Casilda. 
|BLANCO, CAYO, a cape or point of land, on the coast of the province and government of Costarrica, of the N. sea, in the kingdom of Guatemala, op posite the island of Santa Catalina. 
|BLANCO, CAYO, another cape, of the coast of the S. sea, and province and corregimiento of Piura in Pern, one of those which form the great bay and gulf of Tumbez. [It is 120 miles w. of Guaya quil. Lat. 4 18 5. Long. 81 6 . 
|BLANCO, CAYO, a river of the province and go vernment of Guayana in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. It rises near the lake Pilola, and enters that of Las Arnazonas. 
|BLANCO, CAYO, a settlement of the province and government of Aiacames, or Esmeraldas, in the kingdom of Quito, situate on the shore of a small river. 
|BLANCO, CAYO, a settlement of the province and government of Mariquita in the kingdom of Granada, situate on the shore of the river Cauca. 
|BLANCO, CAYO, a small river of the province and government of Tucuman in Peru. It runs e. and enters the Salado, between those of Guachipi and Piedras. 
|BLANCO, CAYO, another small river of the pro vince and corregimiento of Chicas and Tarija in Peru. 
|BLANCO, CAYO, another river of the pro vince and government of Tucuman in Peru, of the district of Xuxuy. It runs e. and enters the Salado. 
|BLANCO, CAYO, another river of the same pro vince and kingdom, in the jurisdiction of Salta. It inns e. and enters the Pasage, between those of Piedras and Guachipa. 
;B L A 
|BLANCO, CAYO, another river of the province of Yapizlaga, or Llanos de Manso, in Peru. It runs e. and enters the Paraguay, below the port of San Fernando. 
|BLANCO, CAYO, another river of the province and government of Louisiana. It rises in the country of the Ossages Indians, runs s, and enters the Mississippi. 
|BLAKCO, CAYO, a ryo, or small island, near the n. coast of the island of Cuba, between the bay of Nicolas and the settlement of Paredones. 
|BLANCO, CAYO, a large river of the country of Las Amazonas. It rises in the mountains of Guayana, near the line, runs w. and turning*, enters the Rio Negro. 
|BLANCO, CAYO, a small river of the island of St. Domingo. It rises in the e. head, in the mountains of Ciboo, runs e. and then turning n. enters the Yuna, near where this joins the sea. 
|BLANCO, CAYO, a cape or point of land on the coast of Brazil, and captainship of Parayba, be tween the capital of this name and cape Leda. 
|BLANCO, CAYO, another cape on the coast of Tierra Firme, in the province and government of Venezuela, close to cape S. Roman. 
|BLANCO, CAYO, another, on the n. w. point of the bay of Salinas, in lat. J0. / and in some maps called the n. w. point of the gulf of Nicoya.} nm&gt;f&lt; 
|BLANCO, CAYO, another cape on the coast of California, at the broadest part of the peninsula. 
B i, AN co, CAYO, another cape on the n. w. coast of America, in New Albion, s. of the mouth of what has been called the River of the West. 
|BLANCO, CAYO, another cape in the S. ocean, on the e. side of Patagonia, s. e. of Julian bay, in lat. 47 15 7 s. Eight leagues w. of Pepys s island. 
|BLANDFORD, a township in Lunenburg county, on Mahon bay, Nova Scotia, settled by a few families. 
|BLANDFORD, a township in Hampshire county, Massachusetts, zs. of Connecticut river, about 25 miles s. ZL\ of Northampton, and 116 &lt;. of Bos ton. Jt has 235 houses and 1416 inhabitants. 
|BLANDFORD, a town in Prince George county, Virginia, about four miles n. e. from Petersburg!}, and is within its jurisdiction. It contains 200 houses and 1200 inhabitants, and is pleasantly situated on a plain, on the e. branch of Appamattox river. Here are many large stores, and three tobacco warehouses, which receive annually 6 or 7000 hogsheads. It is a thriving place, and the marshes in its vicinity being now drained, the air 
|VOL. I. 
169 
of this town, and that of Petersburgh, is much meliorated. 
|BLANQUILLA, a small island of the N. sea, near the coast of V era Cruz and the river Alvarado, close to the island of Sacrificios. 
|BLANQUJZALES, a settlement of the island and government of Trinidad, on the e. coast. 
|BLAS, Cape ST. a cape on the coast of the province and government of Florida, one of those which form the bay of San Joseph. 
|BLAS, a province and alcalciia mayor of Nueva Espaiia, which is very much reduced, and of a very limited jurisdiction. 
|BLAS, a settlement of the missions which were held by the monks of St. Francis, of the al~ cald ia mayor of Acaponeta, and kingdom of Nueva Galicia ; situate 20 leagues e. of its ca pital. 
|BLAS, a point or cape of the coast of Darien in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, which runs two leagues into the sea, and is very dangerous whilst the breza wind prevails ; indeed many vessels have been wrecked here in their voyage from Car tagena to Portobelo. It is 18 leagues distant from the latter place, and 62 from the former. 
|BLAS, SAN, a port in the intendancy of Guadalaxara in the kingdom of Nueva Espana. It is the residence of the deparlimiento de marina, (marine department), at the mouth of the Rio de Santiago. The official people (officiates reales) remain at Tepee, a small town, of which the climate is not so hot, and more salubrious. With in these few years the question has been discussed, if it would be useful to transfer the dock-yards r magazines, and the whole marine department from San Bias to Acapulco. This last port wauls wood for ship-building. The air there is also equally unhealthy as at San Bias, but the projected change, by favouring the concentration of the naval force, would give the government a greater facility in knowing the wants of the marine, and the means of supplying them. Lat. 21 32 a. Long. 105 W K.~\ 
|BLAZA, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Darien in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, situate between two rivers, on a point of land which enters the grand river of Tnira. 
|BLEDSOE Lick, in the state of Tenessee, lies 32 miles from Big Salt lick garrison, and 36 from Nashville. 
|BLENFIELD, PUKTA J&gt;F, a point of laud in the province ami government of Nicaragua, of the kingdom of Guatemala, and of the coast of the N. sea. 
170 
|BLENHEIM, a new town of New Yerk, in Sclioharie county, incorporated in 1797. 
|BLEU, a small river of tbe province and go vernment of Louisiana, which runs nearly due n. and enters the Missouri. 
|BLITAS, LAS, a settlement of the province and government of Nicaragua in the kingdom of Guatemala, situate upon an island within the lake of Nicaragua. 
|BLOCK Island, called by the Indians MaKisses, lies about 21 miles s. s.w. of Newport, and is in Newport county, state of Rhode island. It "was erected into a township, named New ShoreIjam, in 1672. This island is 4(i miles in length, and its extreme breadth is 38 miles. It has 682 inhabitants, including 47 slaves. It is famous for cattle and sheep, butter and cheese : round the edges of the island considerable quantities of cod fish are caught. The s. part of it is in lat. 41 8 w. 
|BLOCK, a river of the province and colony of New Hampshire ; it runs e. and enters the Con necticut. 
|BLOCKLEY, a township in Philadelphia county, Pennsylvania. 
|BLONDEL, CAYOS DE, islands situated be tween the Caicos, to the w. of the Turks islands, in the N. sea. 
|BLOOMFIELD, a township in Ontario coun ty, New York. By the slate census of 1796, 151 of the inhabitants were electors. 
|BLOOMING Vale, a tract of land in the township of Manlius, New York state, on But ternut creek. 
|BLOUING, PUNT A DE, a point on the n. coast of the island of Jamaica, opposite the island of Cuba. 
|BLOUNT, a new county in the state of Teiiessee. 
|BLOUNTSVILLE, in N. Carolina, is on the post road from Halifax to Plymouth, 49 miles from Plymouth, and 55 from \Villiamstown. 
|BLUE FIELDS Bay, lies s. e. of Savannahla-mar, in the island of Jamaica, having good anchorage for large vessels. Lat. 18 10{ n. Long. 78 . 
|BLUE HILL, a township in Hancock county, district of Maine, on the w. side of Union river, 344 miles n. e. of Boston, and 13 c. of Penobscot ; having 274 inhabitants. 
|BLUE HILL Bay is formed by Naskeag point on the w. and mount Desert island on the e. It extends . up to a mountain on the e. of Penob scot river, which, from its appearance at sea, is 
! 
|BOA 
called Blue hill. Union river empties into this bay. 
|BLUR hills, a range of mountains in New England, whose first ridge in New Hampshire passes through Rochester, Barrington, and Not tingham. 
|BLUE Mountains, in Northampton county, Pennsylvania, extend from s. w. to n. e. and a short way across the Delaware. Also a range of mountains which run from s. e. to n. w. through Surry county, in the island of Jamaica. 
|BLUE Ridge. The first ridge of the Alleghany mountains in Pennsylvania and Virginia is called the Blue Ridge, and is about 130 miles from the Atlantic. It is about 4000 feet high, measuring from its base, and between it and the North moun tain is a large fertile vale. The passage of the Potowmack through this ridge is one of the most stu pendous scenes in nature. See ALLEGHANY Mountains and POTOWMACK River. 
{BLUE Licks, on the main branch of Licking river in Kentucky, are situated about eight miles w. from the Upper Blue licks. Both are on the n. e. side of the river ; the latter is about 15 miles n. e. of Millers, 
|BLUE Spring lies between Big Barren and Little Barren river, s. branches of Green river, in Mercer s county, Kentucky ; about 22 miles s. v\ from Sulphur spring, and 13 s. of Craig s fort, on the n. side of Green river. 
|BLUE STONE Creek, a small w. branch of the Great Kanhaway. 
|BOA VISTA, a settlement of the province and captainship of Para in Brazil, situate on the shore of the river of Las Amazonas, near the towil of Cum pa. 
|BOAVfTA, a settlement of the province iand corregimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Rcyno tie Granada. It is of a hot temperature, tolerably fertile, and abounding in wheat, well-tasted maize, and much sugar-cane, from which is made the best sugar in the kingdom, and in exquisite pre serves. In the gardens are many date trees, as also a tree called estonoque, the resin of which is very fragrant and universally esteemed ; here it is used in the churches instead of incense. There is a place close by, where the road is so bad that it has obtained the name of infierno, or infernal. Its inhabitants, who may amount to 800 whites, and 150 *ndians, are much subject to the epi demic disorder called cotos r which is a moxbid swelling of the glands of the throat, and which causes a very unsightly appearance. It is 30 leagues w. of Tunja, and close to the- settlement oi uoitoiuteib/njnoj al b tlhvj audi yi J{ 
of Suata, being divided by the river Chicamocho, or Sogamoso. 
|BOBANAZA, a settlement of the province and government of Quixos and Macas in the king dom of Quito, situate on the shore of the river of its name, with a good port. In its district there are trees of cinnamon, from which some have given it the name of San Joseph de los Canelos. 
BoBAiNAZA,the river, upon the shores of which is the former settlement. It is large and navi gable, and runs in a very crooked course till it enters the Pasta za ; is entered on the s. coast by the fivers Pabayacutinguiza, Capaguari, Aulapi, Caspiyacu, Pahnito, Chambira, and Pungullayacu, and on the n. by those of Umuc, Balso, Sarayacu, Butuno, Pujayacu, and others of less note. It washes the country of the ancient Gayes and Inuris, which is filled with woods. 
BO BARE, a settlement of the province and government of Venezuela, situate to the n. of the city of Barquisimeto, and on the shore of the river Tucuyo. 
|BOBURES, a nation of Indians, of the pro vince and government of Venezuela, to the n. of the lake of Maracaibo, and s. of the city of Merida. They have never been subjected, and even now frequently make incursions upon the neigh bouring countries. The part which they inhabit is by no means the healthiest, since it lays ex tremely low, and is very moist. 
|BOBY, a parish of the province and govern ment of Paraguay, situate on a branch of the river Aguapey, in Lat. 26 54 46". Long. 56 IS 49" 
171 
w. B&lt; 
|IOCA DEL PEHRO, a settlement of the island of Cuba, on the s. coast. 
|BOCA, GHANDE, a mouth of a river of the province and government of Nicaragua in the kingdom of Guatemala, namely, of the river Sucrte, between the rivers Anzuelos and Portete. 
|BOCA CHICA, a liver of the province and government of Texas iu Nueva Espaiia. It runs s. between those of La Trinidad and La Magdalena, and enters the sea. 
i* JBocA CHICA, a strait or narrow and small mouth of the entrance to the port of Cartagena. It is formed by the island of Baru on the s. and by the Tierra-boraba on the n. ; on the right hand ,it has the castle of San Joseph, and on the left that of San Fernando, built by the Lieutenantgeneral Don Ignacio Sala, to replace those which were destroyed by Admiral Vernon in 1741. Vessels car* only enter by means of the canal, fibice in the other parts t here is not sufficient depth of water. It is thus called in contradistinction to 
the other, named Grande. For some little time it has been open to the sea, and it has been assi duously attempted to close it up, not only on ac count of the danger which threatens the walls and houses, but for the sake of impeding the entrance of an enemy, who can now come up within gun shot of the city, rendering the defence of the forts and of the port entirely useless. [Sec CARTA GENA. 
BocA DEI, DRAGO, a strait between the island of Trinidad and Andalusia, in the province of Tierra Firme, S. America. 
|BOCA NUEVA, one of the entrances of the lake of Terminos, in the province of Tobasco, formed by the islands of Tris. 
|BOCA DE PAN, a river of the province of Tumbez in Peru, which receives the title from the gulf of Guayaquil, and runs to the bay of Tum bez, taking a course from s. w. to n. e. 
|BOCACA, a cape or point of land in the island of Puna, of the province and government of Guayaquil. The island is low and sandy. This cape looks to the e. of the district of Machalay, and to the s. za. of the point or cape of Mandinga, in lat. 2 26 s. 
|BOCANEME, a mean settlement of the go vernment of Mariquitain theNuevo Reynode Gra nada. It is of a hot temperature, and its pro ductions arc few in proportion to the scarcity of its inhabitants, who consist of Indians. It is, however, noted for its rich gold mines. 
|BOCAS, LAS, a settlement of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of Je suits, in the province of Tepeguana, and king dom of Nueva Vizcaya, situate on the shore of the river Florido, and lying 15 leagues s. of the settlement and garrison of the valley of San Bartolome. 
|BOCAS, a small island of the river of Las Amazonns, opposite the mouth or entrance of that of Tocantines. moit bsoi Jzoq scfi 
|BOCAS, a river called De dos Bocas, in the country of the Ama/onas, and of the territory of the Portuguese. It is very abundant, rising in the country of the Bacaris and Cariputangas Indians, running many leagues n. and entering the Maranon, a little before this joins the sea. 
|BOCAS, a settlement of the province and cap tainship of Para in Brazil, situate on the shore of the river Jacunda. 
|BOCAS, another settlement of the same captain ship and kingdom, on the shore of the river Tapera, near its mouth or entrance into the sea. 
|BOCAS, ariverofthe province and alcaldia mayor of Tobasco, which runs into the sea in the bay of 
|BOD 
Mexico, between the rivers of Santa Ana and Cuplicos. 
|BOCAS, another river of tbc province and /caldia of Suehitepcc in the kingdom of Guatemala. It runs a;, and enters the sea opposite the barra or sand bank of Istapa. 
|BOCAS, a settlement of (lie province and correginriento of Coquimbo in the kingdom of Chile, at the mouth of the river Choapa. 
|BOCAUERITO, a settlement of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of Jesuits, in the province of Cinaloa. 
|BOCHALEMA, COIIAZON m: JESUS DE, a settlement of the government and jurisdiction of Pamplona in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, is of a hot temperature, and produces canes, plantains, and other fruits peculiar to its climate. It con tains 150 very poor inhabitants, and is 12 leagues n. c. of Pamplona. 
|BOCOABRI, a settlement of the province and government of La Sonora in Nueva Espana, situate to the e. of that of Los Remedies, at the head of a river. 
|BOCON, a settlement of the province of Ostimuri in Nueva Espana. 
|BOCONO, a settlement of the province and government of Caracas in the kingdom of Ticrra Firme, situate at the source of a river of its name. It has the dedicatory title of San Janeiro, and was founded by the Capuchin fathers of the pro vince of Venezuela , in the royal road which leads from the city of Guanare to that of Uarinas. 
|BOCONO, the river which rises in the same province and kingdom, at the side of the moun tains of the city of Truxillo. After leaving the narrow defile through which it runs in the serrania, it begins to serve as a line of demarcation to the provinces of Burinas and Venezuela ; and then passing through some levels, where it irrigates some estates of cacao, indigo, and sugar-cane, established upon its fertile plains, it enters the Guanare near the settlement of San Juan Bautista del Miiagual, of the province of Burinas. 
|BODEGA, a settlement of the province and government of Cartagena, situate on the sea-shore, at the entrance of Boca Chica. 
|BODEGAS, a settlement of the province and government of Guayaquil. 
|BOD i GAS, another settlement of the province and government of Honduras, situate on the shore of the Folso Dulce. 
|BODEGON, a settlement of the province and correziiuicnto of Cumana in Peru, situate on the 
O * 
bea-co &gt;st. 
|BODIGUAS, a barbarous and ferocious nation 
|BOG 
of the province and government of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Reyno, to the n. w. These Indians, united with the Bondas and Jeribocas, had many desperate struggles with the first conquerors. They inhabit the mountains and woods without any fixed residence. 
|BODINGA, a settlement of the province and government of Santa Marta in the kingdom of Tierru Firme ; it was first founded by the Spaniards in 1529, after which the tirst followers of the reli gion of St. Domingo established themselves here for the purpose of converting and reducing to the faith all the Indians of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. 
|BOD WELL S Falls, in Merrimac kriver, lie between Andover and Methuen, about five miles below Ratucket falls. A company was incorpo rated in Feb. 1796, for building a bridge near this spot, between the two states of Massachusetts and New Hampshire. 
|BOEUF, LE, a place in the n. w. corner of Pennsylvania, at the head of the n. branch of French creek, and 50 miles from fort Franklin, where this creek joins the Alleghany, measuring the distance by water. The French fort of Le Boeuf, from which the place has its name, lies about two miles e. from Small lake, which is on the n. branch of French creek ; and from Le Boeuf there is a portage of 14 miles n. to Presquc isle, in lake Erie, where the French had another fort. From Le Boeuf to Prcsque isle is a con tinued chesnut-bottom swamp (except for about one mile from the former, and two from the latter); and the road between these two places, for nine miles, 15 years ago, was made with logs laid upon the swamp. Lat. 4156 w. Long. 80 w. 
|BOGUE, small islands near the coast of 8. Carolina. 
|BOGOTA, a settlement and capital of the corregimiento of this name, also called La Sabana, in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; situate on a beautiful and agreeable plain, on the shores of a river \\hich bears the same name, and in which there are quantities of fine fish, especially a sort called caption, which is of a delicious flavour, and highly esteemed. It is of a cold tempera ture, and abounds in the seeds and fruits corres ponding with its climate. It was formerly a great and rich population, as well as having been the court of the native kings or zipas ; is at present reduced to a miserable settlement. It had once for its curate the Fray Juan de Labrador, of the order of St. Domingo, afterwards bishop of Car tagena. Its jurisdiction comprehends seven other settlements, and is two leagues w. of Santa Fe. Lat. 4 35 n. Long. 74 8 w. See VENEZUELA. 
B o r 
|BOGOTA, a large river of the same kingdom, which rises near to Santa Fe, in the paramo of Albarracin, between the above city and that of Tunja, and after fertilizing a level space, precipi tates itself with a thundering noise down an im mense cataract, called Tequendama ; it then tra verses the province to which it gives its name, afterwards the province of Los Panches, where it is known to the Indians by the title of Eunzha, and at last enters the Magdalena. 
|BOGOTA, another river of the province and government of Atacames, or Esmeraldas, in the kingdom of Quito. It runs from c. to w. for more than 30 leagues, receiving on the c. the waters of the Durango and Tululvi, and those of Cachavi. On the w. it irrigates many uncultivated lands of the nation of the Malaguas, and unites itself with the rivers of Santiago and San Miguel, before it enters the S. sea, where it forms the port of Limones. 
|BOHEMIA, a broad, navigable river, 10 miles long, which runs w. n. tc 1 . into Elk river, in Maryland, 11 miles below Elkton. 
HoHio, a river of Chile in S. America. 
|BOIA, a settlement of the island of St. Domin go, situate in the centre of the c. head, on the shore of a river. 
BOICACES, a river of the province and govern ment of Verajjua in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. 
O ~ 
It runs n. n. e. and enters the N. sea, between the rivers Culebras and Talamancas. 
|BOIERUCA, LACUNAS DR, or De BOIERACO, as some will have it, lakes in the province and corregimiento of Itata in the kingdom of Chile. They are upon the coast, and run out into the sea between the quebrada (ravine) of Lora, and the month of the river Mataqutno. 
|BOIPENA, a town of the province and cap tainship oi Jlheos in Brazil. 
BOINHAY, a river of the province and go vernment of Paraguay in Peru. It runs;?, through some plains arid very fertile lands, and enters the Paraguay. 
|BOIS, a point on the coast of the country of Labrador, and in the strait of Bellisle. 
|BOIS, a small river of Lous tana, which runs e. and enters the Mississippi, between the rivers Ecors and San Pedro. 
|BOIS, an island in the lake Huron of Canada, at the mouth of the strait of Michillimakinac. 
|BOIS, another island of the coast of the pro vince of Connecticut, one of those of New England, at the mouth of the river Pigwaket. 
|BOIS, a small river of the country and land of 
173 
Labrador. 1 1 runs .?. between (hat of ForcJme, and enters the sea in the strait of Bellisle. 
Bo is, a lake of New France, of an oval figure, containing many islands, and communicating with Long lake. 
|BOLA. a settlement of the province and go vernment of Atacanas in the kingdom of Quito, situate on the shore of a small river, which enters that of Guailiabamba. 
|BOLANOLA, one of the SOCIETY Isles, which see. 
|BOLA IS OS, Cuuz DC, a settlement of the mis sions which were held by the regulars of the com pany of Jesuits in the province of Paraguay. It was destroyed at the clse of the last century by the infidel Indians, and the ruins of it are now alone to be seen near the river Nandui-Gazu. 
|BOLANOS, another settlement and real of mines of the afcatdia mayor of Colotlan in Nueva Espana, where there is a convent of monks of St. Francis ; 14 leagues ?. of its head settlement, Tlaltenango. 
|BOLAS, a river of the province and govern ment of Guayaquil, in the district of Machala. It runs from e. to w. through some uncultivated and desert countries, and empties itself in the gulf of Guayaquil, nearly opposite the point of Bocona, of the island of Puna. 
|BOLIUA, a settlement of the province and government of Cartagena, and of the district of Sinn, situate on the coast. 
|BOLINBROKE, a town in Talbot county, f. shore of Maryland, and five miles e. of Oxford. It lies on the n. w. point of Choptank river. 
|BOLLERA, a hike of the province and govern ment of Maracaibo, on the shore of the grand river of this name, between the rivers Sulia and Chamn. 
|BOLOS, a small river of the province and go vernment of Guayaquil. It runs into the sea through the gulf of that name, opposite the island of .La Puna. 
|BOLTON, a .township in Chitfcnden county, Vermont, on Onion river, about 104 miles n. n. c. from Bennington, having 88 inhabitants. 
|BOLTON, a township in Tolhmd county, Con necticut, incorporated in 1720, and was settled from Weathersfield, Hartford, and Windsor ; 14 miles e. from Hartford. 
|BOLTON, a township in Worcester county, Massachusetts, 18 miles n. c. from Worcester, and 34 w, from Boston. It contains 861 inhabitants. There is a fine bed of limestone in this town, from which considerable quantities of good lime are made yearly. 
174 
|BON 
. 
|BOMB A I, a settlement of the province and government of Maracaibo, situate in the way which leads from Gibraltar to Merida, through the Nuevo Reyno to the n. n. e. of this last city. 
|BOMBARDE, a fort and village on the n. peninsula of St. Domingo island, about three leagues n. of La Plate Jorme; six s. e. of the Mole, and 22 from Port de Paix, as the road runs. Here it was intended by the French government to erect a fortress of great strength ; but the works to the sea only were completed when the revolu tion broke out. 
|BOMBSICAKO, a river of the province of Loxa in the kingdom of Quito. It flows down from the mountains of San Lucas, runs from n. to s. and joins the Savanilla, which enters the Zamora. 
f BOMBAY" HOOK, an island at the mouth of Delaware river, about eight miles long and two broad, formed by the Delaware on the e\ side, and Duck creek and Little Duck creek on the Mary land skle ; these are united together by a natural canal. It is proposed to connect Delaware river with Chesapeak bay, by a canal from Duck creek to that bay, through Chester river. See CHESTER River,.- The n. w. end of Bombay Hook is about 47 miles from capes llenlopen and May ; from the Hook to Reedy island is nine miles. 
|BOMBAZINE Rapids, on a river in Lincoln county, district of Maine, are navigable for boats with some lading, at a middling pitch of water. They took their name from Bombazine, an Indian warrior, who was slain by the English in attempt ing to cross them. Jr,
 C 
|BOMBAZINE, a lake, seven or eight miles long, in the township of Castletown, Rutland county, Vermont!,, , $ jn
jpiu 
|BQMBE, a capital settlement and establish ment oi the missions which were held by the regu lars pf the company of Jesuits, in the province of ofSpuayana,- and in the part possessed by the 
Fjeneh, _ biiL, 4 LfirI /,. C.I 
|BOMBOLAN, a settlement of the province and government of Tucuman, in the district of the jurisdiction oi Salta, annexed to the curacy of Chjquiana. 
|BOMI3ON TROU, a small port of (he island of St. Domingo, on the n. coast of the w. head, and in the territory of the French. It is between port Jcremias and the point of Abricots or Alba
Jic SR\ tew 
|BONA, a small island or the S. 5ea, in the bay r gulf of Panama, situate near, and a little to *. e. fttatofOteque. 
|BON 
|BONAIRE, or BUEN AYRE, an island of the N. sea, situate near Tierra Firme, in the province and government of Cumana, to the s. e. of the island of Curaoa, and n. w. of Margarita. It abounds in salt-mines, is renowned for a peculiar sort offish, called alcatraccs % of a very large size, and is inhabited by the Dutch. It has a good port, with a small settlement, but the anchorage is bad, the bottom being very rocky. The chief setllement, which is about a mile from the port, is nevertheless immediately on the sea-shore, and is the residence of the Dutch lieutenant, who is dependent upon the governor of Cura9oa. This island abounds in cattle, and besides the Dutch it has also some Indians. Nineteen leagues from the coast, and 10 from Cu.rac.oa, in Lat. 12 13 #, Long. G8 19 . 
|BONAMY s Point, on the $. side of Chaleiir bay, is at the n. w. extremity of Eel river cove, and forms the s. limit of the mouth of Ristigouche river. 
|BONAVENTURA. See BUENAVENTURA." 
|BONAVENTURE, on the w. side of Chaleur bay, lies about three leagues from New Carlisle, which is now called Hamilton. It was a place of considerable commerce, but is now declined. 
|BONAVENTURE, a small island of the gulf of St. Lawrence, on the coast of Nova Scotia, or Acadia, close .to the cape of Espom; 
|BONAVENTUUE, a cape or point of the e. coast of the island of Newfoundland, at the entrance of the bay of Trinite. 
|BONAVISTA, Cape and Bay of, lie on the e. side of Newfoundland island. The cape lies in hit. 4852 w. long. 52 22 w. and was discovered by John Cabot and his son Sebastian in 1437,, ui the service of Henry VII. king of England.. Tiie bay is formed by this cape and that of cape Frecls, 15 leagues apart. 
|BOND, a settlement of the island of Barbadoes, in the district of the parish of St. George. 
|BONDA, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Santa Marta, situate on the e. side oF 
" A 1 1 
its capital. 
r&gt;A\7T\4d i- C 1 T C At 
|BONDAS, a nation of Indians of the province and government of Saata Marta. At the time of the conquest it was united with the nations of tlie Bodiguas and Jeribocas, in order the better 1 Jo counteract the power of the Spaniards
 . Jti.prescntsome families of it only are remaining. 
|BONHAMTOWN, in Middlesex county, N.Jersey lies about six miles ! ju Brunswic 1 :. | 
|BONIFACIO, SAN, a setllement 
vincc and government of Sonora in Nuova Espaua, situate on the shore of a small river, which enters thatofGila. 
|BONIFACIO, Monno DE, a mountain of (he coast of the kingdom of Chile, in the district of Guadalabquen, between the point Del Ancla and the mouth of the river Meguin. 
|BONNECHERE, a river of the province of the North Iroquees. It runs n. e. and enters the Utaway. 
|BONZA, a settlement of the Nuevo Heyno de Granada. It is famous for the battle and victory which was gained by Gonzalo Ximinez dc Qtiesada against the army of Tundama, prince of Tunja, in 1538, and for the imprisonment and death of Zacrezazipa, the last king of Bogota. The territory is pleasant and fertile, and irrigated by the river Sogamoso. 
|BONZE, CABO DE, an extremity and point of the s. coast, which looks to the s. of the island of Cuba, between the point of Maizi and the river Guatapori. 
|BOON, a .small island of the coast of New England, in the district of the province of Con necticut, lying between the main coast and Jcffry s bank. 
|BOONE Bay lies on the w. side of New foundland island, 22 leagues n. by e. of St. George s harbour. Lat. 49 35 n. 
|BOONETON, a small post-town in Sussex county, New Jersey, on the post-road between Uockaway and Sussex court-house, 116 miles from Philadelphia. 
|BOONS BO ROUGH, in Maddison county, Kentucky, lies on the s. side of Kentucky river, at the nimith of Otter creek, SO miles s. e. of Lex ington, and the same distance n. e. from Danville. La"t.3744 n. 
|BOON S Creek, a small n. branch of Kentucky river. 
|BOOTH Bay, a town and bay on the coast of JLincoln county, district of Maine, in n, lat. 3* 42 about two miles w. of Pcmaquid point. The bay stretches within the land about 12 miles, and receives two small streams. On it is a (own, having 997 inhabitants. 
|BOPQUAM or MQUAM Bay, on the e. side of lake Champlain, is situated in Swantown, Vermont, and has Hog island on the n. at the mouth of Michiscoui river. 
|BOQUEIION, VENTA DE, an entrance or open ing formed by the mountains, in the road uhich leads from Porto vel to Panama, i the kingdom of Tierra JFirmc. It is an indispensable pass, and there is here a house or inn, commonly the rev.
175 
dence of a strong guard, for the detecting (he contraband trade. 
|BOQUEROV, ft small island of the N. sea, on the coast and in the province of Cartagena, situate in the bay of Tolu. It is one of those which form this bay. 
|BOQUEHON, a point on the e. coast of the straits of Magellan, between cape San Valentin and that of Monmouth. 
|BOQUEUOX, an inlet or small bay on the same coast, close to the point of (he same name. 
|BOQUERONES, CAUO DK, an extremity and point of the coast of the province of Darien, between port Acla and the island of Pinos. 
|BOQUET River passes through the town of Willsborough, in Clinton county, New York, and is navigcible for boats about two miles, and is there interrupted by falls, on which are mills. At this place are the remains of an entrenchment thrown up by General Burgoyne. 
|BOQUETA, an entrance made by the sea, in the province and government of Cartagena, on the side of this city, where (here is a guard for the discovery of con(rabands, and for noting down 
the small trading vessels which come to supply ,1 ... * * J 
this city. 
|BORANTE, a river of the province and go vernment of Venezuela. It runs near (he city of Nucva Segovia, abounds in very excellent fish, and the lands which it irrigates are fertile, and produce much maize. 
|BORBON, REAL DE, a town of the province and government of Sierra Gorda, in the bay of Mexico, and the kingdom of Nueva Espana, founded in 1748 by Don Joseph dc Efcandon, Count of Sierra Gorda, and the Colonel of the Militia of Queretaro. 
BOltDENTOWN, a pleasant town in Burlington county, New Jersey, is situated at the month of Crosswick*s creek, on the e. bank of a great bend of Delaware river, six miles below Trenton, nine n. e. from Burlington by water, and J5 by land, and 24 miles . e. from Phila delphia ; and th rough this (own, which contains about 100 houses, a line of stages passes from New York to Philadelphia. The second division of Hessians was placed in this town, in December 1776, and by the road leading to it, GOO men of that nation escaped, when Gen. Washington sur prised and made prisoners of 886 privates, and 23 Hessian officers, at Trenton. 
|BORDET, Tuou, a settlement and parish of the French, in the island of St. Domingo, situate in the w . head, on the side of a small port, which gives it its name. 
|BORDONES, a settlement of the province and government of Cumana. It is composed of the Indians of Piritu, founded in 1688 by the Colonel and Governor Don Mateo Gaspar de Acosta. 
|BORGNE, a lake of the province and govern ment of Louisiana. It is formed by a canal of water which enters the bay of St. Luis, and is near the e. coast of New Orleans. 
|BORGNE, an island of the river of St. Lawrence in New France, or country of the Outacas Indians. It is formed by an arm of that river which runs from, and then returns to enter the mother bed. 
|BORGNE, Li, a town on the n. side of the n. peninsula of the island of St. Domingo, three leagues w. by n. of Port Margot, and eight e. by s. of Port de Paix. 
|J5ORICA, a small island, situate near the coast of Tierra Firme, in the province and government of Venezuela, and at the entrance of the lake of Maracaibo, 
|BORILOS, a barbarous nation of Indians who dwell to the e. of the Chiquitos, and n. of the Purasicas, in Peru. It was discovered by (he mi--sionaries of the order of Jesuits of the province of Lima, in 1718, who succeeded in making converts to the faith until the year 1767. 
|BOKIQUEN; a point on the w. of the island of San Juan de Puerto-rico, between the river of Guaxayaca, and the port of A guada, opposite the cape Engano, of the island of Si. Domingo. It is one of those which form the port. BORIQUEN. eeBiEQii:. BORIQUEX, or CRABS Island. Sec Bi our.. BORJA, SA.N FRANCISCO i,r:, a capital city of the province and government of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito, founded in 1619 by Captain Diego Vaca de Vega, with the name of Nneslra, Senora de la Concepcion, on the f. shore of the fiver Maranon, four leagues from Santiago de las Montanas, at the time that these parts were visited by the regulars of the company of Jesuits, with views of making discoveries, and of extending fheir missions. It was afterwards, in 15
4, re moved tothespotwhereitat present stands, near the source of ihc river Pastaza, and opposite (he mouth of that oi Cahuapanas, upon an eminence near to a stagnant pool of the Maranon, after the narrow sfrait or Channel of the Pongo. This name was given it out of compliment to Don Francisco de Borja, Prince of Esquilache, Viceroy of Peru, to whom it capitulated at its conquest. Its in habitants arc for the most part Indians ; its climate is warm and moist ; it is the residence of the lieutenant-governor of the province, and of a curate who belonged to the company of Jesuits, 
until the year 1767. Its first inhabitants were the conquerors of all the barbarous nations of the Maranon. Lat. 4 28 s. Long. 76 24 w. 
|BORJA, a settlement of the missions which were maintained by the regulars of the company of Jesuits, in the province of Taraumara in the king dom of Nueva Vizcaya ; distant 24 leagues s. w. % to the c . of the real of the mines and town of San F elipe de Chiguagua. 
|BORJA, another, of the missions which were held by the same regulars of the company of Jesuits, in the province and government of Buenos Ayres, situate on the shore ot the river Uruguay r in Lat. 28 39 5 1*. Long. 57 56 w.~ 
|BORJA, another, in the province and govern ment of Moxos, of the kingdom of Quito, founded on the shore of the river Manique. 
|BOROA, a district and province of the king dom of Chile. 
|BOROJO, a settlement of the province and government of Maracaibo, situate on the coast, at the mouth of the river of its name; opposite the great lake, and on the s. side of it. 
|BOROJO, a river of the same province and government, which rises near the coast, and enters tlie sea opposite (he former settlement. 
|BOROMBON, SAN, a settlement of the province and government of Buenos Ayres, situate near the coast and bay of its name, ou the hide opposite to the colony of Sacramento. 
|BOKOMBON, a bay of the former province and government, near the mouth of the river La Plata, and the capital. 
|BOHONOTA, a large settlement of the Nucvo Reyno de Granada, and government of Santa Marta ; founded in the plains, or Uanuras? which lie towards die n. Its natives arc of the Guuranos and Guaxiros nations. It is governed by a cazique, and belongs to the missions of the Catalan ian Ca puchin fathers. 
|BOROS, a barbarous nation of Peru, to the e. of (he province of the Chiquitos, which extends itself through those woods and pin ins as far as the river Paraguay. It is but little known. 
|BOROTARE, a settlement of the province and government of Santa Marta, situate on the shore of a river which runs to empty itself into the lake of Maracaibo. 
|BORQUIELES, islands or rocks of the N. sea, by the coast ot the province and government of Darien ; they are two, and lie at the w. moutli or entrance of the port of Arboleles. 
|BORRACIIOS, PUNT A JJF, a point on the coast of the province and government of Guaya quil in the kingdom of Peru. 
|BOS 
|BORRACNA, an island of the N. sea, very near the coast of Tierra Firme, in the province of Barcelona and government of Cumana, between the cities of these names. 
|BOHUCAS, SAN LORENZO DE, a town of the province and government of Costa-rica in the kingdom of Guatemala, situate on the coast of the S. sea. 
|BORUGAj CABO DE, a cape on the coast of the province and government of Veragua and kingdom of Tierra Firme, between the gulf Dulce, and the port of Las Caravelas Grandes. 
|BOSCAWEN, a township in Ilillsborough county, New Hampshire, on the w. bank of Merrimack river, above Concord ; 43 miles n. w. of Exeter, and 38 s. e. of Dartmouth college, hav ing 1108 inhabitants. Boscawen hills are in this neighbourhood. 
|BOSTON, a large and opulent city, the me tropolis of New England, and of the county of Suffolk, in N. America. In the year 1774, its port was prohibited by an act of parliament of Great Britain, and it was shortly after entered by the king s troops, who destroyed many edifices, and caused considerable havoc. It was at that time the largest and most considerable city of any of New England, having been founded in 1630, by the English colonists who came to it from Charlestown, in a peninsula of nearly four miles in circumference, and 44 from the bay of Massa chusetts. It suffered much from an earthquake which took place on the 29th October 1727. It is the best situated for commerce of any city in America ; on the n. side of it are two small islands called Brewster, to one of which is also given the name of Noddle. The only entrance to the bay is through a channel so narrow, from the number of islands, as scarcely to admit three ships a-breast. There are, however, marks and buoys placed so as to ensure a safe entrance, and the bay itself is capable of containing 500 vessels, in a sufficient depth of water, where they might formerly lie defended by the cannon of a regular fortress, but this was destroyed in the said war. At the ex tremity of the bay is a quay 2000 feet in length, which on the n. part has a set of regular maga zines, beginning from the principal street in the city : this street, as well as all the others, is spa cious and straight. The town from the bay has a beautiful appearance ; it is in the form of an am phitheatre, with a house for the magistrate, in which are the tribunals, and a change, which is a very fine piece of architecture, surrounded by many libraries, well provided, and giving work for n ve printing houses. It contains 19 churches, 
|VOL. i. 
|BOS 
177 
nearly GOOO houses, and 30,000 inhabitants. To form some judgment of the riches of this capital, it is sufficient to know, that from Christmas in the year 1747 to the following, 1748, no less than 500 vessels left its port, and that 450 entered it, not to mention the fishing vessels and coasters, the number of which alone amounted to at least 1000. It suffered much in 1773 by a terrible tempest. The commerce of this city is very great, not only on account of its own productions, but with re gard to the productions of other parts, since its inhabitants are, as it were, the factors of all the other colonies of N. America, the E. Indies, and of some parts of Europe. Its principal ar ticles or eftects are trees and ship-masts, fish, tar, turpentine, planks, salted meats, as well pork as beef, butter, cheese, horses, large cattle, wheat, cider, honey, and flax ; and although it trades also in skins, yet these form no considerable p:irt of its commerce. On its coast arc large whalefisheries, in which a great number of its inhabi tants are employed ; and it is computed that 30,000 quintals of oil are annually sent to Italy, Spain, England, and (he islands of America, as also 20,000 more to the Negroes of the W. Indies. The excessive quantity of liquors distilled in Bos ton from molasses, received in exchange or barter from the W. Indies, is such as to cause them to be sold for two shillings a barrel, and with thera are supplied all the colonies of N. America. Thcj are also sufficient for the traffic with the Indians, for that of the fisheries of Newfoundland, and for a great part of the trade to Africa. The rum is as much renowned for its plentifulness and cheap ness as for its quality. This may be looked upon as almost the only colony that has manufacture* equal to its consumption. The cloths made here are strong and close wove : these manufactories were established by some Irish Presbyterians, who fled from persecution, and through affinity of religion, settled here, introducing the manufac ture of linens of a very delicate texture ; thus having highly increased the commercial credit and reputation of the colony. They likewise make excellent hats here, and these, although contraband, are a great article of exportation to the other colonies. The vessels built here, through the commission of its dock, and which are after wards sold with their cargo in the ports of Spain, France, and Portugal, formed the principal source of its commerce. There used to be a light-house jn a rock for the direction of vessels in the night, the which was destroyed with the fortifications in the late war. This uar originated in this capital in 1774, when the inhabitants burnt the tea which 
178 
|BOSTON. 
came from England, being unwilling to pay the heavy duties imposed on that article. The result of the struggle was, that they declared themselves independent of the English crown, together with the other colonies, as may be seen in the article UNITED STATES. All sects are tolerated in this city, and in it are ten churches. 
Boston, the capital of the state of Massachu setts, the largest town in New England, is now the third in size and rank in the United States, and lies in lat. 42 18 15" n. and long. 70 59 53" w. This town, with the towns of Hingham, Chelsea, and Hull, constitute the county of Suffolk, 17(3 miles s. ic. of Wiscasset, 61 s. by w. of Ports mouth, 164 n. e. of New Haven, 252 n. e. of New York, 347 n. e. of Philadelphia, and 500 w. e. of the city of Washington. Boston is built upon a peninsula of irregular form at the bottom of Massachusetts bay, and is joined to the main land by an isthmus on the s, end of the town, lead ing to lloxbury. It is two miles long, but is of unequal breadth ; the broadest p-irt is 726 yards. The peninsula contains about 700 acres, (other ac counts say 1000), on which are 2376 dwelling bouses. The number of inhabitants in 1790 was 18,038, but the increase has been very consider able since. The town is intersected by 97 streets, 36 lanes, and 26 alleys, besides 18 courts, &c. ; most of these are irregular, and not very conve nient. State street, Common street, and a few others, are exceptions to this general character; the former is very spacious, and being on a line with Long wharf, where strangers usually land, exhibits a flattering idea of the town. Here are 19 edifices for public worship, of which nine are for Congregationalists, three for Episcopalians, and two for Baptists the Friends, Roman Ca,tholics, Methodists, Sandcmanians, and Universalists, have one each. Most of these are orna mented with beautiful spires, with clocks and bells. The other public buildings are the state-house, court-house, two theatres, concert-hall, faneuilhall, gaol, an alms-house, a work-house, a bride well, and powder-magazine. Franklin place, adjoining Federal street theatre, is a great orna ment to the town ; it contains a monument of Dr. Franklin, from whom it takes its name, and is encompased on two sides with buildings, which, in point of elegance, are not exceeded perhaps in the United States. Here are kept in capacious rooms, given and fitted up for the purpose, the Boston library, and the valuable collections ot tiie historical society. Most of the public buildings are handsome, and some of them are elegant. A magnificent state-house is now erecting in Boston, 
on the s. side of Beacon hill, fronting the Mall, the corner-stone of which was laid with great formality and parade on the 4th of July 1795, and which overtops tbe monument on Beacon hill. The market-place, in which the faneuil-hall is situ ated, is supplied with all kinds of provisions wliich the country affords. The fish market, in particu lar, by the bounteous supplies of the ocean and rivers, not only furnishes the rich with the rarest productions, but often provides the poor with a cheap and grateful repast. Boston harbour is formed by point Alderton on the s. and by Nahant point on the;?. It is variegated with about forty islands, of which fifteen only can be properly called so ; the others being small rocks or banks of sand, slightly covered with verdure. These islands afford excellent pasturage, hay, and grain, and furnish agreeable places of resort in summer to parties of pleasure. Castle island is about three miles from the town ; its fortifications, formerly called Castle William, defend the entrance of the harbour. It is garrisoned by about 50 soldiers, who serve as a guard for the convicts, who are sent here to hard labour. The convicts are chiefly employed in making nails. The light house stands on a small island on the n. entrance of the channel, (point Alderton and Nantasket heights being on the s.), and is about 65 feet high. To steer for it from cape Cod, the course is w. n. w. when within one league of the cape ; from cape Cod to the light-house is about 16 leagues; from cape Ann the course is s. w. distant ten leagues. A cannon is lodged and mounted at the light house to answer signals. Only seven of the islands in the bay are within the jurisdiction of the town, and taxed with it, viz. Noddle s, Hog, Long, Deer, Spectacle, Governor s, and Apple islands. The wharfs and quays in Boston are about 80 in number, and very convenient for vessels. Long wharf, or Boston pier, in particular, ex tends from the bottom of State street 1743 feet into the harbour in a straight line. The breadth is 104 feet. At the end are 17 feet of water at ebb tide. Adjoining to this wharf on the ?;. is a con venient wharf called Minot T s T, from the name of its former proprietor and its form. Vessels are supplied here with fresh water from a well sur rounded by salt water, which has been dug at a great expence. Long wharf in every respect ex ceeds any thing of the kind in the United States. In February 1796, a company was incorporated to cut a canal b&lt; hvcen this harbour and Hoxbury, which is neatly completed. Charles river and West Boston bridges are highly useful and orna mental to Boston; and both are on Charles river,! 
|BOSTON. 
which mingles its waters with those of Mystic river, in Boston harbour. Charles river bridge connects Boston with Charlestown in Middlesex county, and is 1503 feet long, 42 feet broad, stands on 75 piers, and cost the subscribers 50,000 dollars. It was opened June 19, 1787. 
Feet long. 
West Boston bridge stands on 180 piers, is 3483 Bridge over the gore, 14 piers, - - - 275 
Abutment, Boston side, ,-ejj, 87| 
Causeway, __..---.- 334 Distance from the end of the causeway to 
Cambridge meeting-house, - - - - 7810 "Width of the bridge, 40 
This beautiful bridge exceeds the other as much in elegance as in lenglb, and cost the subscribers 76,700 dollars. Both bridges have draws for the admission of vessels, and lamps for the benefit of evening passengers. Seven free schools are sup ported here at the public ex pence, in which the children of every class of citizens may freely asso ciate together. The number of scholars is comput ed at about 900, of which 160 are taught Latin, &c. There are besides these many private schools. The principal societies in the commonwealth hold their meetings in this town, and are, the marine society, American academy of arts and sciences, Massachusetts agricultural society, Massachusetts charitable society, Boston Episcopal charitable society, Massachusetts historical society, society for propagating the gospel, Massachusetts congre gational society, medical society, humane society, Boston library society, Boston mechanic associa tion, society for the aid of emigrants, charitable fire society, and seven respectable lodges of free and accepted masons. The foreign and domestic trade of Boston is very considerable, to support which there are three banks, viz. the branch of the United States bank, the Union, and the Massa chusetts bank ; the latter consists of 800 shares of 600 dollars, equal to 400,000; the capital of the Union bank is 1,200,000 dollars, 400,000 of which are the property of the stale. In 1784 the entries of foreign and coasting vessels were 372, and the clearances 450. In 1794 the entries from foreign ports were 567. In 1795 these entries amounted to 725, of which the ships were 96, barques 3, snows 9, polacre 1, brigs 185, dogirer 1, schooners 362, shallop 1, and sloops 65. To the principal manufactures, above enumerated, we may add loaf-sugar, beer, sail-cloth, cordage, wool, and cotton cards, playing cards, pot and pearl ashes, paper hangings, plate, glass, tobacco, and cho colate. There are SO distilleries, two breweries, fight sugar-houses, and eleven rope-walks. 
Eight years ago, the intercourse with the country barely required two stages and twelve horses, on the great road between this and New Haven, dis tant 164 miles ; whereas there are now 20 car riages and 100 horses employed. The number of the different stages that run through the week from this town is upwards of 20 ; about 10 years ago there Mere on|y three. Attempts have been made to change the government of the town from its present form to that- of a city, but this mea sure, not according with the democratic spirit of the people, has as yet failed. At an annual meet ing in March, nine select men are chosen for the government of the town ; at the same time an? chosen a town-clerk, a treasurer, 12 overseers ot the poor, 24 fire wards, 12 clerks of the market, 12 scavengers, 12 constables, besides a number of other officers. If the inhabitants do not reap all the advantages they have a right to expect from their numerous officers, it is said that it is not for want of wholesome laws for the regulation of the weights, measures, and quality of provisions, or other branches of police, but because the laws are not put in execution. Besides those called trained bands, there are four other military com panies in Boston, viz. the ancient and honourable artillery company, the cadets, fusileers, and artillery. The ancient and honourable artillery company was incorporated in 1638, and the elec tion of a captain and officers of it for the year is on the first Monday in June annually, which is ob served here as a day of festivity. Several officers in the American army, who signalized themselves in the late war, received their first knowledge of tactics in this military school. Boston Mas called Shaumut by the Indians; Trimountain by the settlers in Charlcstown, from the view of its three hills ; and had its present name in token of respect to the Rev. Mr. Cotton, a minister of Boston ia England, and afterwards minister of the first church here. Boston has suffered severely by numerous fires, the houses being mostly built of wood. The last large fire happened July 30, 1794, and consumed 96 house*, rope-walks, &c. and the account of losses given in by the sufferers amounted to 209,861 dollars. Boston fee s a pride in having given birth to Benjamin Franklin, and a number of other patriots, who were airong the most active and influential characters in efiVcfing the revolution. 
|BOSTON Corner, a tract of land adjoining mount "Washington, Berkshire county, Massachu setts, containing 67 inhabitants. 
|BOSTON, NKW, a township in HiHt-boronf-h county, New Hampshire, containing 1202 A A 2 
180 
bitants, 12 miles s. w. by w. from Amuskeeg falls, 60 miles w. of Portsmouth, and a like distance . w. of Boston.  
|EOT EN Creek, a small river of the province and government of Guayana, in the Dutch possessions. 
|BOTETOURT, a county in Virginia, on the Blue ridge, w. of which are the Sweet springs, about 42 miles fro u the Warm springs. Its chief town is Fincastle. 
|BOTIN, a settlement of the kingdom of Nueva Espana, and province of Culiacan, near the capi tal town of this name. 
|BOTONN, a settlement of the island of Barbadors. 
|BOTTLEHILL, avilla
ein Somerset comty, New Jersey, two miles n. w. Lorn Chatham, and 15 . w. of Elizabeth town.! 
BO UCAN-BROU, Rio DHL, a river in the island of St. Domingo, in the French possessions. It is small, rises in the w. coast, and rur.s by a w. course into the sea, between the river of Los Naranjos and the bay of Los Flamencos. 
|BOUCASIN, a mountain of the island of St. Domingo, in the French possessions, near the coast of the w. head of the point of Aracahy. 
|BOUKFUKA, a settlement of Indians of S. Carolina, situate at the source, of the river of Pearls. The English have in it a fort and a com mercial establishment. 
|BOUCHERUILLE, a fort of the French, in the province and country of the Iroquees Indians, on the shore of the river St. Lawrence, opposite the island of Montreal. 
|BOUDOIR, LE, a smalt island in the Pacific ocean, lat. 17 52 .?. long, from Paris, 15 25 w. discovered, April 2, 1768, by Bougainville. This island, the year before, had been discovered by "Wallis, and named Osnaburg. The natives call it Muiten, according to the report of Captain Cook, who visited it in 1769. Quiris discovered this island in 1606, and called it La Dezana. See 
|OSNABURGH.1 
|BOUGAINVILLE, Rio DE, a river in the Malvine or Falkland islands. It was discovered and thus named by a naval captain, Don Luis de Bougainville, in 176.3. It runs into the sea through * bay in the largest of these islands. 
|BOLGANVILT,E S Straits are at the w. to. end *&gt;f the isles of Solomon. 
|BOUGIE Inlet, on the coast of N. Carolina, between Core sound and Little inlet. 
|BOUKI1OUMA, a small river of the province and government of Louisiana, which runs s. be tween the rivers of Pearls and Estapacha, and tnkrs the sea in the bay of St. Louis. 
|BOW 
|BOULANGER, two small islands of the N. sea, situate within the bay and port of the great Cul de Sac in the island of Guadalupe. 
|BOULANGEH, a small river of the island of Guadalupe, which runs n. e. and enters the sea in the bay and port of the great Cul de Sac, on the n. side of that island. 
|BOUNDBROOK, a village in Somerset coun ty, New Jersey, on the n. bank of Rariton river. 
|BOUQUETS, CROIX DES, a settlement and parish of the French, in their possessions in the island of St. Domingo, and of the jurisdiction of cape Frances. 
|BOURBON, a county laid out and orga nized in the year 1785 by the state of Georgia, in the s. w. corner of the state, on the Mississippi, including the Natchez country. The laws of Georgia were never carried into effect in this country, and it has been under the jurisdiction of the Spaniards since their conquest of this part of the country in 1780, till it was given up to the United States by the treaty of 1795. The law of Georgia, establishing the county of Bourbon, is now in force. See LOUISIANA. 
|BOURBOX Fort, in the island of Martinico in the West Indies. 
 [BOURBON County, in Kentucky, between lacking and Kentucky rivers, contains 7837 inha bitants, including 908 slaves. 
|BOURBON, a post-town and capital of the above county, stands on a point of land formed by two of the s. branches of Licking river; 22 miles . e. of Lexington, 21 e. of .Lebanon, and 749 w. s. w. from Philadelphia, and contains about 60 houses, a Baptist church, a court-house, and gaol. There are several valuable mills in its vicinity J 
|BOURSAUL, a river of the island of Guada lupe. It rises in the s. e. mountains, runs s. e. and enters the sea between the rivers of the Goyaves and the Petite Plaine. 
BO V, a township of the English in the pro vince of Hampshire, situate on the shore of the river Pennycook, opposite the mouth of that of Contocook. 
Bow is a township in Rockingham county, New Hampshire, on the w. bank of Merrimack river, a little s. of Concord, 53 miles from Portsmouth. It contains 56S inhabitants. 
|BOWDOIN, a township in Lincoln county, district of Maine, on &lt;hc n. e. bank of Audroscoggin river, distant from York n. e. 36 miles, andiiora the mouth of Kennebcck river 6 miles, and 166 n. e. of Boston. It contains 983 inhabitants. 
|BOY 
|BOWDOINHAM, a township in Lincoln county, district of Maine, separated from Pownalborough e. and Woolwich s. e. by Kenncbcck tiver. It has 455 inhabitants, and lies 171 miles n. e. from Boston 
|BOWLING Green, a village in Virginia, on the post-road, 22 miles s. of Fredericksburg, 48 n. of Richmond, and 25 n. of Hanover court house. 
|BOAACA, a settlement of the corregimicnto of Bogota in the Nuevo Reyno dc Granada. It is of an extremely cold temperature, produces \vh at, maize, birley, papas, and other fruits of - \ cold climate; contains 200 housekeepers and 170 Indians, and is six leagues to the s. e. of Santa Fe. 
|BOXBOROUGH, a township in Middlesex county, Massachusetts, containing 412 inhabitants, 30 miles n. w. from Boston. 
|BOXFORD, a small township in Essex coun ty, Massachusetts, having 925 inhabitants. It lies on the s. e. side of Merrimack river, seven miles w. of Newbury port. In the southernmost of its two parishes is a blomary. 
|BOXOLEO, a river of the province and go vernment of Popayan. It is in the s. part, runs from e. to w. and is passed by a ford at the route which leads from Pasto to Popayan. It unites itself with Esinita, and these together enter the Quilcase*. 
|BOYACA, a settlement of the province and cerrcgimfento of Tutija in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of a cold temperature, produces in moderation wheat, maize, vetches, and apples, and with the latter of which the place abounds; but its principal traffic is in lime, which is made in abundance for the whole province, and for Santa Fe, being the best t mt can be made. It contains somewhat more than 25 housekeepers and 80 Indians, whose glory it is that their an cestors alone, in the obscurity of gentilism, had any notion of a Supreme Being, trie author of all created, one in essence and three in person. Thus it was that they adored a human image with three heads. It is distant an hour and an half s journey s. of Tunja. It was taken and sacked by Gonzalo Ximificz de Qucsada hi 1537. 
|BOYLSTON, a township in Worcester county, Massachusetts, having 839 inhabitants, 10 miles n. e* of Worcester, and 45 n. zo. of Bos ton. It was incorporated in 1786, having been a parish of Shrewsbury since 1712, and contains by survey 14,396 acres of land, well watered, and of a rich soil. 
B It A 
181 
|BOZA, a settlement and head settlement of the corregimienlo of this name in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of a cold temperature, but healthy and delightfully pleasant, from whence it was chosen, at certain seasons, as a place of recrea tion by the viceroy of that kingdom, Don Joseph de Solis, who was fond of duck-hunting; in which fowl it abounded, as well as in all the pro ductions of a cold climate. It has some very good pastures for cattle, contains upwards of 100 housekeepers, and as many Indians, and its juris diction comprehends six other settlements. It is three leagues s. of Santa Fe. 
|BOZA, another settlement of the island of Cuba, on the n. coast, between the settlement of Maza and the bay of Nipe. 
|BOZAIRU, a village and settlement of the Portuguese, in the province and captainship of Pernambuco in Brazil, situate near the sea-coast. 
|BOZRA, a town in New London county, Connecticut, formerly a parish in the town of Norwich, 36 miles e. from Hartford. 
|BRACUAENDA, a river of the province and government of Buenos Ayres. It runs w. and en ters the Uruguay between the rivers Yacui and Cavayama. 
|BRADDOCK S Field, the place where Gen. Braddock, with the first division of his army, consisting of 1400 men, fell into an ambuscade of 400 men, chiefly Indians, by whom he was de feated and mortally wounded, July 9, 1755. The American militia, who were disdainfuly turned in the rear, continued unbroken, and served as a rearguard, and, under Col. \V ashington, the late president of the United States of America, pre served the regulars from being entirely cut off. It is situate on Turtle creek, on the n. e. bank of Monongahela river, six miles e. s. e. from Pittsburg. 
|SHADDOCK S Bay, on the.?, side of lake On tario, 42 miles w. from Great Sodus, and 65 e. from fort Niagara. 
|BRADFORD, EAST and WEST, are townships in Chester county, Pennsylvania. 
|BRADFOKD, a township in Essex county, Mas sachusetts, situate on the s, side of Merrimack river, opposite Haverhill, and 10 miles to. of New bury port. It has two parishes, and 1371 inha bitants. Quantities of leather shoes are made here for exportation ; and in the lower parish some ves sels are built. Several streams fall into the Merri mack from this town, which support a number of mills of va 1 ious kinds. 
|BRADFORD, a township ia HillsborougU 
182 
|BRA 
county, New Hampshire, containing 217 inhabi tants, incorporated in 1760 ; 20 miles e. of Charlestown. 
|BRADFORD, a township in Orange county, Vermont, on the w. bank of Connecticut river, about 20 miles above Dartmouth college, having 654 inhabitants. There is a remarkable ledge of rocks in this township, as much as 200 feet high. It appears to hang over, and threaten the traveller as he passes. The space between this ledge and Connecticut river is scarcely wide enough for a road. 
|BRAGA, HA, now FORT DAUPHIN, in the island of Cuba. 
|BRAGADO, a small river of the province and government of Buenos Ayres, which runs e. and enters the Parana to the s. of the city of Santa Fe. 
|BRAINTREE, a township in Orange county, Vermont, lies 75 miles n. e. of Bennington. It joins Kingston w. Randolph on the e. and con tains 221 inhabitants. 
BiiAiNTREEjOne of the most ancient townships in Norfolk county, in the state of Massachusetts, was settled in 1625, and then called Mount Woolaston, from the name of its founder. It lies on a bay, eight mi es e. of s. from Boston, and con tained, before its division, 400 houses and 2771 in habitants. Great quantities of granite stones are sent .to Boston from this town for sale. The bay abounds with fish and sea fowl, and particularly brants. This town is noted for having produced, in former and latter times, the first characters both in church and state ; and in distant ages will de rive no small degree of fame, for having given birth to John Adams, the first vice-president, and the second president of the United States of Ame rica; a man highly distinguished for his patriot ism as a citizen ; his justice, integrity, and ta lents, as a lawyer ; his profound and extensive erudition as a writer ; and his discernment, firm ness, and success, as a foreign minister and states man. 
B KAMA DOR, CERRO, a mountain of the pro vince and corrcgimiento of Coquimbo in the king dom of Chile, to the s. of the town of Copiapo. 
|BRANCO, a river of the province and go vernment of Guayana, in the Portuguese pos sess ons. 
|BRANCO DE M ATJAMBO, a town in the 
province of St. Marta in Tierra Firme, . S. Ame
r ; c i. It is a place of great trade, and seated on 
the river M gdalena, 75 miles n. of Cartagena, 
s a bishop s see. It has a good harbour. 
il40 . Long. 75-30 n. 
|BRA 
|BRANDY POTS, are isles, so called, in the river St. Lawrence, 40 leagues below Quebec. 
|BRANDY WINE, a large and convenient port of the province of Pennsylvania. 
|BRANDY WINE, a small river of the same pro vince and colony, which runs s. s. e. and enters the Delaware. 
|BRANDY WINE Creek falls inio Christiana creek from the n. at Wilmington, in Delaware state, about 25 miles from its n. and n. w. sources, which both rise in Chester county, Pennsylvania. This creek is famous for a bloody battle, fought Sept. 11, 1777, between the British and Ameri cans, which lasted nearly the whole day, and the latter were defeated with considerable loss ; but it was far from being of that decisive kind which people had been led to expect, in the event of a meeting between the hostile armies on nearly equal terms, both as to numbers and the nature of the ground* on which each army was situated. It was fought at Chadd s ford, and in the neigh bourhood of, and on, the strong grounds at Bir mingham church. See DELAWARE, for an ac count of the celebrated mills on this creek. 
|BRANDY WINE, a township in Chester county, Pennsylvania. 
|BRAN FORD, a township of the English in the province of Connecticut, one of the four of New England, situate on the side of the strait of Long island. This township is in New Haven county, considerable for its iron works. It lies on the s. side of a river of the same name, which runs into Lon&lt;r island sound, 10 miles e. from New Haven, and 40.?. of Hartford. 
|BRASS D OR, called also LABRADOR, a lake which forms into arms and branches, in the island of Cape Breton, or Sydney, and opens an easy communication with all parts of the island. See BKETON, Cape. 
|BRASS Island, one of the smaller Virgin islands, situated near the n. ro. end of St. Thomas s island, on which it is dependent. 
|BRASS Town, in the state of Tennessee, is situ ated on the head waters of Iliwassee river, about 100 miles .v. from Knoxville. Two miles s. from this town is the Enchanted mountain, much famed for the curiosities on it:&gt; rocks. See ENCHANTED Mountain. 
|BRATTLEBO ROUGH, a considerable township and post-town in Windham county, Ver mont, having 1589 inhabitants; on the w. bank of Connecticut river, about 28 miles e. of Bennin
lon, 61 n. of Springfield in Massachusetts, and 311 from Philadelphia. Lat. 42 52 n. 
|BRA 
BllAVA, PUNTA, an extremity of the island of Trinidad, which lies in the w. front of the inner bay of the gulf Tristc, in the province and go vernment of Curnana. 
|BRAVA, a point or cape of the island of Cuba. 
jBiiAVA, a lake of the province and govern ment of Buenos Ayres, on the shore of the river Salad illo. 
|BRAVO, a large and abundant river of the kingdom of Nueva Espana, which rises in 40 20 n. lat. and runs 5. till it enters the sea in the bay of Mexico, in 25 55 . [Under the 40 of latitude, the sources of the Rio del Norte,, or Rio Bravo, are only separated from the sources of the Rio Colorado by a mountainous tract of from 12 to 13 leagues of breadth. This tract is the continuation of the cordillera of the Cranes, which stretches towards (he sierra Verde and the lake of Tirnpanogos, celebrated in the Mexican history. The Rio S. Raiiu l and the Rio S. Xavier are the principal sources of the river Zaguananas. which, with the Rio de Nabajoa, forms the Rio Colorado : the latter has its embouchure in the gulf of Cali fornia. These regions, abounding in rock-salt, were examined in 1777 by two travellers full of zeal and intrepidity, monks of the order of St. Francis, Father Escalante and Father Antonio Velez. But however interesting the Rio Za
uaiianas and the Rio del Norte may one day become for the internal commerce of this n. part of New Spain, and however easy the carriage may be across the mountains, no communication will ever, it is though!, result from it, comparable to that opened directly from sea to sea. 
|BRAVO, another river in the province and go vernment of Maracaibo. It is one of the arms of the Catacumbo, which enters in a large body into the great lake. 
|BRAVO, another, of the alcaldta mayor of Tampico in Nueva Espana. It rises in the mountains of that jurisdiction, and runs into the sea. 
|BRAVO, a lake of the province and government of Buenos Ay res, which is a pool formed by the river Tandil, near the coast of the Patagones. , BRAZIL, a kingdom of S. America, situate in the torrid zone, extending from the mouth of the large river Maranon, or Amazonas, to that of La Plata, from 2 n. to 35 s. of the equinoctial line, it is of a triangular figure, two of its sides, the n. and c. being bounded by the sea, and the third, which is the greater, is the line of demarcation be tween this kingdom, which belongs to the crown of Portugal, and the dominions of the king of Spain. This country was discovered by Vinccnte Yafiez Pinzonin 1198; afterwards by Diego Lopez in!500; 
|BRA 
183
by Americo Vespncio in 1501 ; and by Pedro Al varez Cabral in 1503, who was by chance sailing for the E. Indies, lie gave it the name of Santa Cruz, in memory of the day on which it was dis covered ; this, however, it did not retain, and it has been called continually BrazU, from the abundance of fine wood of this name found in it. On the deatli of (he king Don Sebastian, this king dom, as forming a part of the dominion of Portu gal, came to Philip III. by inheritance, as belong ing to the crown of Castille. The Dutch, under the command of the prince of Nassau, made them selves masters of the greater p?rt of it; but this loss was again recovered by the Spanish and Por tuguese, after a bloody war of many years dura tion, when it was restored to the dominion of the latter by a treaty of general peace. It is divided into 14 provinces or captainships, which are, Rio Janeiro, Todos Santos, Ilheos, Parayba, Para, Maranan, Espiritu Santo, Itamaraca, Seara, Puerto Seguro, Pernambuco, Sergipe del Rey, San Vincente, and Rio Grande; and in these are 12 cities, 67 towns, and an infinite number of small settlements and villages, divided into four bishoprics, suffragan to an archbishop; and be sides these there is the district of San Pablo de los Mamelucos, which is governed after the manner of a republic, with some subordination to the crown of Portugal. Also there are the districts of Dole and Petagucy, which being in the centre of the captainship of Seara, belong to the barbarians, and to some Portuguese who are independent of the jurisdiction of Rey. The French, in 1584, established themselves in Parayba, the Rio Grande, and Canabata, from whence they were driven out by the Portuguese in 1600. In 1612, hoAvever, they returned to construct a fortress in (he island of Mara iion, with the name of San Luis, which was taken by the Dutch, and afterwards by the Portuguese in 1646. From that time this king dom has belonged to the crown of Portugal, and has given title to the heir apparent, who is called Prince of Brazil. It has man} fine rivers, and many large, safe, and convenient ports ; but these arc difficult to be entered, on account of the rocks and quicksands which abound on the coast. The interior of this kingdom is uncultivated, full of woods, mountains, and lakes; inhabited by wan dering nations, for the most part savage, and who kept up a continual warfare with the Portuguese ; some, however, have been civilized by the missions that have been established among them by the venerable Father Joseph de Ancheta, of the com pany of Jesuits, who has been called the Taumaturgo [the word alluding to a saint of the fourth 
184 
|BRAZIL. 
century, called Gregory Tliaumaturgus, from the miracles lie is said to perform of Brazil, and by Father Antonio de vieira, a celebrated orator. These savage Indians feast upon the bodies of those whom they take in battle, fancying that they thereby revenge the deaths of their parents or re lations who may have fallen under tbe hands of the enemy. They enjoy a long life, not only from the salubrity of the climate, but from the temperance which is usual amongst them. They are polygamists, and all of them, men as well as women, go naked. They believe in the creation of the world and the deluge ; and they think that there is a paradise beyond their mountains, where they live for ever in sensual enjoyments, such as sing ing, dancing, &e. They have a very great terror of the devil, who, they aftirm, appears to them in an horrible shape, and whom they call in their language agnian. They have neither king nor prince, and in their affairs of state the decision always rests with the elders, who are universally reverenced and esteemed amongst them. Their weapons are bows and arrows, and cimeters, or, as they call them, mncanas. When they move from one quarter to another, the wife carries the arms, and the children the hainmoc, which is a net made of the bark of plants, which, being tied to two trees at its extremities, serves them for house and bed in their travels. They maintain them selves by the chase and by fishing. The greater part of them are of a fierce aspect, which they in crease by adorning themselves with the teeth and bones of monkeys, and with black and red paint, which they smear over their faces and bodies. They are of a lofty stature, robust, well made, and of an extraordinary agility in running. The tem perature of this country is very unequal ; for to wards the M. it is very warm and unhealthy. The soil is extremely fertile, and when cultivated yields every thing for the convenience and luxury of life. After the fine gold and diamond mines with which this country abounds were discovered, the natives gave themselves up entirely to the working of them, despising the culture of the land, and looking for the necessary supplies of food from other parts. Its principal productions may be reduced to sugar, maize, cotton, tobacco, indigo, ipecacuana, balsam of copaive, and Brazil-wood ; of this last consists the principal branch of its commerce, as well with the English as the Dutch, and to the coast of Africa as well as Europe. From the latter three fleets set out annually, one for Pernambuco, an other for Rio Janeiro, and a third for the bay of Todos Santos ; from whence, upon their return, they join and make for Portugal, loaded with immense 
treasures. [The se fleets have ceased to make their voyages. After the expulsion of the Dutch, this country was, as it were, for a time disregarded by its possessors ; for they had not as yet ascertained or discovered its rich mines ; at least not before the year 685. The minister of Portugal was well aware of the utility that would be derived to his country by the territories of this kingdom being well allotted and cultivated, and that by establish ing the capital in the bay of Todos Santos, it would be extremely convenient and centrical for the purposes of commerce ; but the rigour and cruelty with which the first founders treated the poor Indians, were a sufficient obstacle against his bringing about his laudable designs. The Mustees, who are the descendants of the Spaniards and the natives, having kept on good terms with both parties, were the means by which all things were brought to a mutual reconciliation. The govern ment was then vested in some priests of acknow ledged virtue : these immediatley scattered them selves over the whole coast, foundingsettlements, and penetrating into the interior; they first discovered the different gold mines, which have been since worked lo such prodigious emolument ; as also the mines of diamonds, topazes, and other precious stones. This kingdom abounds in birds, exqui site not less for the beauty of their plumage than for the sweetness of their note ; in many kinds of rare animals, in vipers and venomous insects, and in an incredible number of tigers and monkeys of all sorts. It abounds also in every kind of pulse and fruit ; and amongst these, the pine is most exquisite. This kingdom is governed by a vice roy appointed by (he king of Portugal, and who is always one of the head of the nobility of that kingdom ; his residence being in the city of St. Salvador, which is the capital. [The trade of Brazil is very great, and increases every year. They imnort as many as 40,000 Negroes annually. The exports of Brazil are diamonds, gold, sugar, tobacco, hides, drugs, and medicines ; and they receive in return woollen goods of all kinds, linens, laces, silks, hats, lead, tin, pewter, copper, iron, beef, and cheese. They also receive from Madeira a great quantity of wine, vinegar, and brandy ; and from the Azores 25,000/. worth of other liquors. The gold and diamond mines are but a recent discovery ; they were first opened in 1681, and have since yielded above five millions sterling annually, of which a fifth part belongs to the crown. These, with the sugar plantations, occupy so many hands, that agriculture lies ne glected, and Brazil depends upon Europe for its daily bread ; although before the discovery of 
|BRAZIL. 
these mines, the soil was found very sufficient for subsisting the inhabitants. The diamonds here are neither so hard nor so clear as those of the East Indies, neither do they sparkle so much, but they are whiter ; the Brazilian diamonds are sold 10 per cent, cheaper than the oriental ones, sup posing the weights to be equal. The crown reve nue arising from this colony amounts annually to two millions sterling in gold, if some lafe writers are to be credited, besides the duties and customs on merchandize imported from that quarter. This indeed is more than a fifth of the precious metal produced by the mines ; but, every other conse quent advantage considered, it probably does not much exceed the truth. The Portuguese here live in the most effeminate luxury. When people ap pear abroad, they are carried in a kind of cotton hammocs, called serpentines, which are borne on Negroes shoulders, similar to palanquins in India. The portrait drawn of the manners, customs, and morals of that nation in America, by judicious tra vellers, is very far from being favourable. For a detailed history of this country, see the end of the following catalogue. Catalogue of the barbarous Nations and principal 
Places of the kingdom of lirazil. Barbarous Nations. 
 
 aimores, Amacaches, Yiatanis. 
Amixocores, Cities. 
Annacioris, Angra, 
Apotons, Arracife, 
Apuyes, Comuta, 
Aquiguires, Goyana, 
Aracures, Gran Para, 
Arapes, llheos, 
Aryej;, Janeiro, 
Augaras, Matagroso, 
Guastacasios. Paraiba, 
Margajntes, Pernambuco Olinda, 
Maribuccs, Puerto Seguro, 
Mariquites, San Luis del Maranan, 
Obacatiaras, San Pablo, 
Petiguares, San Salvador, 
Quirig-ujes, San Vicente, 
Siguares, 
Tapnyes, 
Tibuares, 
Tobaxarcs, 
Tocantines, 
Tomomimes, 
Toparos, 
Topinambos, 
Tupiques, 
\ ayanabasones, 
|VOL. I. 
Seregipe, Siara, Espiritu Santo, Todos Santos. 
Rivers. Alagoa, Aniembi, Arari, Araxay r Aruguaya, 
Bibirice, 
Cam.uri, 
Capi, 
Cirigi, 
Contas, 
Cunhao, 
Cururui, 
Dulce, 
De los llheos, 
Duna, 
Galiolo, 
Grande, 
Guaraiguazu, 
Ipoche, 
Janeiro, 
Laguaribe, 
Maracu, 
Martin, 
Meari, 
Mongaguaba, 
Meni, 
Muju, 
Ovaquezupi, 
Parinaiba, 
Parapinzingaa, 
Parashui, 
Paraiba, 
Paiipe, 
Patipinga, 
Paxaca, 
Periperi, 
Pinare, 
Ponica, 
Poyuca, 
Rio Real, 
San Francisco, 
San Miguel, 
Tapados, 
Tapocuru, 
Tocantines, 
Trembi, 
Varirin, 
Vazabazas, 
Vermellas, or Ipenin, 
Yari, 
Inaya, 
Itapemeri, 
Yucaru. 
Mines. Cuyaba, diamond, 
Bishops who have presided in Brazil up to the year 1722 ; [also the names of some who have governed since that period. 1. Don Ga&gt;par Barata de Mendoza, elected first 
B B 
185 
Geraes, gold, Guayaz, diamond, Mato-gros, gold, Picuru, sjlver. 
Promontories. Blanco, Corso, Frio, Ledo, Potocalmo, San Roque, San Agustin, Sousa. 
Ports. Cayvo, Rio Janeiro, Para, 
San Luis de Maranan, San Salvador, or La Bahia de Todos Santos, Seregipe, Tamaraca, Tojuqua. 
Islands. Asuncion, Cananea, Catherina, Del Gallo, De los llheos, Goare, Grande, Machiana, Maivgnau, Marayo, Maricana, Martin Vas, Norona, Picos, 
San Salvador, Santa Ana, San Antonio, Santa Barbara, Sipotuba, Espiritu Santo,. Taparica, Tatipara, Trinidad, Upaya, Ygarapotoe. 
186 
|BRAZIL. 
archbishop in 1677 : he took possession of his ap pointment through his procurator only, for he died before he reached it. 
2. Don Fr. J uan De la Mad re de Dios, of the order of St. Francis ; a provincial in that order, preacher to the king, and examiner of the military orders ; noted as being one of the most pleasing and elo quent orators of his time: he took possession of the archbishopric in 1583, and governed only three years, since he died in a plague which then pre vailed, in 1686. 
3. Don Fr. Manuel de la Resurreccion, colle gian of San Pedro, doctor in canons and laws, canon of the holy church of Lamego, and de puty of the holy office of the inquisition : disen gaging himself from the world, lie quitted these dignities, and entered the convent of Varatojo, where the fame of his virtues caused him to be elected archbishop of La Bahia. He entered his office in 1688, and died in 1691. 
4. Don Juan Franco de Oliveira, promoted to the archbishopric of Angola : he was adorned with this metropolitan mitre for eight years, from 1692 to 1700, when he returned to Portugal to take that of the diocese of Miranda. 
5. Don Sebastian Monteiro de Vide, who had belonged to the company of Jesuits, but who, be ing expelled from the same, gave himself up to a military life, and became captain of infantry : be ing disgusted with this, he applied himself to study in the university of Coimbra, and again embraced an ecclesiastical state. In this he held different commissions, and he was at last prior of Santa Marina, and vicar-general of the archbishopric of Lisbon, from whence he was elected to be the archbishop of La Bahia in 1702, where he go verned with great address for the space of 20 years, notwithstanding the afflicting and severe disorder which confined him nearly the whole of this time to his chamber, and of which he died in 1722. 
Don Luis Alz de Figueredo, in 1725. Don Joseph Fialho. Don Joseph Botello de Matos. Don Jonquin Barges de Figueroa. Don Antonio Correa. 
Governors, Viceroys, and Captains-general, who have presided in Brazil till the year 1722 ; also the names of some who have since go verned. 
1. Tome de Sousa, a subject of Portugal, of nol!e birtii, who had served with great renown in the expeditions of Africa and Asia : he was elected toy the king, Don Juan III. to establish the govern 
ment in Brazil, in 1549 ; and this he effected with great skill, until, in 1553, he was recalled to Lis bon, and promoted to the office of master of the horse to the royal family. 
2. Don Duarte de Costa, chief armourer of the king : lie entered his office in 1553, and governed until lr&gt;58, when he was succeeded by, 
3. Mendo de Sa, an illustrious branch of the house of the Marquises of Abrantes : he was elected on account of his singular attainments, learning, and military prowess ; though even these were ex ceeded by the happy establishments, the founda tions of settlements, and the brilliance of con quests to which he was accessary in Brazil during the 14 years of his reign ; he died in 1572, at Bahia, universally regretted. 
4. Don Luis de Vasconcelos : he died at sea, and before he could reach his destined situation, owing to the misfortunes and long voyage of the ill-omened fleet in which he had embarked. 
5. Luis Brito de Almeida, in whose time the mines of diamonds and topazes were first disco vered and dug: he governed five years, until 1578, when he was succeeded by, 
6. Lorenzo de Vega, who, being at a very ad vanced age, governed for three years only, and died in 1681. A vacancy for two years then en sued, and the government was administered by tho council of Camara, and the eldest of the oidoret, Don Cosme Rangel de Macedo, until the right governor came, who was, 
7. Manuel Tellez Barreto, nominated by Philip II. king of Spain, who, in 1583, inherited the crqwn of Portugal. Although he was also much advanced in years, the government suffered no thing on this account during the four years of his power ; he died in 1587. In the vacancy, the government was held by the bishop, Don Antonio Barreiros, and the purveyor-general of the royal re venues, Christobal de Barros, who exercised it for four years, until the year 1591. 
8. Francisco Giraldes, senor proprietor of the cap tainship of Los Ilheos, which title had been purchas ed by his father of Geronimo Figueredo : he was nominated governor, and having embarked at Lis bon, was driven back twice by distress, when, auguring badly from this misfortune, he gave up his appointment, and in his stead was nominated, 
9. Don Francisco de Sousa, who entered La Bahia in 1594 : he was first marquis of the mines, by favour of the king, who promised him this title, should he recover those mines which, according to some, had been already discovered by Roberio Diaz ; he was renowned for his skill and his good 
|BRAZIL. 
187 
dispositions, and was removed from the govern ment, after having held it for 11 years, till 1602. 
10. Diego BoteTho, the first governor that was nominated by Philip 111. : he governed five years, from 1602 to 1607. 
1 1. Don Diego de Menescs, who arrived at La Bahia in 1608, and governed till 1613, when he was succeeded by, 
12. Gaspar de Sousa, who entered the govern ment in the above year, rendering it famous by the expulsion of the French, who had established themselves in the island of San Luis de Mara nan : he visited all the provinces of the kingdom, from whence arose great advantages to the different settlements, as likewise an increase of the revenues during the short period of his stay, which was four years, till 1617. 
15. Don Luis de Sousa, who entered in the above year to succeed thp former; and who, having re mained in the gov&lt; rmne/it for four other years, namely to 1621, rescued it in fivour of, 
14. Diego de Memioza Hurtado, who entered in the year 1622, at which period the Dutch had in vaded Brazil : La Bahia was then besieged by them, and he was made prisoner, after having va liantly defended himself with only 18 men ; he was carried in triumph to Holland in 1624. 
15. Matias de Albuquerque, who was govern ing at Pernatnbuco when he was called to be nomi nated to his government, which, in the interim, was administered by the fathers of the company of Jesuits ; but as he was at least 150 leagues off , and as the country was beset with enemies, it was thought expedient to promote, by way of an iriter-regnum, the auditor-general, Anton Mezquita de Oliveira, who, owing to his age and want of military science, so necessary under such circum stances, ceded the government to the Colonels Don Lorenzo Cavalcanti de Alburquerque, and Don Juan de Burros Cardoso, who also ceded it to the bishop, Don Marcos Texeira, and he delivered the weighty concern to Francisco Nunez Marinho de Eza, sent out as the right governor from Pernam buco ; but before this person could arrive, there was nominated as successor, 
16. Don Francisco de Moura Rolim, native of Pernambuco, \\lio h id followed \i military career with great credit in Italy and Flanders, and who gained no less applause during his government here, and in the period of the war till 1626. 
17. Don Diego Luis de Oliveira, a gentleman of high character and estimation, acquired amongst the troops in Flanders : he was, in consequence, sent for io ijrazil to oppose the progress which the Dutch were making ; he completely fulfilled the 
object for which he was chosen, until, in the year 1634, he was destined to drive the Dutch from the island of Curazao, delivering the government to, 
18. Pedro de Silva, who took possession in 1635: but a rivalship having arisen between him and the general of the troops, Conde Banholo ; he, with heroic disinterestedness, ceded to him the govern ment and all the faculties ; admonishing him, how ever, strongly to mind the public weal. This ac tion was rewarded by the king, who immediately gave him the title of Count of San Lorenzo, and nominated him as successor to the government. 
19. Don Fernando Mascarenas, Count of La Torre, a person of the highest consequence in Portugal, on account of his birth, virtues, perso nal qualities, and military tactics: he entered La Bahia in 1639, and taking the command of the army against the Dutch, ceded the political governm- nt to, 
20. Don Vasco Mascarenas, Count of Ovidos, who exercised it until the year 1640, when the king nominated, 
2J. Don Jorge Muscarefias, Marquis ofMontalvan, the first who had the title of viceroy, but who, being immersed in ruinous litigations, was deposed and sent to Lisbon, in 1641, by the bishop, Don Pedro de Silva, the commander, Luis Becerra, and the chief overseer, Lorenzo de Brito Correa : these took to themselves the government, though their conduct was disapproved by the new king, Don Juan IV. formerly Duke of Braganza. 
22. Antonio Tellez de Meneses, Count of Villa Pouca, of high blood and of great merits, acquired in India : he governed with address until the year 1652. 
23. Juan Rodriguez de Vasconcelos, Count of Castelmayor, illustrious for his birth, and for the unjust imprisonment which he suffered in Carta gena : he was commander of the armies of Portu gal in the provinces of Entre Douro y Mifio and of A Icntejo ; from whence he passed over to Bra zil in 1653. 
24 DoiuJeronimo de Ataide, Count of Atoguia, who, both in the court and in the field, had filled the highest situations with great credit and ad dress : he was governor of the province of Tres Montes at the time of his being called to this; here also his rectitude and affability have perpe tuated the memory of his government; he conti nued in office until the year 1657. 
25. Francisco Barreto de Meneses, nominated by the- Queen Regent of Portugal, as a reward for his prowess and valour exhibited in the si re
 covery of Pernambuco, where he was brigadiergeneral ; he however testified a certain haughti* u B2 
188 
|BRAZIL. 
ness of disposition in some private dissensions, and a successor was nominated in, 
26. Don Vasco Mascareiias, Count of Ovidos, governor of the armies and province of Alentejo, who had been viceroy of India, of the council of state, and second viceroy of the kingdom of Bra zil: he entered in the year 1664, and owing to the skill he had obtained from having been briga dier and general of the artillery, he governed with great address five years, until 1668. 
27. Alexandro de Sousa Freyre, who, after a very meritorious career, was governor of the fort of Mazagan in Africa : he was removed to this go vernment, where he remained until 1671. 
28. Alonso Thurtado de Mendozu, esteemed equally for his noble birth as for his heroic valour ; lie being renowned amongst the greatest warriors of his age. Disappointment in his attempts to discover some mines caused his death in 1675 ; but lie had nominated, as governor for. the interim, the chancellor, Augustin Acevedo Montero, the eldest brigadier, Alvaro de Acevedo, and the eldest judge, Antonio Guedes de Brito ; these governed for upwards of two years, until 1678, when the right successor arrived, viz. 
29. Roque de Acosta Barreto, a person whose good qualities had secured the favour of the court, and had obtained for him employments equal to his pretensions : he was major-general in the pro vince of Brazil atthe limethat he was nominated go vernor and captain-general of Brazil ; and the ap plause which he deserved by his virtues warranted his election ; for the kingdom had to reckon him amongst the best of its governors ; here he conti nued until the year 16812. 
SO. Antonio de Sousa Meneses, a man of great merits : he had lost an arm, which was replaced by one of silver ; he had 1 grown old in government and in various employs, and indeed lie \vas at this lime rather superannuated ; the consequence was, that great dissensions and commotions marked the period of his government, which lasted until 1682, when arrived, 
31. Don Antonio Luis de Sousa, Tello de Me neses, Marquis of Las Minas : he was found exer cising the government of Las Armas, and province of Eritre Douro and Mino, from whence he. was with drawn, on account of his well-established fame, to settle the disturbances prevailing in Brazil; to these he lent his most serious attention : he was also ser viceable in rendering succour and assistance to the natives during the terrible contagion Avluch they sufVred during his government: this lasted until 1687, when soliciting his return to Lisbon, a sucsucccssor was appointed in the person of, 
52. Matias de Acufia, commissary-general of the cavalry ofMontejo, brigadier of the 3d regiment of the Armada, and governor of the Rio Janeiro, and afterwards of the province of Entre Douro y Mino : here he displayed much talent and justice ; but died in a short time, in 1688, nominating, in the interim, with the approbation of all, ci successor in the archbishop, Don Fr. Manuel de la Resurreccion, who kept the reins of government until the year 1690. 
33. Antonio Luis Gonzalez de Camara Coutinho, who was at that time governor of the pro vince of Pernarnbuco, and was elected to the capfa/tfs///y;-gencral of Brazil, of which he took posses sion in 1690, and which he exercised until 1694. 
34. John of Lancaster, of .the royal family of England, who began his military career at a very early age, and being captain of horse, distinguished himself in the battle of the Canal : he was after wards brigadier-general of the 3d regiment of the Armada, governor and captain-general of Angola, general of the horse of Alentejo, and, lastly, cap tain-general of Brazil, of which dignity he took possession in 1694 ; and during a much longer government than was usually enjoyed, he gave evident proofs of the extent of his abilities, by the excellence of his plans for the public emolument, and for the beneficence he shewed to those around him ; he was succeeded in 17S2 by, 
35. Don Rodrigo de Costa, who, by his birth and merits, had been the favourite of the monarchs and governors of the island of Madeira: he was made captain-general of Brazil, and from thence promoted to the viceroyalty of India in 1705; he was succeeded by, 
36. Luis Cesar dc Meneses, chief ensign of the kingdom of Portugal, a descendant of the renowned Vasco Fernandez, and known alike for his happy government in the Rio Janeiro, and in the king dom of Angola, as for that of the city of Ebora, in the war of the succession of Philip V. king of Spain : he came over to Brazil in 1705, and re mained with singular credit until 1710, when ar rived his successor, 
37. Don Lorenzo dc Almada, who was received with some degree of discontent ; a true presage of the ills and disturbances which marked his go vernment, and of the disputes which arose with the government of Pernambuco: all these made him very willing to resign his post, which he did in the following year, 1711, in favour of his successor, 
38. Don Pedro de Vasconcelos y Sousa, es teemed for his valour and conduct during the war : he was brigadier-general at the time that he was 
|BRAZIL. 
appointed lo the government of Brazil, where the memory of his predecessor and grandfather, the Count of Castlemayor, caused him to be received with great expectations ; but the.se were soon frus trated by the disturbances at Pernambuco, the in vasion of Rio Janeiro by the French, and the tak ing of Bahia ; which unlucky circumstances made him earnest in his entreaties to the king to appoint a successor : his request was complied with. 
39. Don Pedro Antonio de Noroiia, Marquis of Angeja, counsellor of state, and inspector-general of the royal estates : he had from a very early age an eye to the viceroyalty of India ; and ac tually entered it with the title of viceroy, in 1714 ; his government was marked by the most prudent regulations, and lasted until 1718. 
40. Don Sancho de Faro, Count of Vimciro, of the royal house of Braganza, by the male line : he served in the wars of this country, and was master of the horse to her most serene highness the Queen Maria Ana of Austria ; was go vernor of Mazagan and of the province of Miiio, -when he was nominated captain-general of Brazil in 1718; where he however shewed more zeal than fortune in his undertakings, and in little more than a year terminated his career, leaving the go vernment to the charge of the archbishop, Don Se bastian Monteiro da Vide, to the brigadier-gene ral, Don Juan de Araujo y Accevedo, and to the oiclor, Don Cayetano Brito de Figneredo, who conjointly governed until the year 1720, when ar rived the right successor, 
41. Don Vasco Fernandez Cesar de Meneses, son of Don Luis Vasco Cesar de Meneses, and nephew of John of Lancaster, both of whom had governed in Brazil: he was distinguished by his conduct in war, and was thought deserving of be ing appointed by the king to the viceroyalty of India, and was destined to govern Brazil in 1720 ; when, by his nice discernment and well-regulated plans, he nearly eclipsed all those who hail gone before him, and governed until 1724. The suc ceeding governors were as follows : 
Don Andresde Mt-llo y Castro, Count of Galveas. 
The Count of Antognia. 
The Count of Los Arcos. 
The Marquis of Labradio, the father. 
The Count Bobadela, who died before he arrived to take possession. 
The Count of Asambuja. 
The Marquis of Labradio, the last son of those who enjoyed the title of viceroy. 
The Count of Povolide, the first who, with the title of governor and captain-general, established .himself in the Rio Janeiro. 
Don Manuel de Acnria Meneses. 
The Marquis of Valencia. 
Don Rodrigo Joseph de Meneses. 
|INDEX TO THE ADDITIONAL MATTER RESPECT ING THE HISTORY AND STATE OF BHAZIL. 
|CHAP. 1. Including; the period between the years 1498 and 1552. 
1. Discovery. % Possession taken for the crown of Portugal. 3. The, country obtains the mime of Brazil.-" 4. Criminals sent to serve there. 5. Brazil divided into captaincies. 6. Alarlim Affonsode Sousa.7. First sugar-canes planted. *8. St. AniaioundTamaraca.9. Paraiba. lQ. The Goeytacozes.-!!. Espiritu Santo. 12. 77/e Papanazes.-l3. Puerto Seguro. l
. The Tupiniquins. l5. The. Ilhcos.i6. Bahia. 17. Revolutions in the Reconcave.lS. Expul sion of Coutinho. lQ. Pernambifco.
O. The Cahetes.2\.. The Tobai/ares.22. &ege of Garazu. 
|CHAP. II. Including the period between the years 1552 and 1595. 
1. A governor-general appointed. - -2. The first Jesuits.- 3. Guarani and Tupi languages 4 Tupi prie.&lt;&gt;ts.5. The Mandioc the common food and drink. 6. Marriages. -7. Condi tion of women among them. 8. Other cus toms of the Tupi tribes. 9. Their treatment of strangers. "-10. Treatment of the sick, 8?c. 11. The first bishop. 12. Brazil diiid d into two governments. 13. Intercourse of the English with Brazil. 14. Their expeditions. 
|CHAP. III. Including the period between the years 1595 and 1642. 
1. Marannn and Para forn.ed into a state indepen dent of Brazil. %. A Dutch company formed3. War with the Dutch. 4. Want of colo nists. 5. The Jews. 6. The savages. 7. Dutch missionaries. &. Force of the Dutch.9. Their successes. 10, Feats of Count Manrice. 11. King John IV. 12. Refi ied policy of the Portuguese.- -13. The Count recalled to Europe. 
|CHAP. IV. Including the period between they tars 
1. Impolitic conduct of the Dutch West India company. -2. Conspiracy of Viera.---3. Admi ral Bonavides arrives with a Jlect.l. But is attacked and beaten by Admiral Licht //art. --5. Open rupture between Holland and P&lt; rlugal. -6. Expedition of Admiral W Me fJ it ezen.7. Evacuation of the Di((ch.-8. State of Biazil at that lime. 9. Treaty of 1661. 1C. Variance. and reconciliation betizttn the Spanish and Por tuguese. II. Interference of Old Spain.--- 12. 
190 
|BRAZIL. 
Treaties of 1777 and 1778. 13. State of com merce, mines, &c. 
|CHAP. V. Containing an account of the division of Brazil. Civil and ecclesiastical government. Slave trade. Present condition of the native Brazilians, Sfc. 
|CHAP. I. 
1 . Discovery. TH B coast of Brazil,as has been be fore observed, was first discovered by VincenteYancz Pinzon. He had sailed with Columbus in 1498, on his first voyage, as commander and master of the Nina. Seven years afterwards he and his ne phew Arias obtained a commission to go in search of new countries, and trade in any which Colum bus had not previously appropriated. The Pinzons were wealthy men, and the former voyage had added to their wealth ; they fitted out four caravels at their own cost, and set sail from Palos in December 1499, made the capede Verds, then steered to the s. w. and were the first Spaniards who crossed the line and lost sight of the n. star. After suffering intolerable heat, and storms which drove them on their way, they saw land on Ja nuary 26, 1500, in lat. 8| s. to which Vincente gave the name of cape Consolation ; but which is now called cape St. Augustines. They landed, cut the names of the ships, and the date of the year and day upon the trees and rocks, and took pos session of the country for the crown of Caslillc. 
The coast which Pinzon had discovered lay within the Portuguese limits of demarcation ; and before he reached Europe, in 1500, it had been taken possession of by the nation to whom it was allotted. As soon as Vasco da Gama had returned from the discovery of India, King Emanuel fitted out a second and far more powerful expedition, tothe command of which he appointed the Fidulgo Pedro Alvarez Cabral. 
2. Possession taken for the crown of Portugal. The Portuguese ships of discovery had hitherto taken out stone pillars, with the arms of Portugal engraved thereon, to set up in the lands which they might find, and by this act secure them for King Emanuel. Cabral, upon his landing at Puerto Seguro, was not provided with these pil lars, because his destination was to follow the track of Gama ; possession had been taken all the way which he was to steer, and no discovery of new countries was expected from him. He erected a stone cross instead, and took possession of the whole province for the crown of Portugal, naming it Santa Cruz, or the Land of the Holy Cross. 
S. The country obtains the name of Brazil. But the honour of havh g formed the first settle 
ment in this country, is due to Amerigo Vespucci in 1504. It does not appear that any farther atten tion was at this time paid to it. No gold had been found, and it produced no articles of commerce which could be thought worthy the notice of a go vernment whose coflvrs were overflowing with the produce of the spice trade, and the riches of the African mines. I3ut the cargo of Brazil which Vespucci had brought home, templed private ad venturers, who wen: content with peaceful gains, to trade thither for that valuable wood ; and this trade became so well known, that in consequence the coast and the whole country obtained the name of Brazil, notwithstanding the holier appellation which Cabral had given it. 
4. Criminals sent to serve there. It was the sys tem of the Portuguese government to make its cri minals of some use to the state, and this system was extended to Brazil ; for the first Europeans who were left ashore there were two convicts. 
5. Brazil divided into captaincies.- It was not until thirty years after its discovery, that the coun try appears to have become of sufficient import ance to have obtained any consideration at court ; and in order to forward its colonization, the same plan was adopted which had succeeded well in Madeira and in the Azores, that of dividing it into hereditary captaincies, and granting them to such persons as were willing to embark adequate means in the adventure, with powers of jurisdiction, both civil and criminal, so extensive as to be in fact un limited. This method was thought to be the ea siest and least expensive to government. The difference between desert islands and a peopled continent had not been considered. The captains of the islands might easily settle lands in which there could be no opposition, and easily at any time assist each other with supplies : if their means failed, they could even borrow from Portugal, those places being so near that they were regarded almost as things within the country. But when Joam divided the coast of Brazil into great captaincies, each extending along 50 leagues of coast, large tribes of savages were in possession of the coun try, Portugal was far distant, and the settlements so far asunder, that one could not possibly afford assistance to another. 
6 . Martini Affonso de Sousa.-" The first person who took possession of one of these captaincies Avas Martirn Affonso de Sousa, whose name fre quently occurs in the history of Portuguese India, where he was afterwards governor, and who is fa mous in Catholic history for having carried out St. FrancLco Zavier to the east. He and his brother, Pera Lopes de Sousa, having each obtained 
|BRAZIL. 
a grant, fitted out a considerable armament, and went to explore the country, and form their settle ment in person. He began to survey the coast somewhere about Rio de Janeiro, to which he gave that name, because he discovered it on the first of January ; and he proceeded s. as far as the Plata, naming the places which he surveyed on the way, from the days on which the several discoveries were made. Having well examined the coast, he fixed upon one of these islands for his settlement, which, likeGoa, are separated from -the main land by an elbow of the sea; but this spot, which had been chosen for the new town, was not found con venient, and the colonists round removed to the ad joining isle of St. Vincente, from which the cap taincy derives its name. 
7. The jirst sugar-canes planted. About the year 1531, Martim Affonso made an unsuccessful expedition southward into the interior, in search of mines, from which he returned with the loss of 80 Europeans. In all other respects his colony was fortunate. Here the first sugar-canes were planted, which were brought from Madeira ; here the first cattle were reared ; and here the other cap taincies stocked themselves with both. Whether the honour of having introduced them into Brazil be due to the founder of the colony is not stated : a battle or a massacre would have been recorded. The king, after some time, recalled Martim Affonso, and sent him to India; but when he re turned to Portugal, ke watched over the welfare of his captaincy, sending out supplies and settlers ; and it descended in a flourishing condition to his son. Wheat and barley were little used here, be cause the food of the country was liked so well ; what little wheat was raised was for delicacies, and for the wafer. Marmalade was made here, and sold to the other captaincies. Oysters of such a size are found here, that their shells are used for dishes ; and once, when a bishop of Bahia visited this province, they washed his feet in one, as in a basin. The whole coast abounds with shell-fish, which the natives came down from the interior to catch at certain seasons : they built their huts upon some dry spot amid the mango groves, fed upon fish while the fishery lasted, and dried them to carry home. So long had this practice been con tinued, that hills had accumulated of the shells, soil collected on them, and trees taken root there and grown to maturity. These hills, which are called ostreiraS) have supplied all the lime that has been used in the captaincy, from its foundation to the present day. In some of them the shells are formed into lime-stone ; in others they are uachanged ; tools and broken pottery of the Indians 
are frequently found in them, and bones of the dead ; lor they who died during the fishing season, were laid on these heaps, and covered over with shells. 
8. St.-dma.ro and Tamaraco. Pero Lopes de Sousa was less fortunate than his brother. He chose to have his 50 leagues of coast in two allot ments. The one, M hich obtained the name of St. Amaro, adjoined St. Vincente, and bordered so close upon the main settlement, the towns being only three leagues asunder, that if they had not belonged to two brothers, the settlers would have but ill agreed. As long as this was the case, the neighbourhood was advantageous to both ; but when the property devolved to other possessors, between whom there were not the same ties, it be came an endless cause of litigation. Tamaraca, the other division, lay between Pernambuco and Paraiba, many degrees nearer the line. Here he had some hard conflicts with the Pitiguares, who besieged him in his town ; but he succeeded at length in driving them from the neighbourhood. Soon afterwards he perished by shipwreck. 
9. Paraiba. A fidalgo, by name Pedro de Goes, had been one of the companions of Pero Lopes, and had suffered shipwreck with him in the Plata ; but neither this, nor the disastrous fate of his friend, disheartened him. He became fond of Brazil, and asked for a captaincy when the king was disposing of them in such prodigal grants. It seems that he had no great interest at court, for his grant was restricted to 30 leagues of coast, be tween the captaincies of St. Vincente and Espiritu Santo ; if the space between them did not extend to so much, he was to take it such as it was. Goes embarked the whole of his property upon the adventure, and many thousand crowns were ad vanced by a certain Martim Ferreira, who pro posed to have sugar-works established there upon their joint account. The expedition sailed to the river Paraiba, and there Goes fortified himself, and remained two years at peace with the Goeytacazes. After that time war broke out between them, and continued five years, to his great loss : peace was made, and soon broken by the savages. There is no reason to suspect the Portuguese of being the ag gressors in this instance, it was too much their in terest to keep the treaty. The colonists were weak and utterly dispirited : they became clamorous to quit the unlucky settlement, and Goes was obliged to yield to their clamours, and evacuate it. Ves sels were obtained from Espiiitu Santo to bring them away. 
10. The Goeytacazes. The tribe which ex pelled Goes were probably of the same stock as the 
|BRA 
192 B R A 2 I 
. / .. t, 
Groaynaze?, and like &lt;Iiem did not devour their prisoners. They were fairer than the oilier savages, on and their language, it is said, more barbarous, which may be understood to mean that some of its sounds were more difficult. They were a braver race, and fought not in woods and ambushes, but itvopcn field. They would swim of} shore with a short stick in the hand, sharp at both ends ; with this they would attack a shark, thrust it into his open mouth and gag him, then drown him, drag him ashore, eat the flesh, and head their arrows with his teeth. 
11. Espiritu Santo. The captaincy of Espiritu Santo was at this time next to St. Amaro ; for Rio de Janeiro was not settled till a later period. This was asked and obtained by Vasco Fernandes Coutinho, a ficlalgo, Avho having spent the best years of his lite in India, and amassed a fortune there, ven tured and lost the whole in this scheme of coloni zation. Uis limits were to begin where those of Puerto Seguro ended on the s. He fitted out a great expedition, in which not less than 60 fidalgos and men of the royal household embarked. DonSimam tie Castello-Branco, and Don Jorge de Menezes, were sent with him as degradados
 that is to say, banished men. Of all shocking tyrannies, that of the Portuguese in the Spice islands stands among the foremost in atrocity, and Don Jorge de Mericzes, in. the first rank of their tyrants for diabolical crndty. Indeed in an age when the cruellies of Vaeco da Gama, and the great Albuquerque, were recorded without one word of reprehension, as doubtless they were without one feeling of huma nity, it may well be supposed, when aman of family and fortune was banished for such offences to Brazil, what the measure of those offences must have been. They had a prosperous voyage to their place of destination, and began a town, to which they gave the name of Our Lady of Vic tory, before the battle had been fought. The title was for a while sufficiently verified, and the Goaynazes, the first enemies with whom they had to deal, were defeated in some of the first engage ments. The building went on with spirit ; canes were planted, four sugar- works established, and Coutinho, seeing every thing thus prosperous, went to Lisbon to collect more colonists, and pro cure stores and implements for an expedition into the country, in search of mines. 
12. The Papnnazes. The coast of this and the next captaincy had been possessed by the Papanazes, but they were now driven back by the Gouytacazes and the Tupiniquius. The language of the Papanazes was scarcely understood by these ene mies, notwithstanding their long wars. They 
L. 
-\:-l . Si 
were hunters and fishers, and slept upon the ground on leaves. If one of them killed another, he wa.9 delivered up to the relations of the dead, and in the presence of all the kindred of both parties, imme diately strangled and interred. All parties lamented loudly at the execution ; they then feasted ami drank together for many days, and no enmity re mained. Even if the deed was accidental, the punishment was the same. Should the offender have escaped, his son, his daughter, or the nearest of his blood, was given up in his stead ; but th substitute, instead of suffering death, remained a slave to the nearest relation of the slain. 
13. Puerto Seguro. The adjoining captaincy of Puerto Seguro was allotted to Pedro de Campo Tourinho, a native of Viana da Foz de Lima, of noble family, and an excellent navigator. He sold all that he possessed in Portugal to embark it in this expedition, and set sail with his wife and family, and a large body of colonists. They landed in the harbour where Cabral had taken pos session of Brazil, and there fortified themselves upon a spot which retains the name of Puerto Seguro, given it by that discoverer, and which still remains the capital of the captaincy. 
14. The Tupinifftdns. The Tupiniquiris made some opposition at first. They possessed the coun try from the river Camamu to the river Circare, an extent of nearly five degrees ; and the first settlers in tnisandthetwoadjoiriing captaincies had to main tain their ground agajrist them. Peace however was soon made, and the Tupiniquius observed it faithfully. They were sometimes at war with the Tupinaes; but these tribes, being of the same stock, did not regard each other as regularly and naturally enemies, and their quarrels were con sidered as mere accidental circumstances,- which were to leave no hatred behind: the two tribes blended at last into one. Of all the Brazilians, these are said to have been the most domestic and the most faithful, indefatigable, and excellently brave. Their manners and language resembled those of the Tupinambas ; but it was so long since they had branched apart, that all memory of the common stock was lost, and there was a deadly enmity between them. The Tupinambas were the most powerful ; pressed by them on the one* side, by the dreadful Aymures on the other, and profiting less by the friendship of the Portuguf3se than they suffered from their tyranny, they gradually forsook the country. Good men were never wanting who lifted up their voices against this tyranny and op pression ; but the guilt .was so general that it has become a national imputation. Tourinho is not implicated in this guilt ; he had influence enough 
|BRAZIL. 
over the natives to coflect many of them into vil lages, and this is proof that he dealt towards them well and wisely.. Sugar-works were established, with such success that they produced a consider able quantity for exportation to the mother coun try. No kine could be kept in this colony, be cause of an herb which is said to have occasioned haemorrhoids, whereof they died ; yet lx&gt;rses, asses, and goats r were not affected by it. The disease was probably imputed to a wrong cause. 
15. The llheos. The captaincy of the isles owes its inapplicable name to the Rio dos llheos, a Fiver so called because there are three islands just at its bar. Jorge de Figueiredo Correa, Escrivam da Fazenda toJoarnlll. was the first donatory. The office which he held prevented him from going himself to take possession of his grant ; he there fore deputed a Castillian knight, by name Fran cisco Homeiro. Rorneiro anchored in the harbour of Tinhare, and began his new town on the height or Morro de St. Paulo, from whence however he found it exped lent to remove it to its present situation. It was first called St. Jorge, in compliment to the lord of the land ; but the same improper appella tion which had been given to the captaincy ex tended to its capital. The Tupiniquins soon made peace with the settlers, and being of all the Bra zilian tribes the most tractable, lived with them on such friendly terms that the colony soon became prosperous. The son of the original proprietor sold the captaincy to Lucas Giraldes : he expended considerable wealth in improving it y and it nourished so well that there A\ere in a short time eight or nine sugar-works established. 
16. Bahia. The coast from the great Rio dc S.. Francisco to the Ponta da Pad ram de Bah in, was given to Francisco Pereira Coutinho, a fidalgo who had distinguished himself in India ; and. the bay itself, with all its creeks, was afterwards added to the grant. He fixed his settlement in the bay, at the place now called Villa V r elha, which was Caramuru s dwelling place ,- two of his com panions, who were men of noble family, married two of Caramuru s danghlers y and as the natives were for his sake well affected towards the Portugueze, every thing went on well for a time. Bahia de Todos os Santos, or All Saints bay, wherein the capital of Brazil was afterwards erected, is un questionably one of the finest harbours in the world. Here, as well as at Rio de Janeiro upon the same coast, the sea seems to have broken in upon the land ; or more probably some huge lake has borne down its barrier, and made way to the ocean. The entrance, which is nearly three leagues wide, is from the s. having the continent on the right hand, 
|VOL. I. 
and the long island of ftnparica on the left. You are then in a bay, extending to the n. and w. a whole degree, and branching inland in every di rection, with deep water every where, and many navigable rivers discharging themselves into it. This little Mediterranean is spotted with above an hundred islands. 
17. Revolutions in the Reconcavf. The old natives preserved the memory of three revolutions in this Reconcave, as the bay with all its creeks and coves is denominated. As far hack as the memory of man among savages cotdd reach, the Tapnyas possessed it ; but as this part of Brazil is in every respect one of the most highly favoured places under heaven, it was too desiraoie a land tobe peaceably enjoyed, when there was no other law than that of the strongest. The Tupinaes expelled them, and for many years retained pos session, still keeping up war on the side of the in terior with those whom they had driven there. At length the Tupinambas from the other side of the river San Francisco migrated here, and in like manner thrust out the Tupinaes, who fell back upon the Tapuyas, and drove them again before them. These last conquerors were masters of the country when the Portuguese arrived ; but they had quarrelled among themselves. Those \vho dwelt between the river San Francisco and the Rio Real, or Royal river, were at mortal enmity with those nearer the bay, and the inhabitants of one side the bay, with those on the other ; they carried on hostilities both by land and water, and all par ties devoured their prisoners. A fresh feud broke out among those who dwelt on the e. side; the cause was that which, in barbarous and heroic, or semi-barbarous ages, has furnished so much matter fr history and sonir. The daughter of a chief had been canned off against her father s consent ; the ravisher refused to restore her ; the father, not be ing powerful enough to compel him, retired with all his clan to the island of Itaparica ; the hordes upon the river Paraguazu coalesced with the seceders, and a deadly war began between the two par ties. The lilia do Mcdo, or Island of Fear, de rives its name from the frequent ambushes and conflicts of which it was then made the scene. The scceders multiplied and spread along the coast of the llheos, and the feud in all its rancour was perpetuated. 
18. Expulsion of Coutinho, This was the state of the Tupinambas in Bahia, when Coutinho formed his establishment among them. That fidalgo had served in India, and India was not a school where humanity or political wisdom was to be learnt. A son of one of the native chiefs was slain by the") 
c c 
|BRAZIL. 
Portuguese ; tli circumstance* arc not recorded, but it is admitted that the deed was done wrong fully. Coutinho paid dearly for his offence. These fierce savages, then (lie most formidable of all the Brazilian tribes, burnt down his sugarworks, destroyed his plantations, killed his bas tard son, and after more than a seven years war, compelled him, and the wreck of his colony, to abandon the lie-concave. Caramuru followed the fate of his countrymen, and retired with them to the adjoining captaincy of the llheos. Wlnm they were gone, the Tnpiiwinbas began to feel the want of those articles which they were now accus tomed to receive in trallic, and which, from being luxuries, they had suffered to become wants. A treaty was opened, the difference was adjusted, and Coutinlio embarked to return in one caravel, and Caramuru in another. They were wrecked within the bar, on the shoals of the island Itaparica ; all got to shore, and there he and his people were treacherously slain by the islanders. Caramuru and the crew of his vessel were spared ; a proof how wisely he had ever demeaned himself towards the natives. He returned to his old abode in the bay. The wife and children of Coutinho did not perish with him ; they had probably been left at llheos: but lie had expended the whole of his lii(ii;in spoils and of his property : they were left destitute, and came to the hospital for support. 
19. P ernani/Mco. One other captaincy was es tablished about the same time as these others, that of Pcrnambuco. A factory had previously been settled there, which a ship from Marseilles took, ami left 70 men in it, thinking to maintain posses sion?;, but the ship was captured on her return, ajid intelligence being thus early obtained at Lis bon, immediate measures were taken for the re covery of the place. The donatory, Duarte Coelho Pereira, asked ,it as the reward of his services in India. The line of coist between the Rio de S. Francisco and the Hio de Juraza was granted htm.: IttJcatucJiimsel
 wilh his wife and children, and ji any of his kinsmen, to begin the colony, and landed in the port of Pernambuco ; the entrance is through an opening in a long stone reef, and this flit native .name implies. O, que linda situncam para se ftcndar hmna villa ! (O, how fine a situ ation for founding a town !) Duarte Coelho is said to have exclaimed on beholding it ; and hence the town was called Olinda. 
20. The Caheles. This coast was possessed by Hw, Cahetes, a tribe remarkable for using boats, the fabric of which was something between thatch and \ricker-work, being of a long and strong kind of straw knit to the timbers. These they made large 
enough to carry 10 or 12 persons. They are said to have been more brutal than the other tribes, in asmuch as there was little natural affection to bo perceived in them. An instance is related of one who was a slave to the Portuguese, and threw his child into the river because she cried. The single fact would prove nothing more than individual brutality ; but it is mentioned as an example of their general unfeeling nature. From these people Duarte Coelho had to gain by inches, says iiocha Pitta, what was granted him by leagues. They attacked and besieged him in his new town. Th French, who now (about the year 1540) were trading to that coast, led them on ; their numbers were very great, and had he IXMMI less experienced, or less able in war, his colony would probably have been rooted out. He was wounded during the siege, many of his people slain, and the place reduced to extremity; nevertheless they beat off the enemy, and having made an alliance with the Tobayares, had strength and spirit enough to fol low up their success. 
21. The Tobayares. The Tobayares were the first Brazilian tribe who leagued with the Portu guese. One of their leaders, named Tabyra, pos sessed great talents for war, and was the scourge of the hostile savages : he went among them hi ruse-It to spy out their camps, and listen to their projects : these tribes therefore must have been of one stock, and have spoken the same dialect. He laid am bushes, led on assaults in the night, and harassed them with incessant alarms. At length they as sembled their whole force, came upon him and sur rounded him : Tabyra sallied forth ; an arrow pierced his eye, he plucked it out, and the eye ball on it, arid turning to his followers, said, he could see to beat his enemies with one ; and ac cordingly he gave them a complete overthrow, not withstanding their numbers. Ilagybe, the arm of iron, was another of these Tobayares, who dis tinguished himself on the same side; and Piragybe, the arm of the fish, (if the name be rightly trans lated by this unimaginable meaning), rendered such services to the Portuguese, that he was re warded with -the order of Christ and a pension. Some years of peace and prosperity ensued : then again (about tlie year 1548) a war broke out, which was occasioned, as usual, by the miscon duct of the settlers. This is the first war between the Portuguese and the savages, of which any de tail has been preserved : and the detail is curious : it is related by Hans Stade, the first person who wrote any account of Brazil. Hans was the son of a good man at Homberg in the Hessian terri tory. He was minded to seek his fortune in India,} 
|BRAZIL. 
195 
and with that intent sailed from Holland in a fleet of merchantmen going 1 to Set n ha I for salt; hut when he reached Portugal the Indian ships were gone, so he accepted the post of gunner in a vessel bound for Brazil on a trading voyage, and cur rying out convicts to Pernambuco. There was n smaller ship in company : they were well provided with all kinds of warlike stores, and had orders to* attack all Frenchmen whom they might find trad ing in those parts. They made cape St. Angustines in 88 days, on the 28th Jan. 1548, and en tered the port of Pernambuco. Here the captain delivered his convicts to Coclho, meaning &lt;o pro ceed and traffic wherever it might be found most convenient: it happened, however, that just at this time the natives rose against the Portuguese, and were about to besiege the settlement oi Garazu, which was not far distant : Coelho could spare them no support, because he expected to be at tacked himself; he therefore requested these ships to assist him, and Hans was sent with 40 men in a boat to their succour. 
22. Siege of Gar a ~u. Gurazn was built in the woods, upon a creek which ran about two miles in land ; its garrison, including this reinforcement, consisted of 90 Europeans and 30 slaves, some of whom were Negroes, others natives. The force which attacked them was computed at 8000, pro bably an exaggerated number. There were no other fortifications than the palisade, which the Portuguese had adopted from the Brazilians. The besiegers piled np two rude bulwarks of trees, within which they retired at night for security against any sudden attack : they dug |&gt;its, in which they were sate from shot by clay, and from which they frequently started at different times, and rushed on, hoping to win the place by surprise. "VV hen they saw the guns aimed at them they fell upon the ground. Sometimes they approached the palisade, and threw their javelins over, for the chance there was that some wound might be in flicted by their fall ; they shot fire arrows, headed with waxed cotton, at the houses ; and \\hcnerer they drew nigh, it was with loud threats that they would devour their enemies. The Portuguese soon began to want food, because it was the custom to dig the mandioc, of which their bread was made, every day, or at farthest on the alternate days ; and now they were blockaded, and could not go out to perform this necessary work. Two boats were sent for food to the island of Itarnaraca, which is at the entrance of the creek, and where there was another settlement ; and Hans was of the party. The creek is narrow in one place, and there the savages endeavoured to obstruct the na 
vigation by laying great trees across . this obstacle the Portuguese removed by main force; but while they were thus delayed the tide was ebbing, and before the boats could roach Itamarar :i they were left dry. Instead of attacking them, tl;e savages raised a heap of dry wood between the boats and the shore, set fire to it, and threw into the flames a species of pepper which grows there abundantly, and produces a pungent smoke, by which they thought to suffocate, or otherwise annoy them. A breath of wind from the opposite quarter would have defeated this artifice, though it failed in this instance because the wood did not burn ; and when the tide floated them, the Portuguese proceed to Itamaraea, and were there supplied with what they sought. Meantime the savages cut two large trees nearly through, which grew beside the narrowest part of the creek, and fastened to them the long and lim ber shoots of a plant which they called sippo; these shoots reseirble the hop plant, except that they are thicker. When they in the boats drew nigh and perceived this, they called out to their fellows in the fort to come and help them, for the place was within hearing, though the wood con cealed it from sight ; the savages knew what this meant, and as soon as they began to shout, shouted also, and effectually drowned their words : all, therefore, that the Portuguese could do was, for one part of them to endeavour to confuse the ene mies attention, while the rowers ptdled up for their lives : this succeeded, one of the trees went down in a slant direction on the bank, the other foil be hind one of the boats, and brushed it in its fall. The siege had already lasted a month ; the savages saw themselves thus disappointed in the hope of reducing Garazu by famine; their perseverance was exhausted, and they made peace and broke up* The Portuguese had not lost a single man, and the besiegers not many. After this easy war the colony continued to prosper during the remainder of Duarte Coelho s life. 
23. Expedition* up to 1552. Amongst the most notable of the Portuguese expeditions to Brazil, up to the middle of the 16th century, we have ta mention that of Aires da Cunha to Marnnan ; that of Sebastian Cabot, that of Diego Garcia, that of D. P. de Mendoza, whose force consisted of ilships and 800 men, and who laid the foundation of the city of Nuestra Seuorade Buenos Ay res ; that of Alonso de Cabrera, sent out to the reinforce* merit of the former ; the attempt of Gonzalo Pizarro to find the Dorado; the voyage of Orellana, and the expedition of HernandodeBibera, in quest of the Amazons : but as a narration of them would not suit the plan of this work, we refer the reader I 
|BRAZir; 
who may wish to know the various success with which these were carried on, to Southev s History 6f JJrazit, vol. J. chapters Hi. iv. v. vi. vii. ,w- l &gt;fi -nnimorff 
ri) of ?) -VP TTO T.O*PV/ vrtiH 
|CHAP. II. 
? irfHALF a century had now elapsed since (lie discorery of Brazil, and so much capital in the course of that time had been vested there, -that these colo nies began to be regarded as jwssessions of consi derable importance. The evils of the present sys tem of government were very great : the governor of every captaincy exercised uncontrolled authority, and consequently abused it; the property and ho nour and lives of the colonists were at the mercy of these lords ; and the people groaned under their intolerable oppression. Their complaints reached the king; he took into consideration the advantages which the country promised, espe cially from -the cultivation of sugar, and the danger there was, lest the French should succeed in es tablishing themselves there, and in winning the natives -to their party ; and he resolved to revoke ihe powers of the several captains, leaving them in possession of their grants, and to appoint a gover nor-general, with full authority, civil and cri minal. 
noiL : A governor- general appointed. The person appointed to this high station was Thome de Housn, a h dalgo, though a bastard, who had been tried and approved in the African and Indian Avars. r&gt;n/2. The first Jesuits. In the same year the Je, suits, who have borne so great a part in the history ;of S. America, first made their appearance. The Tic-tmes of these primary adventurers were, Father Juan de Aspilcueta, Father Antonio Pires, Father Leonardo N lines, and the lay brethren, V inccnte Rodriguez and Diogo Jacome. The following in. stances of the barbarous customs of the natives will give an idea of the ignorance of the minds they had to cultivate. We are informed, that whilst preparations were making for the death of a captive, a woman was appointed to watch him, and to cohabit with him, the captor not scrupling thus -:rto i bestow his sister or his daughter. If she be came pregnant this was what they wished. It was their opinion that the child proceeded wholly from the father, receiving nutrition, indeed, and birth from the mother, but nothing more. This opinion produced a horrible consequence ; the off spring of a captive was suffered to grow up, the circu -
stances of his birth-place and up-growing occasioned no human feelings towards him ; it was always remembered that lie was of the blood and flesh of their enemies, and when they thought him i the best condition they killed and devoured him ; 
the nearest kinsman to the mother officiated as slaughterer, and the first mouthful was given to the mother herself. But human nature partakes too much of that goodness from which it hath pro ceeded, ever 1o become totally perverted. The women often took drugs to cause abortion, that they might be spared the misery of seeing their off spring butchered ; and they often assisted these husbands to escape, laid food for them in the woods, and sometimes fled with them. This happened frequently to the Portuguese prisoners ; the Brazi lians held it dishonourable to fly, and could not always be persuaded to save themselves. A mother also was sometimes found who resolutely defended her child, till he was able to make his way to his father s tribe. But the native Brazilians were not all cannibals. The Tupi race seem to have brought this custom from the interior, and it is found in all the branches of that stock. 
3. Gvarani and Tupi languages. The Tupis of Brazil, the Guaranis of Paraguaj r , and the Omaguas of Peru, (between whom and the nearest Guaranis there intervenes, as llervas says, a chaos of nations), speak dialects of the same tongue, traces of which are found through an extent of 70 degrees. The Guarani is the parent language, I)eing the most artificial ; as the Greek is moFC so than the Latin, the Latin than all the modern dialects which have grown out of its ruins. It bears the marks of a primitive tongue, for it abounds with monosyllables ; one word, as in the Chinese, serves for various meanings, as it is variously accented ; and every word is said to ex plain itself, which probably means that many ar imitative sounds, and that all composites and deri vatives are regularly formed. Yet from the variety of its accentuations, it is the most difficult of all the American languages. The Tupi is spoken along the whole coast of Brazil, and far into the in terior, probably extending over a wider surface than any other of the native American languages. Their names for the numerals were very barbarous, and extended only as far as five ; all beyond wag expressed by help of the fingers. Tupa is their word for father, for the Supreme Being, and for thunder; it past by an easy procees from the first of these meanings to the last, and the barbarous vanity of some tribes compounded from it a name for themselves. In these words their whole theology is at once comprised and explained. 
4. Tupi priests. Their payes
 or priests, lived alone in dark huts, the doors of which were very small, and into which no one dared enter. What ever they wanted was given them. Tliey taught that it was au abominable sin for any one to refuse 
B R AZIL. 
197 
b!s daughter, or any tiling else which they chose to ask ; and few ventured to incur the sin, for if they predicted the death of one who had offended them, the wretch took to his hamrnoc instantly, in such full expectation of dying, that he would neither eat nor drink, and the predic tion was a sentence which faith effectually execu ted. Their mode of quackery was that which is common to most savage conjurers ; they sucked the part affected, and then produced a piece of wood, bone, or other extraneous substance, as what they had extracted by the operation. 
5. The mandioc the common food and drink. The native mode of cultivating the mandioc was rude arid summary ; they cut down the trees, let them lie till they were dry enough to burn, and then planted them anew between the stumps. They ate the dry flour in a manner which baffled all attempts at imitation ; for, taking it between their fingers, they tossed it into their mouths so neatly that not a single grain fell beside. No European ever tried to perform this feat without powdering his face or his clothes, to the amusement of the savages. When the mandioc failed, what they called stick-flour (in Portuguese farinha de pao) was made from the wood of the urucuri-iba, which they cut in pieces and bruised ; and this being less liable to corrupt than the mandioc, is now generally used in the Brazilian ships. The mandioc supplied them also with their banqeting drink. They prepared it by a curious process, which savage man has often been ingenious enough to invent, and never cleanly enough to reject. The roots were sliced, boiled till they became soft, and set aside to cool. The young women then chewed them, after which they were returned into the vessel, which was filled with water, and once more boiled, being stirred the whole time. When this had been continued sufficiently long, the un strained contents were poured into earthen jars of great size, which were buried up to the middle in the floor of the house ; these were closely stopt, and in the course of two days fermentation took place. They had an odd superstition, that if it was made by men it would be good for nothing. They never ate at their drinking parties, nor ever desisted from drinking while one drop of liquor remained; but having exhausted all in one house, -removed to the next, and so on till they had drank out all in the town. Fond as the native Brazilians were of fermented liquors, they were as nice in the choice of water as we are respecting wine, and wondered at the imprudence or ignorance of the Europeans in seeming to be indifferent concerning the quality of what they drank. They preferred 
the sweetest, lightest, and such as deposited no sediment, and they kept it in vessels of porous pot tery, so that it was kept cool by constant &lt;ran3udation. Pure water exposed to the morning dew, and to the air, was a favourite remedy both with the native and Portuguese empirics ; the air and dew were supposed to temper it, and to separate its terrestrial from its aerial parts. It is subject of speculation, whether the philosophy of tins quack ery could have been of savage growth ? 
G. Marriages. No man married till he had taken an enemy, nor was suffered to partake of ttoe drinking-feast while he remained single. As soon as a girl became marriageable, iier hair was cut off and her back scarified, and she wore a neck lace of the teeth of beasts till the tiair had grown again. The scars thus made i
erc considered honourable ornaments. Cotton cords were tied round her waist and round the fleshy part of both arms ; they denoted a state of maidenhood, and if any but a maiden wore them, they were persuaded that the anhanga would fetch her away. This seems to have been a gratuitous superstition; it, cannot have been invented for the purpose of keep ing the women chaste till marriage, for these bands were brokwi without fear, and incontinence was not regarded as an offence. Chastity, like com passion, is one of the virtues of civilization ; the seeds are in us, but will not grow up without culture. Their custom of herding together in large and undivided dormitories produced an obvious and pernicious effect: all decency was destroyed by it j universal lewd ness was the consequence ; and this in its turn led to the most loathsome of all out rages against human nature. If a man was tired of a wife he gave her away, and he took as many as he pleased. The first had some privileges ; she had a separate birth in the dormitory, and a field which she cultivated for her own use. These privileges however did not prevent her from being envious of those who supplanted her ; and the wives who found themselves neglected, consoled themselves by initiating the boys in debauchery. The husbands seem to have known nothing of jealousy; it cannot perhaps exist without love, and love also is a refinement. There prevailed among them the Jewish custom, that the brother or nearest kinsman of the deceased took his widow to wife. 
7. Condition of women among them. The more brutal the tribe, the worse always is the treatment of the women. The Tupinambas were in many respects an improved race; their wives bad some thing more than their due share of labour, but they were uot treated &gt;?ith brutality, and their 
108 
|BRAZIL. 
condition was on the \vliolc happy. They set and dug the inumlioc ; they sowed and gathered the maize. An odd superstition prevailed, that, if a sort of earth-almond, which the Portuguese call amcndoens, was planted by men, it would not grow. The Tupinambas wen- lontl of acting upon a physical theory ; and it is probable, that in this allotment of agricultural labours, they proceeded upon the same hypothesis as the more barbarous savages of the Orinoco, who explained it to Gumiila when he remontrated against it. Father, said they, you do not understand our custom, and that is the reason why you do not like it. Women know how to bring forth, which is a thing that AVC do not know. When they sow and plant, the stalk of maize produces two or three heads, the root of mandioc two or three baskets full, and every thing multiplies in like manner from their hands. Spinning and weaving, for they had a sort of loom, were properly the women s work. I laving taken the cotton from the pod, they pulled it abroad ; no distaff was used; the spindle was about a foot long and a finger thick ; it was passed through a liltle ball, and the thread fastened to the top ; this they twirled between the hands, and M Mt spinning into the air : they could do it as they walked. In this manner they made cords slrong enough for their hammocs, and likewise so fine a thicad, th;it a waistcoat woven of it, which De I .cry took to France, was mistaken there for silk. When their hammoc was dirty, as it must soon have been soiled by the smoke of their everlasting /ires, they bleached it by means of a sort of gourd, rvhidi, when cut in pieces, boiled, and stirred, raised a lather, and being used as soap, made the t-otion white as snow. The women were skilful potter**. They dried their vessels in the sun, then inverted them, and covered them wilh dry bark, to \\liich they set fire, and thus baked them sufficient ly. Many of the American tribes carried this art to great perfection ; there are some who bury their, (lead in jars large enough to receive them creel. The Tupinambas, by means of some white liquid, glazed the inside of their utensils so well, that it is said the potters in France could not do it better. The outside vvas generally finished Avith less care ; those however in Avhich they kept their food were frequently painted in scrolls and flou rishes, intricately intertwisted and nicely execu ted, but after no pattern; nor could they copy what they had once produced. This earthen ware was in common use, and De Lery ob serves, that in this respect the savages were better furnished than those persons in his own country who fed from trenchers and wooden bowls. 
They made baskets both of wicker-work anil : 6r* straw. 
8. Other ctisloms of the Tupi tribes. The men Avere not deficient in ingenuity. They cut the trunk of the Goayambira, a tree which is about the girth of a man s leg, in lengths often or twelve palms, and slipt the bark off whole; this served them as a case for their bows and arroAvs. Bark canoes they made whole. The tree which Avas used for this purpose is called by Stade ygaywera; they took off the bark in one piece, then Keeping the middle straight and stretched by means of thwarts, they curved and contracted the two ends by fire, and the boat Avas made. The bark was about an inch in thickness; the canoe com monly four feet wide, and some 40 in length ; some would carry thirty persons. They seldom Avent more than half a league from the coast, and if the Aveather was bad, they landed and carried the canoe on shore. Their modes of fishing evinced much dexterity ; yet it is remarkable tha.t they had not applied the net to this purpose, as their hammocs were of net-work. They pierced the fish Avith arrows, and if a larger one carried the arrow down, would dive to the depth of six fathoms in pursuit. Such Avas their power in the water that they caught fish by the hand, and did not fear to attack the great water-snake in its OAVII element. Another method Avas by beating the Avater, Avhile some of the parly Avere ready with gourds, scooped like a bowl, to slip under the smaller fry
 as they rose, stunned or stupified, to the sur face. For angling they used a thorn, till hooks Avere introduced among them ; these Avere \vhat the children Avere particularly desirous of ob taining from the Europeans. When they Avcnt on the Avater to angle, it was upon a raft composed of five or six lengths of Avood, about arm thick, fastened together Avith withes," just long and wide enough to support them ; on this they sat Avith their legs extended, and paddled out to sen. Sometimes they dammed a stream and poisoned the water. This art, though generally known among the American Indians, seems no where to have been generally used ; partly per haps because they had discovered that it Avas de structive to the young fry, and also because it requires no exertion of skill, and affords none of the pleasure and uncertainty of pursuit. They pre served fish by drying it on the botican
 (a method which preserves it from becoming putrid, and .from Avorms, but not from a species of mite, Avhich is very destructive), and then reducing it to pow der. In catching monkeys for their European customers they were less ingenious ; they had no 
|BRAZIL. 
199 
better device than to bring tlifi animal down with an arrow, and then heal the wound. They were fond of taming birds and of teaching parrots to talk. Some of these birds were at perfect liberty, and flew whither they would, yet were so familiar with those who fed and fondled them, that they would come from the woods at a call. Lizards were s uttered to live in their houses ; so also -was a large species of harmless snake. Dogs were soon obtained from the Portuguese, and in less than half a century after the discovery of the new world, European poultry were domesticated among half the tribes of South America. The Tupinambas had a method of dying their feathers with Brazil wood : they kept them in large hollow canes, which were closed with wax, to preserve them from a mischievous species of moth, called arauers ; these insectsmade quick work with leather; cuirasses and bucklers were soon skinned by them ; and if the car case of a beast was left uncovered for a single night, they would make the bones clean by the morning. 
9. 7 heir treatment of str&lt;rngers. As soon as a guest arrived at one of their villages, he went, if he was a stranger, to the dwelling of the chief, at the entrance of whose birth a hammoc was swung for him. The chief then came and questioned him, while the others sat round and listened in iilence. The elders afterwards consulted apart concerning him, whether he were an enemy who was come to spy out their weakness : an enemy had little chance of escaping their penetration, and if he were detected he was put to death. But if the new-comer had formerly been a guest, he went to the same family which lie had before visited, and whose privilege it was to exercise the rights of hospitality towards him for ever after : if he be took himself to another host, it was an affront to them. The master of the family resigned to him his own hammoc, and the wife brought him food before they asked any questions. Then the women came round, and seated themselves on the floor, hid their faces with their hands, and began to lament, he also joining in the lamentation, and not unfrequently shedding real tears. This custom prevails extensively among the Indians, and is more natural than mav perhaps immediately be perceived : for the tecfing which first rises is of the lapse of time since their last meeting, of the friends whom they have lost during that interval, and of the changes and chances of human life. It is . remarkable that they had no propensity to thieving. On De Lery s first visit to them, one took his hat and put it on ; another girded on his sword to his naked side ; a third dressed himself in his doublet, lie was a little alarmed at being thus 
undressed, but it was their custom, and every thing was soon restored. They were a grateful race, and remembered that they had received gifts after the giver had forgotten it. They were liberal, as ready to bestow as to ask; whatever the houe contained was at the guest s service, and any one might par take their food. They were Milling, and even watchful to oblige; if an European, whom they liked, was weary when travelling in their com pany, they would cheerfully carry him. 
10. Treatment of the sick, &lt;$r, I? is among the worst parts of their character, that they were un feeling to the sick, and when they thought the case hopeless, neglected to give them food, so that many died rather of want than of disease. In their burials they tied fast the limbs of the dead map, that he might not be able to get up, and infest his friends with his visits ; and whoever happened to have any thing which had belonged to the dead, produced it, that it might be buried with him, lest he should come and claim it. The nearest rela tion dug the grave : when the wife died it was thd husband s office, and he assisted to lay her there. One cause which retarded the improvement of th Tupi tribe was the practice of frequently remov ing their habitations. They never remained longer in one place than the palm thatch of their houses lasted : as soon as that rotted and let in the rain, instead of repairing it, they migrated. This was not because the adjoining soil had been exhausted, but from a persuasion that change of abode was essential to health ; and a superstition, that if they departed from the custom of their forefathers, they should be destroyed. When they removed, the women were the beasts of burthen, and carried the hammocs, pots, wooden pestles and mortars, and all other household stock. The husband only took his weapons, and the wife, says Marcgraff, is loaded like a mule. She swings a great basket behind her by a band which passes over the fore head, carries another on her head, and has several empty gourds, which are for drinking vessels, hanging at her side; one of these serves as a saddle for the child, who sits astride it, and holds on. Being thus equipped, she carries the parrot in one hand, and leads the dog with the other. If it, rained while they were on their way, they fixed two stakes in the ground, and made a thatch with p-din leaves, sufficient against wind and weather for the service of the night. 
11. The first bishop. We shall here resume the thread of our history : The number of Jesuits soon began to increase, arid in the year 1.XT2 there arrived in Brazil 1). Pedro Fernandes Sardinia, as bishop of Brazil; bringing with him priests, j 
200 
|BRAZIL. 
canons, and dignitaries, and church ornaments of every kind for his cathedral : he had studied and graduated at Paris, had held the office of vicar-gene ral in India, and, unhappily for himself, was now sent to Bahia. At this time no better colonists could be sent out than the clergy, for none were employed upon this mission except such as were selected tor their peculiar fitness for the service. From the time of its earliest discovery, the French had frequented the coasts of Brazil, though the first regular attempt at establishing themselves was in the Rio de Janeiro, under Nicholas Durand de Villegagnon, in 1558. The wars of the Portuguese with the French being a subject of little interest, we pass on to the period when the kingdom wasdivided into t\vo governments, which was in the year 1572. 
12. Brazil divided into two governments. Si. Sebastian s was the seat of the new one, which began with the captaincy of Puerto Seguro, and included every thing south of it. The French, driven as they had repeatedly been from Brazil, whenever they attempted to form even a factory there, would not abandon the trade of that coun try. They indeed made a stand at Paraibu in 158, j, but even here they were dislodged. 
13. Intercourse of the English with Jtirazi) . It was about the same time that the subjection of Por tugal to Spain had involved Brazil in hostilities xvitli the English, who till now had never ap peared there as enemies, tlKwgh they had traded with tho Indians before the foundation of St. Sal vador. Be it observed, that Englishmen were hated by all the Spaniards in America, and were considered as pirates. 
14. Their erptd/lions. The first act of hos tility which the j
aglkjh committed in Brazil was under Fenton, and in this they were not the ag gressors ; but Brazil was now become a Spanish colony, and therefore exposed to the depredations of every freebooter. Three years alter Fenton s return, in 1586, another expedition was destined for the S. sea, and its instructions were not equally pacific. The Karl of Cumberland was at the charge of (!iis adventure, of which Robert Withrinirtou had the command ; it was joined by two other privateers, one of which was fitted out by Raleigh. After thisexpedition followed two others, one under Cavendish in 1592, the other under Lancaster in 1594, both inconsiderable alike in their means and intent. 
|CHAP. III. 
1. Maranan and Para formed into a state inde pendent of Brazil. THE wars bet ween the French and the Portuguese up to the year 1624 arc also 
little worthy of note ; but the consequence of them was, that Maranan and Para were separated from the general government of Brazil with the title of cstado or state, and Francisco Coelho de Carvalho was appointed the first governor. The evil days however of Brazil were now drawing on, and the Portuguese, instead of extending their settle ments in that country, were on the point of losing all that they possessed there. 
2. A Dutch company farmed. In 1625 a Dutch company was formed, full powers being given them, and all other subjects of the United States being prohibited during a term of 24 years from trading to America, or to the opposite coast of Africa, between the cape of Good Hope and the tropic of Cancer. The company were to render an account of their proceedings every sixth year. A fleet sailed in December under the command of. Jacob Willekens ; his admiral being the famousPieter Heyne, who from being a common sailor had risen, to that rank. The fleet made for St Salvador, and this capital was taken with com paratively no resistance. The Portuguese were aware of the value of their colonies; 1 00,000 crowns were given by the city of Lisbon towards the expences of government for the deliverance of St. Salvador; the Duke of Braganza made a volun tary contribution of 20,000, the Duke of Caminha of 16,500. The nobles, perceiving that for the first lime the court of Madrid was zealous for the welfare of Portugal, and flattered in that the king had written to them with his own hand request ing their exertions, offered with unexampled rea diness their persons and property to the public service. Men who had held the highest oih ces embarked as volunteers, among others A flbnso de Noronha, who had been viceroy in India; nor was there a noble family in Portugal but had some of its sons in this armament. The capitulation of the Dutch was the natural consequence. 
3. War with the Dutch. hi 1629 a Dutch fleet, consisting of more than fifty sail, under Kenrick Loncq, as general in chief, arrived at Brazil ; Pieter Adrian was admiral; colonel Wardenburg commanded the troops. They sailed from ilolland in small divisions; eight ships, with the general on board, fell iir with the Spanish fleet ofifTenerifre, and, inferior as they were in num bers, beat it off. They reached the cape de Verds in September, but the forces under Wardenburg did not sail from the Texel till late in the succeed ing month. The whole expedition consisted of about 7000 men, half of whom were soldiers. In 1634 the Dutch commissioners, who hail been dis patched to Europe for reinforcements, returned 
|BRAZIL. 
201 
pwrth 35(W) men ; and it is worthy of observation, that the force which Holland sent out to conquer Brazil, exceeded what Spain would send to pro tect it in more than the proportion of ten to one. Four years afterwards, not without several remon strances on the part of the Brazilians, the trade was thrown open, reserving to the company the traffic in slaves, in instruments of war, and in Bra zilian woods. But all persons high in office were prohibited from trading altogether, lest they should abuse their power for the sake of profit. One of the senators returning to Holland about this time, laid before the West India company a detailed account of the state of their conquests. They were now in possession of six provinces, extending from Seregipe to Seara. The first of these had been utt&lt; rly laid waste by Giesselin and Schoppe when til; y conquered it ; the latter had only a single fort garrisoned by forty men, but it sup plied the Dutch sometimes with allies, and with such articles as the natives collected for traffic. Peniambuco, the most important of these captain cies, contained five towns, Garazu or Iguaracu, Olinda, Recife, Bella Pojuca, and Serinhaem ; it had also several villages which were equal to small towns in size. Before the Dutch invasion, there had been 121 sugar- works, each itself a village; but 34 of these were now deserted. In Itamaraca 14 works were still employed, of 23 which flourish ed before the conquest. Paraiba had suffered less ; 18 were at work, and only two had been destroyed. Rio Grande had originally but two, and one was rained. Jn the whole of the Dutch captaincies 120 were going on ; 46 had been stopt. The tenths of their produce were leased at the follow ing rates; those of Pernambuco for 148,500 florins; Itamaraca and Gojanafor 19,000; Paraiba 54,000. A tax called the pensam, upon the Pernambuco sugar-works, was leased for 26,000. The small tenths, as they were called, made the whole amount to 980,900 florins. 
4. W ant of colonists . The country had severely suffered from the Dutch invasion ; large tracts were devastated, and more inhabitants had been cut off, than would in many long years be sup plied by the slow course of nature. The city of Kecife had thriven ; it was the seat of govern ment, the chief military and naval post, and the great commercial mart, and houses were crowded there wherever room could be found to place them. There were Dutchmen who looked on in hope to the days when Recife would be another Tyre ; and could these men have inspired their countrymen with their own generous and enterprising spirit, that anticipation would have been realized. They 
|TOL. I. 
cried aloud for colonists; send over to us, they said, your handicrafts, whose utmost industry at home can scarcely supply for them the absolute wants of life ; here they may speedily enrich them selves. Three, four, and six florins a day, were the wages for builders and carpenters; that kind of mechanical work which the sugar-engines itfquired, was still more highly paid. Three sorts of men, they said, were wanted in Brazil : men of capital, who would speculate in sugar
vorks, ar tificers, and persons in the employ of the com pany, who, when they retired from their offices, would betake themselves to agriculture, and settle themselves as quietly as upon their native soil. With such men the country would soon be as flourishing as the Dutch had found it. 
5. The Jews. The Portuguese were held in subjection only by fear ; but many Portuguese Jews from l.olland had taken their abode in a country where they could speak their own lan guage as well as enjoy their own religion. These were excellent subjects ; they exercised the cha racteristic industry of their original nation, secure of enjoying its fruits under a free government. Some of the Portuguese Brazilians also, gladly throwing off the mask which they had so long been compelled to wear, joined their brethren of the synagogue. The open joy with which they now celebrated their ceremonies attracted too much notice ; it excited horror in the Catholics, and even the Dutch themselves, less liberal than their own laws, pretended that the toleration of Holland did not extend to Brazil ; the senate con ceded to, and perhaps partook of the popular feel ing, and hence arose the edict by which the Jews were ordered to perform their rites more in private. 
6. The savages. The native savages, whose numbers from the Lagoas to the Potengi were esti mated now at less than 2000 fighting men, had little reason to rejoice in their change of masters. No thing but the desire of obtaining European com modities could induce them to work at all, and these commodities were now more easily attainable; yet more work was required from them, because Negroes were scarcer and dearer than they had formerly been, some having faithfully followed kind masters in their emigration, others having gone over to the Dutch to obtain their freedom, others again more wisely joining their brethren at the Palmares. The article in most estimation among them was Osnaburgh linen, with that which was manufactured at Rouen and at Sleinfurt they had been overstocked. The savages never could be persuaded to hire themselves for a longer term than twenty days : a Dutch overseer 
D D 
|SOS 
|BRAZIL. 
resided in every village to keep them to their task, and see that their employers paid them fairly ; before the time expired they generally demanded their wages with a suspicious feeling, for which there was probably enough reason ; and when thev were paid they not unfrequently fled from the unfinished job. Many employments which used to be exercised by Negroes, were now required from them, and they often took to flight in consequence. 7. Dutch missionaries. A few Dutch mission aries laboured to teach them a Lutheran instead of a Popish creed ; but did not succeed in making any proselytes. 
8. Force of the Dutch. The military fosce of the Dutch in Brazil amounted only to 6180 men, to whom it was supposed 1000 Indians might be added. This whole force was required for gar risons ; there was none to spare for pursuing their successes, nor even for defending the country against the marauding parties of the Portuguese. Under any minister but Olivares, Spain would have extirpated them in one campaign. The Dutch senator confessed in his memorial, that they owed their safety more to the negligence of the enemy than to their own strength. * 
9. Their successes. It is true, that in the course of about 13 years, the company had fitted out 800 ships, which cost 90,000,000 of livres, 3,750,000 /. In this space of time they captured 545 vessels belonging to their enemies, which, Avith the cargoes, sold for 180,000,000 of livres, 7,500,000. The dividend had never been below 20 per cent, and had. often risen to 50. They had, by taking advantage of the delays and misconduct of their opponents, subjugated, in the space of seven years, the captainships of Pernambuco, Tamaraca, Paraiba, and Rio Grande. In short, their efforts were attended with such astonishing success in this and other parts of America, that from the time of the consolidation of the West India company in 1624 to 1637, they had destroy ed and taken from the Spaniards and Portuguese money and merchandize of various kinds, to the value of 45,000,000 of florins, or 4,500,000/. of our niont-y; and out of 800 ships fitted out against them by Ilie crewn of Spain, they took or des troyed 547. 
10. FealsofCoun! Maurice. Elated with the ac quisition ot this wealth, which flowed into Amster dam instead of Lisbon, the company had resolved to attempt the conquest of the whole oi the Brazils,and hud entrusted this enterprise to Maurice of Nass.au, a near relation of the Prince of Orange, and who had already greatly distinguished him self in the service ot the stales. The Count, alter 
a very obstinate resistance, defeated the Portu guese, and forced their camp at Porto Cabelo, though strongly entrenched. After this he laid siege to the fortress of Povacaon, and forced its garrison, of 600 men, to surrender. Count Mau rice next took the town of Openeda, on the river of St. Francis, where he erected a fort, as well as another at the mouth of the river, by which he effectually covered his new conquests, after which he returned to Olinda. During his stay in this city, he was sedulously occupied in organizing the civil and military government, and in fitting out two fleets. One of these, under the command of Admiral Lichthart, was ordered to attack the*, coast of Brazil, while the other, commanded by Commodore Hanskins, was destined to a service of still greater importance, that of securing a sta tion on the opposite shore of Africa. With this view, it was resolved to attack the Portuguese castle of St. Goergn de la Minn, on the coast of Guinea, in the neighbourhood of which the Dutch possessed a strong settlement. Commodore Hanskins therefore joined the Dutch governor of this place ou the 25th of July, when, attacking the above-mentioned castle, which was then deemed one of the most formidable in that part of the world, they obliged it, after a siege of some length, to surrender. Having thus succeeded in his enter prise, the commodore returned to Olinda, where he was received by Count Maurice with all that distinction which the achievement merited. The campaign of 1638 was equally glorious and suc cessful on the part of the Dutch ; for in that year the Count took the capital of the captainship of Segerippa, and reduced the whole province under the subjection of the Dutch. These splendid suc cesses induced the natives of Seara, one of the n. captainships, to declare in their favour, and to offer, as the price of their restoration to liberty, to assist them against the Portuguese ; on which, a body of troops being sent to join them, these united forces soon reduced the whole district. Count Maurice now determined to attack St. Salva dor, in the bay of All Saints, which was in some measure considered as the capital of all Brazil ; and with this view he embarked all the troops he could spare for this expedition at Olinda, and landed them in the bay, expecting by the prompt ness of his measures to take the Portuguese by sur prise. He succeeded, indeed, and without much resistance, in making himself master of the strong fort of Albert, of that of St. Bartholomew, and of the celebrated castle of St. Philip; and encouraged by this success, he erected two batteries, with the view of attacking fort Hoses, which covered the 
|BRAZIL. 
203 
city on one side, and a born-work on the other. Between these lay a piece. of ground covered with shrubs and Im.shes, where the Portuguese governor had posted himself with 400 men. TJI is dispo sition was attended with the most serious con sequences to the Dutch ; for, after an obstinate engagement, attempting to retire by that way, they were attacked in the rear, and lost four oflicers of distinction, besides their principal engineer, and 300 of their best men; on which Count Maurice, abandoning the post he had taken, raised the siege with great precipitation. In the mean time the Spanish government sent out, in the beginning of 1640, Count c!e las Torres with a fleet of large and small vessels, amounting to 93 sail, having 12,000 men on. board. Count Maurice awaited his approach, with 41 men of war, within four miles of the coast of Olinda. This last fleet was commanded, under the Count, by Admiral Loos, a man of the most determined courage and bravery. These hostile fleets met and engaged, on the 12th of January, near the island of Tamaraca, and after a contest which lasted four days, the Dutch gained a complete victory. But an event at this time occurred in Europe, which completely changed the state of affairs in Brazil. 
The Portuguese had never been thoroughly sa tisfied with their situation, nor enjoyed much pros perity since their subjugation to the Spanish yoke in 1581. Philip II. it should appear, had deemed it better to reign over an enslaved nation than one owing its allegiance to the affection and good-will of the people; and in almost every instance did he sacrifice the glory of the Portuguese name to those narrow and mistaken ideas of policy. This prince had, however, the address to conceal his real intentions under the most specious and hoijourable pretexts ; but his son, who pursued the same pernicious maxims of government, suffered the Portuguese to be deprived of a number of con quests which had been acquired at the expence of much blood and treasure, and had proved to them a source of glory, power, and riches. The suc cessor of this weak monarch, possessing still less Understanding than even his father, openly at tacked the administration, the laws, and privi leges of the Potuguese people ; and to this impoli tic conduct he is said to have been instigated by the advice of Olivares, with a view to provoke a revolt, that he might obtain over them the rights of a conqueror. 
11. King John IV. A short time however evinced how unwise had been his plans for these repeated outrages j for a conspiracy, which dur 
ing three years had been organizing 1 with uncom mon secrecy, and had united in one interest all the Portuguese whom Spain had laboured to divide, burst out with incredible fury in December 1610, when Philip IV r . was ignominiously expelled from Portugal, and the Duke of Braganza, by title of John [V. pliiced on the throne of his a?:cestors. The example of the capital was soon followed by the rest of the kingdom, as well as by what re mained of the colonies, settled under happier aus pices in Asia, Africa, and America. The new king had scarci-ly ascended the throne before he united his interest and resentments with those of the English, the French, and, in short, with all the enemies of Spain. On the 23d of June 1641, he concluded an offensive and defensive alliance with the United Provinces for Europe, and a 10 years truce for the East and West Indies. Prince Maurice, who had foreseen that such an event would naturally result from the changes which had take place in Portugal, resolved to embrace the present opportunity of regaining the captainship of Segcrippa, which had been wrested from him by the Portuguese. He also reduced the island of Loandn, on the coast of Conga, and that of St. Thomas, whieh lies directly under the equinoctial Jine ; after which he dispatched Admiral Lichthart and Commodore Hanskins with six men of war and an equal number of frigates, in order to reduce the island of Maranan and the town of St. Lewis. Having effected this service, the rest of the districts submitted of course, so that towards the conclusion of the year 1641 the Dutch pos sessed seven out of the 14 captainships into which Brazil was divided. As most of these successes were obtained after the publication of the truce abovementioned, a remonstrance was addressed to the states-general by the Portuguese ambassador, re presenting in strong terms the unjustifiable nature of such proceedings. Some of the places in ques tion they refused, under one specious pretence or another, to relinquish ; and though orders were sent out for the delivering up others, these injunc tions were drawn up in such a vague manner, that most of the Dutch governors in Brazil refused to comply with them. 
12. fiefined policy of the Portuguese. While these unjustifiable proceedings rendered the Portu guese more anxious than ever to expel the Dutch wholly from Brazil, they had recourse to a most wise and refined piece of policy, in order to for ward the accomplishment of their designs. They magnified the wisdom of the Dutch government, apparently confided in their promises, and readily acquiesced in the validity of the excuses which D D 2 
204 
|BRAZIL. 
they offered for their non-performanoe. Thrown off their guard, by what they supposed the friendly dispositions of their neighbours, Count Maurice and the directors of the West India company con ceived they had nothing now to dread, either from the natives or the Portuguese ; but even these arts of their rivals would not probably have led to their final overthrow, had it not been for the nar row and illiberal views of the company itself. Fully confident that, -(he Dutch had secured a firm and permanent settlement in Brazil, they dis patched orders to Count Maurice to adopt such measures as would augment their revenue, by for warding vast cargoes of sugar, and the other com modities of the country : they particularly en joined him not to receive the debts of the com pany in small sums., but to enforce payment all at once. Count Maurice remonstrated against these orders, and represented to the company the incon veniences and distress which would attend their execution. He represented to them, that the country had only enjoyed a short state of tranquil lity, after a long-protracted and expensive war ; that most of the company s debtors were Portu guese, who had settled in their territories, and hi therto acted in the most honourable manner, and therefore ought to be treated with liberality, and not urged to extremities ; but the company were deaf to his arguments. They knew that Brazil was a rich country ; and indulging a truly mer cantile spirit, they could see no reason why all that it produced should not be instantly shipped for Holland. Other parts of Count Maurice s con duct likewise afforded them a subject of discon tent. Opposite to the Receiffe is situated a com modious island, upon which he ordered a town to be built, and well fortified, chiefly out of the ruins of Olinda. This town, to which he gave the name of Mauriceburgh, in a short time became so extensive, that he united it to the Receiffe, which was become the centre of the Dutch commerce, by means of a stone bridge. These improvements, which were undertaken for the public benefit, and witha view of securing the company s capital from accidents, were not relished by the proprietors, as the ex pence attending them amounted to above 40,000/. ; but what created in their minds still greater discontent, was the splendid palace built by Count Maurice for his own use. This magni ficent edifice was erected in such a situation as to command an extensive prospect both by sea and land ; it was surrounded by gardens, elegantly laid out, and planted with citrons, lemons, figs, and other fruit-trees. In its front was a marble battery, rising gradually from the rivei-side, upon 
which were mounted 10 pieces of cannon. The Count also possessed a large villa at a short dis tance in the country, encompassed by fine gardens adorned with fish-ponds, and protected by strong walls ; the whole being so disposed as to serve at once for the purposes of pleasure and the defence of the city, which it covered on that side as a fort. Within the fortifications were also laid out extensive parks and meadows, which, by judicious management, became capable of producing every thing necessary for the subsistence of the garrison, and in the disposition of which, utility and beauty were equally combined. 
13. The Count recalled to Europe. Thus did Count, Maurice expend the treasures, which were the fruits of his conquests and victories, in the im provement of the colony, which an individual of less generosity would have appropriated to his own private advantage. But this disinterested and public-spirited conduct, which ought to have ensured to him the applause and gratitude of his country, appears to have produced a contrary ef fect ; for while thus employed, it was finally re solved to rccal him, as the only means of drawing from the colony such a revenue as would be pro portional to the expectations of the company. In consequence of this order, the Count sailed tor Eu rope with a fleet of 13 large ships, and near 3000 soldiers on board ; while, in conformity with the instructions he had received, and with the econo mical scheme of government to be pursued in fu ture, only 18 companies were left for the defence of the whole of the Dutch settlements. 
|CHAP. IV. 
|AFTER the recal of Count Maurice, the govern ment of the Dutch possessions in Brazil was be stowed on Hamel, a merchant of Amsterdam ; Bassis, a goldsmith of Haerlem ; and Bullestraat, a carpenter of Middleburgh. To this council the decision of all commercial affairs was in future to be confined. 
These successors to the illustrious warrior and statesman who had hitherto ruled the colony, were men of unimpeachable integrity and solid good sense, but with narrow minds, and wholly unac quainted with the science of government. Under their administration the face of affairs became for a short time changed ; every department of com merce seemed to be animated with new life and vigour ; and in the year following, a greater quan tity of sugar and other commodities was sent home to Europe than had ever been received in the same space of time before. 
1 . Impolitic conduct of the Dutch West India com- 
|BRAZIL. 
|SOS 
pany. This dawn of prosperity proved however altogether illusory. They had sent to Holland the very produce of the lands which Count Mau rice had assigned for maintaining the fortifications in a proper state of defence, by which means they were suffered to fall into ruin. They even sold the arms and ammunition, and granted passports on the most easy terms to every soldier who was desirous of returning to the mother country. They compelled the Portuguese, who lived under their jurisdiction, to liquidate their debts to the company all at once, which rendered many of them insolvent ; arid in other cases they forced the cultivators to resign the entire price of their productions, till their demands should be fully sa tisfied. By this conduct the public strength was annihilated, and the Portuguese began to entertain hopes that they might free themselves from the galling bondage of a foreign yoke. The last sti pulation, which deprived them of those comforts and convenicRcies to which they had been accus tomed, above all stimulated them to attempt the recovery of their just rights. 
2. Conspiracy of Viera, At the head of this conspiracy was Juan Fernandez Viera, a Portu guese of obscure birth, who, from being a page to one of the magistrates of Olinda, had risen to be an agent, and afterwards an opulent merchant. His inflexible integrity had gained him universal esteem, and the generosity of his character had at tached to him many warm and sincere friends. It was the intention of Viera and his associates to put their designs in execution on the 24th of June 1645, in the midst of the capital of Pernambuco, at an entertainment to be given at Viera s house, in honour of his marriage with one of the daugh ters of Antonio Cavalcante, who was himself a warm adherent to the cause. To this festival were invited most of the officers and principal people in the service of the company, whom the conspi rators intended to seize, and then immediately at tack the people, who would be wholly unprepared for their detencc. The plot, however, was dis covered at the moment of its execution ; but such was the consternation of the Dutch at this disco very, that Viera and his associates succeeded in escaping into the neighbouring woods, where they formed themselves into a body, and immediately took up arms. Viera now assumed the character of general and commander in chief. His name, his virtues, and the popularity of his projects, soon collected round him the Brazilians, the Portuguese soldiers, and even the colonists. Assisted by Co lonel Diaz, with a few Portuguese troops, and the Brazilian, Cameron, the idol of his people, with a 
numerous body of natives, he fixed his head quarters at Pojug, a town between the Receiffc and cape St. Augustine ; so that he commenced the war in the very heart of the Dutch dominions. Alarmed at these hostile proceedings, the council issued a proclamation, promising pardon to all those who would return to their duty, with the exception of Viera, Cavalcante, and Aragonsa. They gave the command of a few ill-appointed troops to Huys, on whom they conferred the title of general ; and dispatched two captains to the Portuguese viceroy, at the bay of All Saints, to remonstrate against (his infraction of the truce. 
The viceroy received these gentlemen with all the politeness and courtesy which their rank de manded, and replied to them, with much seeming frankness, that he was unquestionably answerable for the conduct of the inhabitants of that part of Brazil under the dominion of Portugal; and if they had broken the truce, he would give the Dutch every satisfaction they could reasonably desire : but if the Portuguese settled in the Dutch territo ries had been induced by oppression or any other cause to take up arms, he did not conceive himself amenable for their conduct. Notwithstanding thia declaration, it is affirmed that he clandestinely en couraged those who had begun hostilities ; and that even on the present occasion he had secretly prevailed on Captain Hoogstrate, one of the gentle men charged with this negociation, to deliver up the important post of St. Augustine, of which he was the governor. 
3. Admiral Bonavides arrives with a fleet. While this negociation was going forward, Gene ral Huys, attacking Colonel Cameron, was de feated with the loss of 100 men. About the same time Admiral Salvador Correa de Bonavides ap peared with a formidable fleet on the coast, on which Admiral Lichthart, though he had with him at the time only five men of war, offered him battle. The Portuguese commander, however, declined the combat, alleging that he had no or ders to act against the Dutch, but only to land a body of men on his sovereign s dominions. But these troops were no sooner landed than they en tered the Dutch territories in a hostile manner, making themselves masters of every place which fell in their way ; on which General Huys was or dered by the council to retreat, but having waited for an officer whom he had dispatched to bring off some valuable effects, and escort a party of ladies to a place of safety, he was surrounded by the Portuguese, who made him and his whole army prisoners. 
4. Bonavides attacked and beaten by Admiral} 
|BRAZIL. 
\_Lichthart Orders were now dispatched to Admi ral .Lichlhnrt to attack the Portuguese ships whereever be could find them, and in consequence of these orders he bad soon an opportunity of ex hibiting a fresh proof of his skill and courage; for with four ships, a frigate, and a bark, lie attacked a Portuguese fleet of 17 sail, captured three of the largest ships, together with the admiral, burnt ami sunk most of the rest, and killed 700 men. On the news of this victory, the hopes of the council began to revive, when they received information that Hoogstrate had. yielded up the post of St. Au gustine. This officer, with the price of his trea chery, raised a regiment of 650 Brazilians, of whom he was made colonel by the Portuguese, and appearing at their head against his country men, behaved with great resolution and fidelity in the service of his new masters. In a short time the Portuguese, owing to the great superiority of their force, made themselves masters of all the strong places in Pernambuco, and at length blocked up the Receiffej the only remaining strong hold of the Dutch. 
5.* Open rupture between Holland cuid Portugal. As soon as the news of these transactions readied Holland, the Portuguese ambassador endeavoured to allay the irritation they hail produced, by re presenting that his most faithful Majesty had no concern in them whatever. Notwithstanding these representations, however, the Dutch government fitted out a fleet of 52 men of war, under the com mand of Admiral Blankert, whom they nominated admiral of Brazil, Guinea, and Angola. He was accompanied on this expedition by Colonels Shuppen and Henderson, who had acquired much celebrity in the service of Count Maurice; and thus an open rupture commenced between Hol land and Portugal. 
The delays and disasters encountered by this fleet on its passage were so great, that it did riot arrive at the Keceiffe, til I the garrison, reduced to the utmost extremity, was on the point of sur rendering. The reinforcements, however, brought by this fleet, enabled the Dutch to protract the war a short time longer, and even to obtain a few trifling advantages. But at the commencement of 1647 the Portuguese again blocked up the Receiffc, where the whole Dutch forces, amounting to only 1800 men, were concentrated. This hand ful of troops made a gallant defence, but at length sallying out to attack the enemy in the open field, they were overpowered by numbers, and defeated with the loss of 1100 men, most of their otlicers, and all their artillery and amunition. 
The progress of the Portuguese about this 
period, became so rapid as to threaten the total ruin of the Dutch affairs in that part of the world ; but these misfortunes, instead of stimulating them to greater exertions, produced a national despon dency that tended to accelerate the destruction which was become inevitable. The province of Zealand recalled Admiral Blankert, who was ac companied on his return by most of the officers who had served under him ; but similar hardships to those they had experienced in the passage out befel them on their return; so that the admiral, as well as several of his officers, died before the fleet arrived in Holland. 
6. Expedition of Admiral Witte TVittezcn. Sieur Shilk, an agent from the governors of Bra zil, who came over at the same time, drew such an affecting picture of affairs in that country, as induced the States to resolve to make a vigorous effort for the preservation of so valuable a settle ment. With this view they issued orders for fit ting out a fleet of 50 large men of war, and for the embarkation of 6000 troops. The command of this expedition was given to Admiral Witte \Vittezen, who was esteemed one of the ablest officers in the Dutch service ; and it was also re* solved to send after him an additional supply of 5 or 6000 more troops. The admiral sailed to* wards the end of the year 1650; and alter en countering very stormy weather on the passage, he at length arrived on the coast of Pernambuco ; but instead of a colony he found only an hospital of sick, maimed, and infirm; and in place of the fortresses he was sent to succour, church-yards filled with the bodies of those brave men who had preceded him, and found their graves in the new world. 
Such being the posture of affairs, the admiral resolved, notwithstanding his orders, to return home withoHt delay ; and this resolution he put immediately into practice, leaving the colony in a -worse situation, if possible, than he found it ; for which conduct he was called to account by the States General, though he found means to justify himself to their satisfaction. In short,, ill-fortune still continued to pursue the Dutch ; and towards the conclusion of the year 1653, the Portuguese government, wha now avowedly assisted Viera, sent a fleet of 16 large men of war to attack the Receiffe by sea, which so dismayed the garrison, that they absolutely refused to fight ; arid in the following year the few remaining republicans who had escaped famine and the sword evacuated Bra zil, in consequence of a capitulation signed the 28th of January 1654. 
7. Evacuation of the Dw/e/i. Thus did the 
|BRAZIL. 
Dutcb, by an ill-judged parsimony, joined to a number of unfortunate and unforeseen circum stances, relinquish a conquest which, under a more liberal policy, might have become one of the richest and most flourishing of the European colonies in the new world. The sensation created in the mother country by the news of this untoward event, and the fury with which they demanded justice against General Sigismund Schuppen, who had commanded in chief many years in Brazil, and was governor of the Receirfe at the time of its surrender, is perfectly inconceivable. The States, in order to protect him and his ollicers from the resentment of an enraged populace, found it ne cessary to send them to prison. In this situation the general earnestly entreated to be suffered to make a public defence ; and in this he recapitu lated with so much clearness his own long and faithful services, and the splendid successes he bad obtained under the administration of Count Maurice, while at the same time he drew such a faithful picture of the misfortunes and hardships which he and his brate companions in arms had lately sustained, that the audience dissolved into tears, and his judges honourably acquitted him. 
8. State of Brazil at that time. To conclude : when count Maurice, after residing eight years in Brazil, relinquished the government, he left seven captainships, one city, 30 large towns, 45 regular fortresses, 90 sail of ships, 3000 regular troops, 20,000 Dutch, 60,000 Negroes, and" about twice the number of native Brazilians: but, after the expenditure of several millions of money, and the destruction of several thousands of lives, there re turned to Holland, in 1655, only between 6 and 700 individuals, and these wholly destitute of property. 
The peace which was a short time before this period concluded between England and the United Provinces, seemed to leave the latter at liberty to attempt the recovery of this valuable settle ment. 
9. Treaty of 1661. But the general expecta tion, which anticipated this event, was disap pointed by the treaty, which put an end to the hostilities between the two powers in 1661, and by which the Brazils were secured to the crown of Portugal, in consideration of 8,000,000 of livres, (333,333/. 6.?. 6rf.), which that government en gaged to pay, either in money or goods, to the United Provinces. 
Since the. above period, the Portuguese have remained in quiet possession of this extensive country. The treaty, which delivered them from 4iie presence of an enemy by whom they had been 
so often humbled, was no sooner executed, than the court of Lisbon began to consider the best means of securing the future tranquillity, and in creasing the riches, of their possessions. 
The Portuguese visited the river Plata short! v after the Spaniards ; but whatever might be their views in this excursion, it does not appear that they endeavoured to form any settlement on it till 1553, at which period they proceeded as fai as Buenos Ayres, and took possession of the n. coast of the Spanish provinces in that quarter. This transaction seems to have been overlooked by the Spanish government, till the court of Lis bon proceeded, in 1000, to found the colony of St. Sacrament, at the extremity of the territory hither to claimed by Spain. Hence arose a new source of jealousy and animosity, which gave rise to the most violent contests between these rival powev.s, and eventually stained the river Plata with blood. 
10. Variance and reconciliation between the Spanish and Portuguese. Spain contended that the new colony was planted in the space allotted to her by the Popes, a truth which the Portuguese attempted not to deny, but they maintained that this tract was yielded up to them by later agree ments, and particularly by the treaty of 1668. After various acts of hostilities, in which the rising walls of the colony had been destroyed, and the Portuguese expelled, it was agreed, in 1681, that they should be re-instated in possession of the post they had been compelled to abandon, but that the inhabitants of Buenos Ayres should have art equal right with themselves to the enjoyment of the disputed territory. 
This provisional treaty was however abrogated during the war which broke out between the two crowns at the commencement of the last century ; in consequence of which, the Portuguese, in 1705, were again expelled from St. Sacrament. It was once more, however, ceded to them by the treaty of Utrecht, as well as the exclusive possession of the whole territory in dispute. 
No sooner had hostilities ceased between these rival crowns, than the inhabitants of St. Sacra ment, and those of Buenos Ayres, impelled by their mutual wants and conveniences, entered into a considerable contraband trade with each other, in which it appears that all parts of Brazil and of Peru, and even some merchants of the mother countries, were more or less engaged. 
11. Interference of old Spain. The Spanish government, uneasy at perceiving the treasures of the new world diverted into any other channel, with that short-sighted policy which marked al! its councils in respect to its South American pos-J 
208 
|BRAZIL. 
sessions, endeavoured as far as possible to limit these unauthorised connections. Asserting that the Portuguese had no right to advance beyond cannon-shot from their own walls, orders were given to occupy the n. banks of the Plata, from its mouth to St. Sacrament, with flocks and herds of cattle. The villages of Maldonado and Montevideo were built, and every other measure adopted to secure the possession of this interme diate domain. 
These unexpected and offensive proceedings on the part of Spain quickly revived those feuds and animosities which had been suspended by their commercial intercourse with the Portuguese, and which in a little time would have been wholly forgotten. A clandestine war, to which the peo ple were stimulated by the agents of their respec tive governments, was carried on for some time, and the two nations were on the brink of an open rupture, when a treaty was proposed, in 1750, that appeared well calculated to terminate the differences between these monarchies. By this treaty the Portuguese agreed to exchange the colony of St. Sacrament, and the territory annex ed to it, for the seven missions established by Spain on the e. coast of the Uruguay. Consisiderable opposition was, however, expected to the execution of this treaty in America. " The Jesuits," saj r s the Abbe Raynal, " who from their earliest origin had opened to themselves a secret road to dominion, might have objected to the dismembering of an empire which owed its ex istence to their labours. Independent of this great interest, they might have thought themselves responsible for the prosperity of a docile set of people, who, by throwing themselves into their arms, bad entrusted them with the care of their future welfare. These tribes had not, besides, been conquered, and therefore when they sub mitted to Spain, they did not give to that crown the right of alienating them from its dominion. Without having reflected on the incontestible rights of nations, they might imagine that it be longed to them alone to determine what was con ducive to their happiness. The horror they were well known to entertain for the Portuguese yoke, was equally capable of leading them astray, or of enlightening them." Whatever may be thought of these speculations, whether the above, or what ever other motives operated on the seven ceded provinces, it is certain that they prepared to repel by force the united armies of Spain and Portugal, which had been sent from Europe to enforce the execution of the treaty. Unfortunately, how ever, their military skill and conduct did not 
equal their love of independence ; for instead of harassing the enemy, and cutting off their sup plies, which they were obliged to procure from a great distance, they imprudently waited for them in the open field. Being defeated in a pitched battle with considerable slaughter, which discon certed their measures, they abandoned their ter ritory without another effort. 
In consequence of this event, the Spaniards conceived themselves warranted to take posses sion of the colony of St. Sacrament, which was, however, resisted by the Portuguese, on the pre tence that the inhabitants of the Uruguay were only dispersed, arid would, in all probability, endeavour to regain a territory from which they had been forcibly expelled. These difficulties re tarded the conclusion of the treaty, which was at length finally broken off in 1761. 
12. Treaties of 1777 and 1778. From that period these deserts once more became the theatre of war and bloodshed, till Portugal, deprived of the assistance of her most powerful allies, was at length forced to submit. By the treaties of 1777 and 1778, she relinquished for ever the colony of St. Sacrament, but received in exchange the terri tory of the river St. Peter, of which she had been formerly deprived. 
While these enterprises were going forward on the Amazon and the Plata, the more peaceful and industrious citizens on the coast of Brazil were endeavouring to increase the useful produc tions of the colony, and to give respectability and permanency to her commercial undertak ings. 
13. State of commerce, mines, Sfc. - Since the prince regent came to the Brazils, the trade has increased greatly. Before this period it was carried on with Europe in large ships, similar to our East Indiamen ; but it is of course now thrown open to all nations. 
Mr. Humboldt, who takes for his authority the work of Correa de Serra, makes the annual produce of the mines of this kingdom amount to 29,900 Spanish marks of pure gold, the value of which, in dollars, is 4,360,000, at 1 45
% dollars to the Spanish mark. This estimate we strongly suspect to be exaggerated, as 16 years ago Bra zil did not furnish 20,000 marks annually, and as many years preceding, the supply from it had been diminishing every year. 
|CHAP. V. 
|THE 14 provinces or captainships have been al ready enumerated by Alcedo. Each of these pro vinces is under the government of a separate com- 
|BRAZIL. 
209 
jjnander; but though these governors arc expected lo conform to the general regulations enacted by the viceroy, they are wholly independent of his authority, since they receive their instructions di rectly from the Portuguese government, and are bound to transmit to Lisbon an account of the busi ness transacted in their several departments. They are only appointed for three years, but their com mission is usually extended beyond that period. They are prohibited by hw from marrying in the country under their jurisdiction, from being con cerned in any branch of trade, from accepting any present whatsoever, from receiving any emoluments for the functions of their office ; and these regulations have been very rigorously ad hered to for several years past. Individuals who voluntarily resign their office, or who are recalled by the government, are obliged to give an account of their conduct to commissioners appointed by the mother country; and the citizens, whatever may be their rank, are competent to impeach them. If they happen to die while in office, the bishop, in conjunction with the commanding officer and the chief magistrate, immediately assume the reins of government till the arrival of a successor. 
The jurisprudence in Brazil is the same as that of the mother country. A judge resides in each district, from whose decision an appeal lies to the superior tribunals of Bahia, Rio dc Janeiro, and even to those of Lisbon, if it be a question of great importance. In the districts of Para and Man nan, they are allowed, however, to appeal directly to the mother country, without being obliged to ap pear before the two intermediate tribunals already mentioned. In criminal cases a different practice is followed. The judge belonging to each parti cular district is empowered to punish petty misde meanours ; while more enormous offences are judged by the governor, assisted by a certain num ber of assessors appointed for this purpose. In every province there is also established an especial tribunal, in order to take cognizance of those lega cies bequeathed to persons residing beyond the seas. They have no fixed salary, but are allowed to deduct five per cent, from such capitals, the remainder being transmitted to Portugal, and de posited in an office appropriated to the purpose. 
The finances of each province are administered by the commandant and four magistrates; and their accounts are annually forwarded to the royal treasury at Lisbonj where they undergo a most minute inspection. The military establishment is here on the same footing as in Portugal and other European countries. The troops are at the dis
|VOL. i. 
posal of the governor for the time being, who is entrusted with the nomination of all the officers under the rank of captain. The militia is in like manner pl.iced under his controul. Jt is com posed of all the citizens indiscriminately, except the hidufaosj or highest order of nobility, who are exempted from every kind of personal service. This body of men furnish their o\m uniforms ; in the interior parts of the country they are only as sembled in cases of absolute necessity ; but at Pernambuco, Bahia, and other parts 0:1 the coast, they are exercised one month every year, diiring which they receive pay from the government. The Negroes and Muhutoes are embodied by them selves, but the Indians are incorporated along with the colonists. The regular troops generally amount to about 8000 men, and the militia to upwards of 30,000. 
The king, as grand-master of the order of Christ, has the sole right to the tithes, as well as to the produce of the crusade; nevertheless, six bishoprics have been established at different times, which are all subordinate to the arch bishopric of Bahia, or Todos Santos, founded in 1552. The prelates, who fill those sees, are all of them Europeans, and their salaries, which are paid by the government, vary from 1200 to 30,000 livres (from 50/. to 1250/.) 
None of the inferior clergy are paid by the go vernment, except the missionaries ; but, exclusive of an annual tribute which they receive from every family, they are paid 40 sols (Is. &/.) for every birth, marriage, and burial ; and in the districts of the mines this emolument is more than doubled. No regular convents are established by law in Brazil ; but in a few of the districts, such as Bahia, and at Rio de Janeiro, some establish ments have been endowed for female devotees. There are, however, more than 20 monasteries belonging to different religious orders, the two richest of which are occupied by Benedictine monks. In the sold provinces these institutions are prohibited by law ; though, while in the pleni tude of their power, the Jesuits had sufficient in fluence to evade this salutary regulation ; but since the period of their expulsion, no other re gular orders have been permitted to settle in those regions. 
Though the professed motive for the conquest of this country was that of converting the natives to Christianity, and liberal provision has been made for maintaining friars to preach the gospel to the Indians, yet of late years not one of these fathers have engaged in this dangerous and per- 
E E 
|BRAZIL. 
f haps hopeless- undertaking. At the period Sir George Slaunton visited this country, a few Ita lian missionaries residing at Rio, he informs us, took some pains to send among the Indians such of their tribe who frequented this city, as they were enabled to gain over to their faith by pre sents, as well as by persuasion, in order by that means to endeavour to convert the Indians scat tered throughout the country. 
No inquisition, or tribunal of the holy office, was ever legally established in the Brazils; never theless the colonists are not wholly independent of the power of that institution. 
In the whole of the Brazils, it is computed that there are at least (300,000 slaves, who have cither been born in Africa, or descended from those originally brought from that country. No particular ordinance exists respecting these slaves, though it is generally understood that they ought to be tried by the common law. About 20,000 are annually imported to keep up the number. The average price is about 301. sterling each. Before being shipped from Africa, a duty of 10 reis per head used to be paid to the queen of Portugal s agent in that country, and which in the whole amounted to about ()0,000/. a year. This sum went to her own private purse, and was not " considered as a p;irt of the public revenue. These ill-fated beings are clothed and fed by their mas ters ; and a small portion of ground being al lotted to each, which they are allowed two days out of the seven to cultivate for their own emolu ment, those among them who are laborious are sometimes by this means enabled to purchase their freedom, and which they have a right to demand at a fixed price, whenever they rind themselves oppressed. To this circumstance it may perhaps be owing that there are few fugitive Negroes in Brazil, and those few arc chiefly to be found in the vicinity of the mines, where they subsist on the productions of the fields. This condition in Brazil is hereditary through the mother, and is not confined to colour, many of them exhibiting every different shade from black to white. Those belonging to the crown are chiefly employed in the diamond mines, and other public works ; seve ral are also attached to the convents. The Bene dictines alone have more than 1000 on their dif ferent plantations. These fathers are of opinion that the Mulattoes, or the offspring between blacks and whites, are generally endowed with much in telligence and ingenuity. Some of these children they have educated and instructed with much care and success; arid one of the friars, with great tri 
umph, mentioned to Sir George Staunton, during his stay in Brazil, that a person of a mixed breed had been lately promoted to a learned professor ship at Lisbon. 
Such of the Negroes, as well as the Mulattoes, who have purchased their liberty, enjoy all the rights of citizens, but they are excluded from the priesthood, and from any civil employment under government, nor can they hold a commission in the army, except in their own battalions. The colonists seldom or never marry a Negro woman, confining themselves merely to forming with them illicit connections, which are sanctioned by the manners of the country. 
Had the Portuguese, instead of introducing Negro slavery, and all its attendant train of evils, into their new possessions, endeavoured, by a wise and enlightened policy, to conciliate the good will of the natives ; had they endeavoured to overcome their natural indolence, by introducing among them a taste for the conveniences of civilized life; had they, in short, endeavoured to render them and the colonists but as one people, then would their presence have proved a blessing to one of tho finest portions of the globe. But such was the in humanity and impolicy of these conquerors of the new world, that no sooner had they gained a se cure footing in Brazil, than they seized upon the Indians, whom they sold in the public markets, and compelled to work like slaves on the different plantations. 
In 1570, Sebastian prohibited any Brazilian from being subjected to slavery, except those who were taken prisoners in a just war ; but this wise regulation was evaded by the Portuguese, who were too indolent to till the lands themselves, and who had, besides, attached some idea of disgrace to this species of labour; and at this period a suf ficient number of Africans had not been imported to answer the demand for cultivators. 
An edict of Philip II. in 1595, which con firmed the above orders, and likewise reduced the term of slavery, in the case of prisoners, to 10 years, was equally disregarded by the colonists. 
In 1605 and 1609, orders were again sent from Europe, which declared the freedom of the Indians ; and Philip III. having some time after learned that this law had been in a great measure disregarded, issued an edict, by which those who infringed it in future should be subjected to heavy penalties. But as these edicts were not more respected than the former, the missionaries be came loud in their complaints respecting the op pression to which the Indian converts were sub- 
|BRE 
jected. These remonstrances induced the new court of Lisbon, in 1617, once more to renew their orders against Brazilian slavery. The internal state of the colony, however, and a rising spirit of independence which began to pervade all ranks among the co onists, induced that weak power to compromise their just decrees, and permit those individuals who were born of a Negro mother and an Indian father, to be retained in slavery. Tired at last with the languid labours of the unfortunate natives, the colonists gradually began to supply their place with African slaves, except in a few of the poorer captainships, where they were inca pable of purchasing them ; and notwithstanding va rious edicts of the government, issued during the early part of the last century, this remnant of bar barism continued to prevail in these districts till 1755, at which period the Indians without excep tion were declared citizens. The same road was opened to them as to their conquerors for the ex ercise of their talents, and they were suffered to aspire to the highest offices and dignities in the colony. Various circumstances, however, pre vented or retarded the good effects which might have been expected to result from this political amelioration of their condition ; but the most powerful of these is, perhaps, the want of a free intercourse between them and the Portuguese. Most of the Indians live in separate villages, over which an European presides, who is invested with the power of directing all their concerns, and of punishing or rewarding them according to their deserts. He, in pursuance of the plan that had been laid down by the Jesuits, but certainly with less regard to the spiritual welfare of these poor creatures, superintends the sale of all commodities in behalf of the community, delivers to the go vernment agents the tenth part of the territorial products, and appoints the portion of labour to be performed by those who have fallen into a state of vassalage; and these agents act under the di rection of a chief, to whom is delegated still more extensive authority. See each captainship, as enu merated at the beginning of this article. 
|BRA/IT , OLD, a ridge of rocks of the s. coast of Nova Scotia, between capes Sable and Negre. 
|BRAZOS, THINIDAD DE LOS, a settlement of the province and government of Antioquia in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; situate on the shore of a river, and at a little distance from the real of mines of San Gen mimo dc Novita. 
|BREAD, a settlement of the island of Barbadocs, i:i the district and parish of Santiago. 
|BREAK, Cape, a point of the w. coast of the 
B RI 
island of Newfoundland, on the side of the point of Toryland. 
|BRENAS, a settlement of the province and government of Venezuela, situate near the coast of Golfete, between the city of Coro and the lake of Maracaibo. 
|BRENTFORD, a city of New England, in the county of New Haven, or New Port, cele brated for its beautiful iron manufactures. 
|BRETON, Cape, an extremity of the e. coast of Royal island, Breton being also the name of the island itself. [See SYDNEY. 
|BRETONES, ISLA DE, an island on the coast of Florida, between Balisa and Candclaria. 
|BREWER, a strait in the Magellanic sea, bounded in part by the island called Statcn Land, which parts it from the straits Le Maire. It was discovered by the Dutch navigator Brewer, about the year 1643. 
|BREWER S Haven, a good harbour, at the n. end of the island of Chiloe, on the coast of Chile, in S. America, arid in the S. Sea. 
|BREWINGTON Fort lies in the township of Mexico, New York, and at the w. end of lake Oneida, about 21 miles s. e. from fort Oswego.J 
|BRIAR Creek, a water of Savannah river, in Georgia. Its mouth is about 50 miles s. e. by s. from Augusta, and 55 n.w. from Savannah. Here Gen. Prevost defeated a party of 2000 Ame ricans, under Gen. Ash, May 3, 1779 ; they had above SOO killed and taken, besides a great num ber drowned in the river and swamps. The whole artillery, baggage, and stores were taken. 1 
|BRIDGE-TOWN, a capital city of the island of Barbadoes, one of the Antilles ; situate on the w. coast of the parish of San Miguel, in the interior part of the bay of Carlisle, which is one league in length, and a league and an half in breadth ; capable of containing 500 vessels. The shores in its vicinity lie extremely low, so that they were formerly inundated ; but they are now, for the most part, left dry. The city is at the en trance of the valley of St. George; it contains about 1200 houses, built nearly all of brick, and is esteemed the finest city in all the islands : the streets are wide, the houses lofty, and one of the streets has much the appearance of Cheapside in London, the rents being here equally as dear as they are there. It has very convenient wharfs for lading and unlading of merchandize, with some strong forts and castles for their defence; but it is much exposed to hurricanes ; and, as the wind is generally in the e. or n. e. point, thee. part of the city is called the windward. The citadel, or 
E E2 
B RI 
fortress, which bears the name of St. Anne, was tin ex pence of 180.000 dollars ; this has on the e. side a small fort, mounted with eight pieces of can non, where are preserved, under the care of a good guard, the magazines of the ammunition and provision. The city is garrisoned by 1200 men, who are called the royal regiment of the infantry guards: it is the scat of the governor, the coun cil, assembly, and court of chancery. At the dis tance of a mile to the n. c. of it the governor has a beautiful house, which was built by the assem bly, called Pi grims, although his ordinary resi dence is in Fontable : the other forts are to the K. namely St. James s, close to the inlet of Steward, with 18 cannon ; Willoughby, with 20 ; and three batteries, lying between the latter and fort Needham, with 20 cannon. The church is as large as a .good-sized cathedral, having a fine organ, a set of bells, and a clock. This city has some good inns and houses of refreshment ; also a post-office, at which monthly foreign mails have been lately established. Its shops and magazines are filled with all kinds of European productions, and it is filled with Englishmen and other foreigners, who come here to merchandize. The air is somewhat damp and unsalutary, owing to the neighbouring lakes; but, nevertheless, the inhabitants, born here, maintain a vigorous and healthy appearance. [This city was burnt down April 18. 1668. It suffered also greatly by fires on Feb. 8. 1756, May 14. 17t&gt;6, and Dec. 27. 1767, at which times the greatest part of the town was destroyed : before these fires it had 1500 houses, mostly brick, very elegant, and said to be the finest and largest in all the Charibbee islands : the town has since been re built. It has a. college, founded and liberally en dowed by Col. Codrington, the only institution of the kind in the West Indies ; but it does not ap pear that its success has answered the designs of the founder. This was the state of the capital of Burbadoes in the summer of 4780. It had scarcely risen from the ashes to which it had been reduce
 by the dreadful fires already mentioned, when it was torn from its foundations, and (lie whole coun try made a scene of desolation, by the storm of the 10th of October 1780, in which above 4000 of the inhabitants miserably perished ; the force of the wind was then so great, as not only to blow down the strongest walls, but even lifted some pieces of cannon oft" the ramparts, and carried them so-ne yards distance; and the damage to the country in general was estimated at 1,320,5047. 15.v. sterling, and it is scarcely yet restored to its former splen dour. [Sec BARBADOLS. 
|BRI 
TBniDGE-TowN, in Cumberland county, district of Maine, having Hebron on the n. w. and Bakerstown (on the ro. side of Androscoggin river) on the 5. e. which three settlements lie on the n. side of Little Androscoggin river, it contains 329 inha bitants, and lies 34 miles n. by n."W. from Port land, and 156 n. e. from Boston. Bridge-town consists of large hills and valleys-; the high land affords red oak, which are often three feet, and sometimes four, in diameter, and GO or 70 feet without any branches. The valleys are covered with rock-maple, bass, ash, birch, pine, and hem lock. There is a curiosity to be seen in Long pond, which lies mostly in Bridge-town, which may afford matter of speculation to the natural philosopher. On the e. side of the pond is a cove which extends about 100 rods farther e. than the general course of the shore ; the bottom is clay, and so shoal that a man may wade 50 rods into the pond. On the bottom of this cove are stones of various sizes, which it is evident, from various circumstances, have an annual motion towards the shore : the proof of this is the mark or track left behind them, and the bodies of clay driven up before them. Some of these stones arc two or three tons weight, and have left a track of several rods behind them ; having, at least, a common cart load of clay before them. The shore of the cove is lined with these stones, which, it would seem, have crawled out of the water. See SEBAGO Pond. 
|BRIDGE-TOWN, the chief town of Cumberland county, New Jersey, and near the centre of it. It is 50 miles s. s. e. of Philadelphia, 80 s. by e. of Trenton, and 145 5. w. of New York. 
|BRIDGE-TOWN, a post-town in Queen Anne s county, Maryland, lies on the w. side of Tuckahoe creek, eight miles e. from Centreville, as far s. e. from Church hill, and 65 s. to. from Philadelphia. Also the name of a town in Kent county, in the same state, situated on the . bank of Chester 
river, -(which separates this county from that of 
Ann), seven miles*. &lt;. from Cross Roads, and four 
s. from Newmarket. 
|BRIDGE-TOWN, in the island of Antigua. See 
Wii.LotJGHBY Bay. BRIDGEWATER, a township in Graff on 
county, New Hampshire, incorporated in 1769, 
and contains 281 inhabitants. 
BI.IDGKWATEH, a township in Somerset comv
ty, New Jersey, which contains 2578 inhabitants, 
including 357 slaves. 
|BRIDGEWATGR, a considerable township in 
Plymouth county, Massachusetts, containing 4975 
|BRI 
inhabitants ; five miles n. e. from Raynham ; about 30 miles . of s. from Boston, in which large quantities of hard ware, nails, &c. arc manu factured. 
Bnn)GEWATEJi,atownshipin\Vindsor county, Vermont, about 5~&gt; miles n. e. of Bennington, con taining 293 inhabitants. 
|BRIDPORT, a township in Addison county, Vermont, on the e. shore of lake Champlain : about 72 miles n. n. w. from Bennington. It-has 449 inhabitants. 
BlilDLlNGTOX. See BURLINGTON. 
BHIG, a small island of the coast of New Jer sey, between the island of Absecon and the port of Great Egg. 
|BRIGANTINE Inlet, on the coast of New Jersey, between Great and Little Egg harbour. 
BRIGGES, a settlement of the island of Barbadoes, in the district and parish of St. George. 
|BRIGIDA, SANTA. See SANTA ISABEL. 
|BRIMFIELD, a township in Hampshire county, Massachusets, situated e. of Connecticut river; having 121 1 inhabitants ; Similes s.e. of Northampton, and 75 w. of Boston. 
BRION, a small island of the gulf of St. Lawrence, one of those of Magdalene, and that which lies most to the n. 
|BRISANS, some sand-baiks near the e. coast of the island of Gnadaloupe; they are two, and are situate opposite the bay of Goave : between them and the small island Mobile is formed the channel called Pasage del Ilomme. 
|BRISANS, a small island, or some rocks close to the n. w. coast of the same island, between the two bays called Grandes Ances du N. W. 
BRISEUAL, PONT A DE, a point on the n. coast of the island of St. Domingo, between that of Isabelica and port Caballo. 
|BRISTOL, a city of the province and colony of Pennsylvania, in the county of Bucks, on the shore of the river Delaware ; 20 miles from Phila delphia, 11 s.s.e. from Newtown, and opposite Burlington : it has no more than 100 houses, but a number of mills of various sorts. Long. 74 56 w. Lat. 40 5 . 
|BRISTOL, a township in Philadelphia county. 
|BRISTOL, a small town in Charles county, Ma ryland. 
|BRISTOL, a township in Addison county, Ver mont, e. of Vergennes, having 211 inhabitants. 
|BRISTOL Bay, on the n. w. coast of N. Ame rica, is formed by the peninsula of Alaska on the s . and s. e. and by cape Newnham on the n. and is very broad and capacious, A river of the same name runs into it from the e.~\ 
21 Z 
|BRISTOL, a new town of New York, in Scholiarie county, incorporated in 1797. 
|BRISTOL, LITTLE, in the island of Barbadoes, which \vas formerly called Spright bay, situate on the shore of a road very convenient for vessels, by which it is much frequented, on account of its great traiHc and commerce. It is well peopled and defended by two castles. It is four leagues distant from its capital. 
|BRISTOL, a township in Lincoln county, dis trict of Maine, having 1718 inhabitants; distant 204 miles n. c. from Boston, and 8 n. of Pernaquid point. 
|BRISTOL, a county in the s. part of Mas sachusetts, e. of a part of the state of Rhode island. It has 15 townships, of which Tauntoa is the chief, and 31,709 inhabitants. The great Sachem Philip resided here (see RAYNHAM); and it was called by the Indians Pawkunnawkutt, from which the nation derived the name, but were sometimes styled the Wamponoags. 
|BRISTOL County, in Rhode island state, con tains the township of Bristol, Warren, and Barrington ; having 32 11 inhabitants, inclusive of 98 slaves. It has Bristol county, in Massachusetts, on the n. e. and Mount Hope bay e. 
|BRISTOL, a sea-port town, and chief of the above county, lies on the w. side of the pen insula called Bristol neck, and on the e. side of Bristol bay, including Popasquash neck, and all the n. and e. parts of Bristol neck, to War ren, n. and to Mount Hope bay, e. It is about three miles from Rhode island ; the ferry from th s. end of the township being included, which is little more than half a mile broad ; 13 miles n. from Newport, 24 s. e. from Providence, and 63 from Boston. Bristol suffered greatly by the ra vages of the late war ; but it is now in a very flou rishing state, having 1406 inhabitants, inclusive of 64 slaves. It is beautiful for situation, a healthy climate, rich soil, and a commodious safe har bour. Onions, in considerable quantities, and a variety of provisions and garden stuff, are raised here for exportation. Lat. 41 35 w. 
|BRISTOL, a township in Hartford county, Con necticut, 16 miles w. of the city of Hartford. 
|BRITAIN, NEW. The country lying round Hudson s bay, or the country of the Esquimaux, comprehending Labrador, New North and South Wales, has obtained the general name of New Bri tain, and is attached to the government of Lower Canada. A superintendantof trade, appointed by the governor-general of the four British provinces, and responsible to him, resides at Labrador. The principal rivers which water this country are tb 
|BRITAIN. 
Wager, Monk, Seal, Pockerekesko, Churchill, Nelson, Hayes, New Severn, Albany, and Moose rivers, all which empty into Hudson and James s bay from the w. and s. The mouths of all the rivers are filled -with shoals, except Churchill s, in which the largest ships may lie ; but 10 miles higher the channel is obstructed by sand banks. All (he rivers, as far as they have been explored, are full of rapids and cataracts, from 10 to GO feet perpendicular. Down these rivers the Indian traders find a quick passage ; but their return is a labour of many months. Copper-mine and M Kenzie s rivers fall into the N. sea. As far inland as the Hudson s bay company have settlements, which is 600 miles to the w. fort of Churchill, at a place called Hudson s house, lat. 53. long. J06 2T w. from London, is flat country : nor is it known how far to the e. the great chain, seen by navigators from the Pacific ocean, branches off. From Moose river, or the bottom of the bay, to cape Churchill, the land is flat, marshy, and wooded with pines, birch, larch, and willows. From cape Churchill to Wager s river the coasts are high and rocky to the very sea, and woodless, except the mouths of Pockerekesko and Seal rivers. The hills on their back are naked, nor are there any trees for a great distance inland. The t. coast is barren, past the efforts of cultivation. The surface is every where uneven, and covered with masses of stone of an amazing size. It is a country of fruitless valleys and frightful mountains, some of an astonishing height. The valleys are full of lakes, formed not of springs, but rain and snow, so chilly as to be productive of a few small trout only. The mountains have here and there a blighted shrub, or a little moss. The valleys are full of crooked stinted trees, pines, fir, birch, and cedars, or rather a species of the juniper. In lat. 60, on this coast, vegetation ceases. The whole shore, like that on the w. is faced with islands at some distance from land. The laudable zeal of the Moravian clergy induced them, in the year 1752, to send missionaries from Greenland to this coun try. They fixed on Nesbit s harbour for their settlement ; but of the first party, some of them were killed, and the others driven away. In 1704, un der the protection of the British government, another attempt was made. The missionaries were well received by the Esquimaux, and the mission goes on with success. The knowledge of these n. seas and countries was OAving to a project started in England for the discovery of a n. w. passage to China and the E. Indies, as early as the year 1576 : since then it has been frequently dropped and as often revived, but never yet com 
pleted. Frobisher, about the year 1576, dfteovered the main of New Britain, or Terra de La brador, and those straits to which he has given his name. In 1585, John Davis sailed from Portsmouth, arid viewed that and the more n. coasts, but he seems never to have entered the bay. Hudson made three? voyages on the same adventure, the first in 1607, the second in 1608, and his third and last in 1610. This bold and judicious navi gator entered the straits that lead into the bayknown by his name, coasted a great part of it, and penetrated to eighty degrees and a half into the heart of the frozen zone. His ardour for the dis covery not being abated by the difficulties he strug gled with in this empire of winter, and world of frost and snow, he staid here until the ensuing spring, and prepared, in the beginning of (611, to pursue his discoveries ; but his crew, who suf fered equal hardships, without the same spirit to support them, mutinied, seized upon him and seven of those who were most faithful to him, and committed them to the fury of the icy seas in an open boat. Hudson and his companions were ei ther swallowed up by the waves, or, gaining the inhospitable coast, were destroyed by the savages ; but, the ship and I he rest of the men returned home. Though the adventurers failed in the original pur pose for which they navigated Hudson s bay, yet the project, even in its failure, has been of great advantage to England. The vast countries which, surround Hudson s bay abound with animals, whose fur and skins are excellent. In 1670, a charter was granted to the Hudson s bay company, which docs not consist of above nine or ten per sons, for the exclusive trade of this bay, and they have acted under it ever since, with great be nefit to the individuals who compose the company, though comparatively with little ad vantage to Bri tain. The company employfour ships and 130 sea men. They have several forts, viz. Prince of Wales fort, Churchill river, Nelson, New Severn, Albany, on the w. side of the bay, and are gar risoned by 186 men. The French, in May 1782, took and destroyed these forts, and the settlements, &c. said to amount to the value of 500,000 . They export commodities to the value of 16,000/. and carry home returns to the value of 29,310 /. which yield to the revenue 37247. This includes the fishery in Hudson s bay. The only attempt to trade to that part which is called Labrador, has been directed towards the fishery. The annual produce of the fishery amounts to upwards of 49,000/. See ESQUIMAUX and CANADA. The whole of the settlements in New Bri tain, including such, as have been mentioned
 
are as follow, which see under their respective heads : Abitibbi, Frederick, East Main and Brunswick houses; Moose fort; Henly, Glou cester, and Osnaburg houses ; and a house on Winnipeg lake; Severn, or New Severn; York fort, or Nelson ; Churchill s fort, or Prince of Wales fort ; South Branch, Hudson s, Manches ter, and Buckingham houses : the last is the westernmost settlement, and lately erected. 
|BRITISH AMERICA. Under the general name of British America, we comprehend the vast extent of country, bounded a. by the United States of America and the Atlantic ocean : e. by the same ocean and Davis s straits, which divide it from Greenland : extending n. to the n. limits of Hudson bay charter, and w. indefinitely ; lying between lat. 42 30 and 70 n.; and long. 50 and 96 w. from Greenwich. British America is divided into four provinces, viz. 1. Upper Ca nada ; 2. Lower Canada, to which are annexed New Britain, or the country lying round Hudson bay, and the island of Cape Breton, which island, in 1784, was formed into a separate government, by the name of Sydney ; 3. New Brunswick ; 4. Nova Scotia, to which is annexed the island of St. John s. Besides these, there is the island of Newfoundland, which is governed by the admiral for the time being, and two lieutenant-governors, who reside at Placentia and St. John s. The troops stationed at Newfoundland, however, are subject to the orders of the governor-general of the four Britisli provinces. The number of people in the whole of the n. British colonies, is estimated by Morse at about 160,000 or 180,000 ; but has, from the time he wrote, most rapidly increased. Since the four provinces have been put under a general governor, the governor of each is styled lieutenant-governor. The residence of the general governor is at Quebec. The following informamation, from Eduards s History of the West In dies, respecting the trade and resources of British America, is inse; ted under this head. The river St. Lawrence remains usually locked up one half of the year ; and although, in 1784, it was con fidently said, that the British provinces would be able in three years to supply all the West Indies with lumber and provisions, yet it was found ne cessary to import lumber and provisions into Nova Scotia from the United States. Thus, in 1790, there were shipped from the United States to Nova Scotia alone, 540,000 slaves and heading, 924,980 feet of boards, 285,000 shingles, and 16,000 hoops, 40,000 bbls. of bread and flour, and 80,000 bushels of grain. 
Newfoundland furnished the British West 
Indies with 806,459 quintals of fish, on an ave rage of four years ending with 1786. The only provisions exported to Jamaica from Canada, Nova Scotia, and St. John s, between 3d of April 1783, -and 26th of October 1784, were 180 bushels of potatoes, and 751 hhds. and about 500 bbls. of salted fish. Of lumber, ths quantity was 510,088 feet, 20 bundles of hoops, and 301,324 shingles ; and on an average of five years, from 1768 to 1772, the whole exports to Jamaica from Canada, Nova Scotia, and St. John s, were only 33 bbls. of flour, 7 hhds. of fish, 8 bbls. of oil, 3 bbls. of tar, pitch, and turpentine, 36,000 shingles and staves, and 27,235 feet of lumber. From the custom-house returns it appears, that of 1208 cargoes of lumber and provisions imported from North America to the British sugar-colonies in 1772, only seven of those cargoes were from Canada and Nova Scotia ; and that of 701 top-sail vessels, and 1681 sloops, which had cleared outwards from North America totheBritisli and foreign West Indies, only two of the top sail vessels, and il of the sloops, were from these provinces; and it has been proved, that in the years 1779, 1780, 1781, and 1782, the scarcity in Canada had been such as to occasion the export of all bread, wheat, and flour, to be prohibited by authority ; and in 1784, when a parliamentary inquiry took place concerning what supplies the West Indies might expect from Canada and Nova Scotia, a ship in the river Thames was actually loading with flour for Quebec. 
|BROADALBIN, a township in Montgomery county, New York, which, by the state census of 1796, contained 277 inhabitants, who are electors. 
|BROAD Bay, in the district of Maine, lies on the line of Lincoln and Hancock counties, bounded by Pemaquid point on the w. and Plea sant point on the &lt;?. On the shore of this bay wag an ancient Dutch settlement. 
|BROAD River is an arm of the sea, which ex tends along the w. and n. w. sides of Beaufort or Port Royal island, on the coast of S. Carolina, and receives Coosa from the n. w. Coosa river may likewise be called an arm of the sea ; its waters extend n. w. and meet those of Broad river round a small island at the mouth of Coosa Hatchee river. These two arms embrace all the islands between Com-, bahee river and Dawfuskee sound, with which also Broad river communicates. Channels be tween Broad river and Coosa form the islands. The entrance through Broad river to Beaufort har bour, one of the best in the state, is between Hil ton s head and St. Philip s point. 
|BROAD River, or Cherakee-haw, a water of Sa vannah river, from the Georgia side* It empties 
216 
into the Savannah at Petersburg!!. At a trifling expence, it nvght be made boatable 25 or 30 miles through i| lt , ues t settleincnts in Wilkrs county. 
BH.OAD River, in S. Carolina, rises by three branches from the M. a;, viz. the Ennorce, Tiger, and Packolet, \vliich unite about 40 miles above the mouth of Saluda river, which, with Broad river, forms Conga ree river. Broad river may be rendered navigable miles in N. Carolina. 
|BROKEN Aiiuo\v, or CLAY-CATSKA, an Indian town in the ("reek country, in West Flo rida, on the KI. side of Chata-Uche river; 12 miles below the Cussitah and Coweta towns, where the river is fordable. See COWETA and FLINT Riven 
|HIIOKI: Point, on the island of Barbadoes, and on the c. coast, between the settlements of Beetle and Howe. 
|BROLLE Cape, a cape on the to. coast of the island of New to und land, on the side of the point of Foreland. 
|BROMLEY, a township in Bennington coun ty, Vermont, about 32 miles n. e. from Benning ton. It has 71 inhabitants. 
B ROM LEY, a town in Sofierset county, New Jersey. 
|BROOKFIELD, in the s. w. part of Wor cester county, Massachusets, is among the first towns as to age, wealth, and numbers, in the county ; containing 3100 inhabitants. The great post-road from Boston to New York runs through it. It is 64 miles w. of Boston, and 27 w. of Wor cester. The Indian name of this town was Qtraboag. The river, which still retains the name, passes through it ; and, like its other streams and ponds, abounds with various kinds of fish. Here is iron ore, and large quantities of stone, which yield copperas, and have a strong vitriolic quality. This town was settled by people from Ips\vich in 1660, and was incorporated in 1673. 
|BHOOKFIELD, a township in Orange county, Vermont, has 421 inhabitants, and lies 80 miles n. from Bennington. 
BuooKFU.Li), a township in Lincoln county, district of Maine, 14 miles above Norridgewalk on Kennebeck river, and was formerly called Sevenmile Brook. 
|BROOKFIELD, a town in Montgomery county, Ne*w York. By the state census of 1796, 160 of its inhabitants are electors. 
BiiooKFiELD, a township in Fairfield county, Connecticut, six miles n. n. e. from Danbury. 
|BROOKHAVEN, a township in Suffolk county, Long island, New York, containing 3224 
inhabitants. Of these, 233 are slaves ; and by the state census of 1796, 535 only are electors. The compact part of the town contains about 40 houses, an Episcopalian, and a Presbyterian church. It is 60 miles e. of New York. 
|BROOKLYN, a pleasant town of Norfolk county, Massachusetts, of about 60 or 70 families, between Cambridge and Roxbury, and separatee! from Boston on the e. by a narrow bay, which setsup 5. from Charles river, and peninsulates Boston. Large quantities of fruits, roots, and other vege tables, are produced in this town for the Boston market. It is a place where gentlemen of fortune and information, retiring from public life, may enjoy a dignified retreat. 
|BROOKLYN, a township in King s county. New York, on the w. end of Long island, having 1603 inhabitants ; of these, 405 are slaves, and 22-i are electors, by the state census of 1796. Here are a Presbyterian church, a Dutch reformed church, a powder magazine, and some elegant houses, which lie chiefly in one street. East river, near a mile broad, separates the town from New York. 
|BROOKLYN, a township in Wyndham county, Connecticut, -about 20 miles n. of Norwich. 
|BROQUEL, a small island of the N. sea, on the coast of the province and government of Darien, within the bay of Mandinga. 
|BROTAS, SAN AMARO DAS, a town of the pro vince and captainship of Seregipe in Brazil. 
|BROTHER/TON, an Indian village adjoin ing New Stockbridge, New York, inhabited by about 150 Indians, who migrated from different parts of Connecticut, under the care of the Rev. Mr. Occom. These Indians receive an annuity of 2160 dollars, which sum is partly appropriated to the purpose of maintaining a school, and partly to compensate a superintendant to transact their busi ness, and to dispose of the remainder of their money for their benefit. 
|BROUGHTON Island lies at the mouth of Alatamaha river in Georgia, and belonged to the late Henry Laurens, Esq. The s. channel, after its separation from the n. descends gently, wind ing by M lntosh and Broughton islands, in its way to the ocean through St. Simon s sound. 
|BROWERS, a strait which some Englishmen thought they had discovered in 1643, in lat. 55* s. to the s. e. of the strait of Maire : There is no land to the s. which can bear the above title : they therefore attached the name to a piece of land lying to the e. n. e. of the island of the Straits, dis covered by Henry W illiam Browers, an English man, in 1665. Its situation is only known by rela
live measurement, being thereby placed in lat. 52 IV s. 
|BROWN, a settlement of the island of Barbadoes, situate near the e. coast, on the s. side. 
|BROWX, a sand-bank on the s. coast of Nova Seotia. It is large, and extends itself from cape Sable to that of Sambro. 
|BROWN S Sound is situated on the n. w. coast of N. America. It was thus named by Cap tain Gray, in 1791, in honour of Samuel Brown, Esq. of Boston. The lands on the c. side of this sound are tolerably level, but rise near the w. moun tains, whose summits out-top the clouds, and whose wintry garb gives them a dreary aspect. The land is well timbered with various sorts of pines. Th animals in the vicinity are deer, wolves, sea-otters, and seals ; the fish, salmon, halibut, and a species of cod, &c. Ducks, brants, shags, & c. are here in plenty in summer. 
|BROWNFIELD, a small settlement in York county, district of Maine, which, together with Suncook, contains 250 inhabitants. 
|BROWNSVILLE, or REDSTONE OLD FORT, is a flourishing post-town in Fayette county, Penn sylvania, on the s. e. bank of Monongahela river, between Dunlap and Redstone creeks ; and next to Pittsburg is the most considerable town in the w. parts of the state. The town is regularly laid out, contains about 100 houses, an Episcopalian and Roman Catholic church, a brewery and distillery. It is connected with Bridgeport, a small village on the opposite side of Dunlap creek, by a bridge 260 feet long. Within a few miles of the town are four Friends meeting-houses, 24 grist, saw, oil, and fulling mills. The trade and emigration to Ken tucky employ boat-builders here very profitably ; above 100 boats of 20 tons each are built annually. Byrd s fort formerly stood here on the s. side of the mouth of Redstone creek, in lat. 40 2 n. long. 79 55 w. ; 37 miles s. from Pittsburgh, 13 s. by c. of Washington, and 341 w. of Phila delphia. 
|BRO YLE, a harbour, cape, and settlement on the c. side of Newfoundland island ; 15 miles n. e. from the settlement of Aquafort, and 30 s. w. from St. John s, the capital. 
|BRULE Isle, a very small island of the island of Newfoundland, situate at the mouth of the bay of La Fortune. 
|BRUNSWICK, a maritime county in Wilming ton district, N. Carolina, containing 3071 in habitants, of whom 1511 are slaves. It is the most southerly county of the state, having S. Carolina on the s. w. and bounded by cape Fear river on the e. Smithville is the seat of justice. 
|VOL. i. 
, the chief town in the above county, situated on the tr. side of cape Fear river; it was formerly the best built in the whole state, and carried on the most extensive trade. It lies 30 miles above the capes, about 9 miles n. of fort Johnson, 17 s. te. of Wilmington, and was for merly the seat of government. In 1780 it was burnt down by the British, and has now only three or four houses and an elegant church in ruins. 
BuuxswicK, a township in Essex county, Ver mont, on the w. bank of Connecticut river, oppo site Stratford in New Hampshire, 
Biu NSWICK, a city in Middlesex county, New Jersey, is situated on the s. a 1 , bank of Rariton river, in a low situation ; the most of the houses being built under a hill which rises a&gt;. of the town. It has between 200 and 300 houses, and about 2500 inhabitants, one half of whom are Dutch. Queen s college was in this city, but is now extinct as a place of instruction. There is a considerable in land trade carried on here. One of the most elegant and expensive bridges in America has been built over the river opposite this city. Brunswick is 18 miles n. c. of Princetovvn, 60 n. c. from Phi ladelphia, and 35 s. a?. from New York. Lat. 40* 30 n. Long. 74 30 a?. 
|BRUNSWICK, in Cumberland county, district of Maine, contains 13
7 inhabitants, and lies n. e. of Portland 30 miles, and of Boston 151. It, is in lat. 43 52 . on the s. side of Merry Meeting bay, and partly on the s. w. side of Androscoggin river. Bowdoin college is to be established in this town. 
|BRUNSWICK, the chief town of Glynn county, Georgia, is situated at the mouth of Turtle river, where it empties into St. Simon s sound. Lnt. 31 10 n. It has a safe harbour, and sulh ciently ca pacious to contain a large fleet. Although there is a bar at the entrance of the harbour, it has depth. of water for the largest ship that swims. The town is regularly laid out, but not yet built. From its advantageous situation, and from the fertility of the back country, it promises to be one of the most commercial and flourishing places in the state. It lies 19 miles 5. of Darien, GO s. s. w. from Savan nah, and 1JO s. c. from Louisville. 
|BRUNSWICK House, one of the Hudson bar company s settlements, situate on Moose river, half way from its mouth ; s. w. from James s bay, and n. e. from lake Superior. Lat. 50 15 ; n. Long. 82 46 o&gt;. 
|BRUNSWICK, NE\V, one of the four British provinces in N. America, is bounded on the s. by the n. shores of the bay of Fundy, and by the river Missiquash to its source, and from thence bj 
F v 
2JS 
a due e, line to Verle bay ; and on the w. by a line to run due n. from the main source of St. Croix river in Passamaquoddy, to the high lands which divide the streams that fall into the river St. Lawrence and the bay of Fundy ; and from thence by the s. boundary of the colony of Quebec, until it touches the sea-shore at the w. extremity of the bay of Chaleur ; then following the course of the sea shore to the bay of Verte, (in the straits of Northumberland), until it meets the termina tion of the e. line, produced from the source of the Mi.ssiquash above-mentioned, including all the islands within the said limits. The chief towns are St. John s, the capital, Fredericktown, St. An drew s, and St. Ann, the present seal of govern ment. The principal rivers are St. John s, Magegadavick, or Eastern river, Dickwasset, St. Croix, Merrimichi, Pctitcodiac, and Memramcook ; all, the three last excepted, empty into Passamaquoddy bay. St. Jtohn s river opens a vast extent of fine country, on which are rich intervales and meadow lands ; most of which are settled and under improve ment. The upland is in general well timbered. The trees are pine and spruce, hemlock and hard wood,principally beech, birch, maple, and some ash. The pines on St. John s river are the largest to be met with in British America, and afford a con siderable supply of masts for the royal navy. The rivers which fall into Passamaquoddy bay have intervales and meadows on their banks, and must formerly have been covered with a large growth of timber, as the remains of Urge trunks are yet to be seen. A racing fire passed through that country, in a very dry season, according to Indian accounts, about 50 years ago, and spread destruction to an immense extent. For other particulars respecting this province, see the articles separately, and NOVA SCOTIA. BUITISH AMERICA, &c. 
BaUNswtcK County, in Virginia, lies between Nottaway and Meherrin rivers, and is about 38 miles long and 35 broad, and contains 12,827 in habitants, including 6776 slaves. 
|BRUSHY, Mo NT AGNES DE, mountains in S. Carolina, at the source of the river Sapona. 
|BRUTUS, a military township in New York, through which runs Seneca river. Here the river receives the waters of Owasco lake, from the s. e. through the towns of Aurelius and Scipio. Brutus lies 1 1 miles n. e. from the n. end. of Cayuga lake, and 19 s. s t e. from lake Ontario. 
|BRUXAS, a point or cape of the isthmus of Daricn, in the N. sea, between the month of the river Cliagre to the s. and Portorelo to the e. ; it runs far into the sea, and the land lies so low that it forms different sand-banks, level with the sur
face of the water, which render the navigation ex tremely dangerous for vessels coming from Chagre and Portovelo. 
|BRUYJNSWICK, a plantation in Ulster coun ty, New York. 
|BRYAN, a county in Georgia, adjoining Cha tham county on the w. and s. w.~\ 
|BRYANT S Lick, a s. e. branch of Green river, the mouth of which is about 27 miles e. of Craig s fort, and 10 e. of Sulphur spring, in Mer cer s county, Kentucky. 
|BRYAR, a river of S. Carolina j it runs e. and enters the Savannah. 
|BUADE. See M.SISAGAN. * M &gt; 
|BUC Bay, in the island of Martinique, one of the Antilles. It is large and capacious, ou the s. e* coast, behind the point of Chaux. 
|BUCALEMU, a small valley of the kingdom of Chile, remarkable for a fountain tbund in it, which rises in an uneven stony ground, at a league s distance from the sea, and gushes out of the sand as if it was boiling. The effects which it iias upon the stomach lor promoting digestion are admirable, and, indeed, it has been proved by experience to be a fine thing for dispelling all crude humours, and preserving the body in constant health. Close to it the regulars of the company of Jesuits had a church and a house for novices. [In its neigh bourhood is found abundance of fine salt. 
|BUCALRMU, a settlement of the province and correginricnto of Rancagua in the same kingdom, situate in the former valley. 
liUCAilALLl Point, on the n. w. coast of N. America, lies in lat. 55 12 n. and long. 133 J 29 w. and forms then, e. side of Dixon s entrance : Washington or Queen Charlotte s islands form its s. w. side. 
|BUCARAMANGA, a settlement and real of gold mines, of the jurisdiction and government of Pamplona in the JNucvo Reyno de Granada. Ilis the residence of the uliatdta mayor, and has a se parate and distinct jurisdiction, including the mines of Las Betas and Montuosa Baxa. it is of a hot temperature, abounding in sugar-cane, to bacco, cotion, cacao, maize, and many other pro ductions. It contains upwards of 150 house keepers, and is one league to the . of the city of /-i s J 
(jriron. 
|HUCARANAO, a great plain of the island of Cuba, with a iortified tower, near the i)la*&gt;a of the Habana, where the English disembarked v, hen they besieged that place in 1762, uniier the command o* Admiral Pocock and the Earl of AlbemarJe. 
|BUCAR\NAO, a river of the same island, which runs into the sou in the above plain. 
|BUD 
|BUCHALEMA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, situate in the serrania. 
|BUCK Harbour, in Hancock county, dis trict of Maine, lies w. of Machias, and contains 61 inhabitants.} 
BucK Island, one of the Lesser Virgin isles, situated on the e. of St. Thomas, in St. James s passage. Lat. 18 15 w. Long. 63 30 w. 
|BUCKINGHAM County, one of those which compose the colony and province of Pennsylvania, and the most northern ; 20 miles distant from Phi ladelphia, and bounded by Canada. 
|BUCKINGHAM House, in New S. Wales, lies n. w. from Hudson house, and stands on the n. side of Saskashawen river, near its source, and is the westernmost of all the Hudson bay company s settlements. Lat. 53 48 n. Long. 110 40 . 
|BUCKLAND, atownship in Hampshire county, Massachusetts, containing 718 inhabitants ; 120 miles w. from Boston. 
|BUCKLESTOWN, in Berkley county, Vir ginia, is a village eight miles distant from Martinsburg, and 250 from Philadelphia. 
|BUCKS, a county and jurisdiction of the co lony and province of Pennsylvania, one of the six which compose the same. [It lies s. w. of Philadelphia, and is separated from Jersey by De laware river, on the s. e. and n. e. and has North ampton county on the n. w. It contains 25,401 inhabitants, including 1 14 slaves. Bucks is a well cultivated county, containing 411,900 acres of land, and is divided into 27 townships, the chief of which is Newtown. It abounds with lime stone, and in some places are found iron and lead ore. There is a remarkable hill in the n. end of the county, called Haycock, in the township of the same name. It is 15 miles in circumference, hav ing a gradual ascent, and from its summit is a de lightful prospect. The waters of Toh ickon creek wash it on all sides except the w.~\ 
|BUCKSTOWN, in Hancock county, district of Maine, on the e. side of Penobscot river, con tains 316 inhabitants, and lies 260 miles n. e. from Boston. 
|BUCKTOWN, in Dorchester county, Mary land, lies between Blackwater and Transquacking creeks, 12 miles from their mouths at Fishing bay, and 8| miles s. e. from Cambridge. 
|BUCKTOWN, a township in Cumberland county, district of Maine, near Portland, containing 453 inhabitants. 
|BUDD 8 Valley, a place in Morris county, New Jersey, situated on the head waters of Rariton. 
|BUDJ, a river of the district and jurisdiction of Tolten Baxo in the kingdom of Chile, which runs w. and enters the sea between the rivers Chile and Imperial. 
|BUEI, an island of the N. sea, opposite the coast, in the bay or gulf of Campechc. It is seven leagues long and three wide, is very fertile, and abounds in fnr ts and cattle. Near it are two other small islands, and these altogether form a bay or port. 
|BUEN-AIRE, one of the Leeward isles in the W. Indies. It is small, lies e. of Cura
oa, and belongs to the Dutch. 
|BUEN-CONSEJO, NUESTRA SENORA DEL, a settlement of the province and government of Tucuman, in the division or district of Chaco. Itis a reduction of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of Jesuits, and which are at present under the protection of the Franciscans. 
|BUEN-SUCESO, a bay on the w. coast of the strait of Maire, between the bay of San Valenzin and cape San Gonzalo, nearly in front of the island of Staten-land. It is large and convenient, but exposed to the s. winds. 
|BUEN-SUCESO, a river which runs e. and enters the sea through the former bay. 
|BUENA-ESPERANZA, a city of the province and government of Paraguay, in the ancient pro vince of Timbues. It was founded by Pedro dc Mendoza in 1537, on the s. shore of the river La Plata ; but nothing remains of it save the name and a small settlement of Indians. 
|BUENA-ESPERANZA, a fort of the kingdom of Chile, built upon the shore of the river Biobio, in the territory of the infidel Indians, who burnt and destroyed it in the war of the year 1601. In its vicinity was a college, which .belonged to the re gulars of the company of Jesuits, and which shared the same fate. 
|BUENA-VENTURA, S. a settlement of the missions, and 
.reduction of infidel Indians belong ing to the religious order of St. Francis, on the shore of the river Guallaga, in the province of Caxamarquilla in Peru. 
|BUENA-VENTURA, S. another settlement, of the head settlement and alcaldta mayor of Toluca in Nueva Espana, where there are 46 families of In* dians. It is at a little distance to the w. of its capital. 
|BUENA-VENTI T RA,S. another, of the head settle ment and alcaldia mayor of Tecali in the same kingdom. It contains 12 families of Indians, and is situate to the *. of its capital. F F 2 
220 
|HUE 
Bu EN A- VENTURA, S. another, of the province and corrcginriento of Canta in Peru. 
|BUENA-VENTURA, S. another, of the head settle ment and alcaldia mayor of Cuiceo in Nueva Espaiia ; it contains 67 families of Indians, who employ themselves in handicraft, in building villas, and in making blankets and cotton garments, in which consists the commerce of the place. In its district also are some rancherias, consisting of 63 families of Spaniards, Mustees, aud Mulatloes, who apply themselves to the breeding of large cattle and mules, in sowing seeds, and in weaving cotton. Five leagues n. of its capital. 
|BUENA VENTURA, S. another, of the missions be longing to the religious of St. Francis, in the pro vince of Coaguila in Nueva Espana. It lies eight leagues from the town of Monclova. 
|BCENA-VENTURA, S. another, oftheprovince and government of California, situate on the sea shore, in the interior of the gulf, or Mar Roxo de Cortes ; and it is the nearest of any to the mouth of the riv r er Colorado, or Del Norte. 
|BUENA-VENTURA, S. another, of the kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya, situate to the s. of the garrison of Janos. It has in it a regular detachment, which lias been lately established for the defence of the frontier bordering upon the infidel Indians. 
|BUENA-VENTURA, S. another, of the province of Los Apaches, situate in a valley of its name. 
|BUEXA-VKNTURA, S. a port of the sierra of Los Apaches, in this province. ,,u , 
|BUENA-VENTURA, S. another, of the S. sea, in the district of the province and government of Choco, where there is a small settlement, subsisting only by means of the vessels which arrive at it ; since it is of a very bad temperature, and difficult to be en tered, and .since the road to the cify of Call is so rough, as to be passed only upon men s shoulders ; a circumstance arising from the inaccessible moun tains which lie in the route. Jt is 36 leagues from lali, and is the staple port of this place, Popayan, Santa Fe, c. Lat. 3 51 n. Long. 76 48 . BL M N A- VENTURA, S. a small island of the N. *ea, situate opposite the entrance of the port of Portobelo, on the side where the rancheria, or meeting of labourers, is established. 
|BUENA-VISTA, SAN SEBASTIAN DE, a city of the province and government of Cartagena, founded towards the a;, by Alonso de Ojeda, in 1509, near the gulf of Uraba or Darien. It was transferred by Alonso de Heredia, in 1531, to another situation, within half a league s distance of the sea, by the same gulf, and of it nothing but ihe ruins and some huts are now to be seen. 
|BUCNA-VTSTA, SAN SEBASTIAN DE, another town, with the dedicatory title of San Joseph, also called Curico, in the province and corregimiento of Maule in the kingdom of Chile ; founded in the year 1742 by the Count Superunda, who was pre sident of that kingdom. It has a convent of Itecolects, or strict observers of St. Francis. 
|BUENA-VISTA, SAN SEBASTIAN DE, another, with the dedicatory title of San Geronirno, of the province and government of Cartagena, in the dis trict of Tolu ; founded in 1776 by the Governor I). Juan Pirn ienta, on the shore of the river Magda len a, at four leagues distance from the town of Maria. BUENA-VISTA, SAN SEBASTIAN DE, another settlement of the province and government of Santa Marta. 
|BUENA-VISTA, SAN SEBASTIAN DE, another, of the province and government of Sonora in Nueva Espana, where there is a garrison for the defence of the frontier. 
|BUENA-VISTA, SAN SEBASTIAN DE, another y with the dedicatory title of San Joseph, called also De los des Posorios, in the province and govern ment of Santa Cruz dc la Sierra, in Peru ; founded by the regulars of the company of Jesuits, with some recruits from the Indians of the nation of the Chiquitos. It was under the care and administra tion of the former until the time of their expulsion. It lies to the n. of the capital. 
|BUENA-VISTA, SAN SEBASTIAN DE, another, with the dedicatory title of San Pedro, in the pro vince and corregimiento of Chayanta or Charcas in Peru. 
|BUENA-VISTA, SAN SEBASTIAN DE, a bay of the w. coast of the island of Newfoundland, where the English have an establishment. 
|BUENA-VISTA, SAN SEBASTIAN DE, another settlement, with the dedicatory title of San Miguel, of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Lagos in Nueva Espana, in the kingdom and bishopric of Nueva Galicia, annexed to the curacy of its capital, to which it is very close. 
|BUENA-VISTA, SAN SEBASTIAN HE, another, of the island and government of Trinidad, situate near the n. coast. 
|BUENA-VISTA, SAN SEBASTIAN DE, another, with the dedicatory title of San Juan Bautista, and of La Plata, of the province and mission of Apolabamba in Peru. 
|BUENA-VISTA, SAN SEBASTTAN DE, another, of the government of Mariquita in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada; annexed to the curacy of the city of Los Remedios. It is of a hot and very unhealthy temperature, situate in a rough uneven country, 
|BUENOS A Y R E S. 
anef one abounding in stagnant waters ; but it has lavaderos or washing places of gold, arid its cli mate abounds in various productions. 
|BUENAS CoSTUMBRES, NcjESTRA SENORA 
|DEL, a settlement of the province and government of Tucuman, situate on the shore of the river Salado. BUENOS AVRES, a province and govern ment of Peru, afterwards erected into a vicerovalty in 1777 ; bounded n. by the province of Para guay, re. by that of Tucumun and the lands of G ran Chaco ; on the s. it extends as far as the straits of Magellan, comprehending a large part of the territory lying zc. of the cordil/era ; and on the e. by the sea. This province formerly apper tained to that of Paraguay, until the year 1621, when it was formed into a separate government, taking the name of the Rio dc la Plata ; its first governor having been Don Diego de Gongora. It was discovered in 1506 by the pilot Juan Diez de Soils. The temperature is for the most part mild, and the soil uncommonly fertile; producing in abundance wheat, seeds, herbs, and frnits,especially peaches, which are extremely delicious. There are such quantities of horned cattle, that their flesh is considered a thing of no value ; and it is custo mary to kill them merely for their hides, these forming a principal branch of commerce. Horses also arc in such quantities as to cost nothing more than the trouble of catching them. There is in this province a great variety of rare animals and exquisitely fine birds : among the former may be reckoned tigers, larger than any found elsewhere in America: the ant-eater, an animal subsisting entirely upon ants, and which, to get at these insects, is provided with a very long and pointed snout, and the chinchilla, about the size of a lapilog, covered with a wool of a light grey colour, and finer than the best silk. This province is, at the present day, very rich and flourishing, for since the galleons have ceased going to Tierra Firrne, this has become the port for all the commerce of the several provinces of Peru. This commerce is conducted on land by means of small waggons drawn by oxen ; large companies being formed for the better defending themselves against the at tacks of the infidel Indians, who inhabit the ex tensive llanos or plains called pampas, which are watered by several rivers. All of these rivers are tri butary to the river of La Plata, one ot the four largest rivers in all America. The capital is the city of La Trinidad de Buenos Ayres, founded on the shore of the river La Plata by Don Pedro de Mendoza. In the year 1535, it was twice aban doned for a time, owing to the invasions of the in fidel Indians, the Jarres, and the Cbarruas, when so 
great was the misery experienced by the inhabitants for want of necessary supplies, that they were re duced to the necessity of eating human flesh. It was first restored by the licentiate Vaca de Castro, governor of Peru, in the year 1542 ; and a second time in 1581, when it was settled, at the command of Philip II. by Don Juan Ortiz de Zarate, go vernor of Paraguay, to the jurisdiction of which it then belonged. Its situation is very beautiful, for on the n. side, looking towards the river, there is, to all appearance, a complete sea, without a pos sibility of discerning the opposite shore, whilst the country around it is delightful, consisting of ex tensive fields covered with perpetual verdure, and bedecked with an infinite number of country houses and villas, which form an agreeable retreat for the inhabitants. The temperature is healthy, and the air pure : The winter is fresh and healthy, and com mences in June. The rains, which are abundant, are accompanied with such violent storms of lightning and thunder, that nothing but a familiarity with them can allay the terror they are calculated to in spire. The heat of the sun in the summer is moderated by the breezes which rise at mid-day. It is very fruitful, and abounds in all the produc tions which convenience or luxury can require. The fruit most common is the peach, the timber of which serves for fuel for the kitchens and ovens, and this article is sometimes brought from a dis tance of 2 to 300 leagues. Vines were once culti vated here. It is the head of the archbishopric of CharcaSy erected in 1620. Its first bishop was D. FT. Pedro de Carranza, of the order of the Carmen. It was the residence of the tribunal of the royal audience, founded in 1663; and which having been abolished a short time after, was re established in 1783. The buildings, although of brick, may vie with any of Europe. It has a good cathedral church and four parishes, which: are, La Concepcion, San Nicolas, Monserrat, and La Piedad ; six convents, two of Franciscans, one of the Observers, and another of the Recolects or Strict Observers, another of St. Dominic, another of La Merced, and a house of entertainment of Bethlemites ; two monasteries of Nuns, one of Capu chins, and the other of St. Catharine ; a house for female orphans, and another for the correction of women ; a college ; and it once had two others, belonging to the Jesuits. It has a beautiful market-place, which is improved and set off by the houses of the city ; and on the side towards the river is a fort, in which the governor and pub lic officers reside : this is well defended by artil lery, and by 21 militia companies of cavalry, each company consisting of 50 men; also by 9 com 
|BUENOS A YRES. 
panies of infantry, of 77 men each. The streets are drawn in a straight line, but arc impassable for carts in the wet season : there are battlements or projections on either side of them for the conve nience of foot-passengers. It may at (he present day be looked upon as the first commercial city in all Spanish America. Its inhabitants amount to 3000 housekeepers. It is 70 leagues from the moulh of the river La Plata. 
|INDEX TO ADDITIONAL INFORMATION CON CERNING BUFNOS AYRES. 
1. General description. 2. Imports and exports. 3. Coinage. 4. Table of the population. 5. Present state. 
1. General description. [BUENOS AYKES is one of the most considerable towns in Sou Hi Ame rica, and the only place of traffic to the s. of Brazil. It is in the s. division and province of La Plata, is well fortified, and defended by a numerous artillery. It has an elegant cathedral, a small Indian church, and about 4000 houses. The houses are generally two stories high, some built of chalk, and others of brick ; most of these are tiled. Buenos Ayres has its name on account of the excellence of the air, and is situated on the s. side of the river La Plata, where it is seven leagues broad, 50 leagues from the sea. The ships get to it by sailing up a river that wants depth, is full of islands, shoals, and rocks ; and where storms are more frequent and dreadful than on the ocean. It is necessary to anchor every night at the spot where they come to ; and on the most moderate days a pilot must go to sound the way for the ship. After having reached within three leagues of the city, the ships are obliged to put their goods on board some light vessel, and to go to refit and wait for their cargoes at Icunado de Barragan, situated seven or eight leagues below. Here we meet with the merchants of Europe and Peru ; but no regular fleet comes here, as to the other parts of Spanish America; two, or at most three, register ships, make the whole of their regular intercourse with Europe. The returns are chiefly gold and silver of Chile and Peru, sugar, and hides. Those who have now and then carried on a contraband trade to this city, have found it more advantageous than any other whatever. The benefit of this contra band has been of late wholly in the hands of the Portuguese, who keep magazines for that purpose in such parts of Brazil as lie near this country. The most valuable commodities come here to be exchanged for European goods, such as Vigona wool from Peru, copper from Coquimbo, gold from Chile, and silver from Potosi. From the towns of Corientes and Paraguay, the former 250, the latter 
500 leagues from Buenos Ayres, are brought hither the finest tobacco, sugars, cotton, thread, yellovr wax, and cotton cloth ; and from Paraguay, the herb so called, and so highly valued, being a kind of tea drank all over S. America by the better sort ; which one branch is computed to amount to 1,000,000 of pieces of eight annually, all paid in goods, no money being allowed to pass here. Azara asserts, that the wheat here produces 16 for 1, at Monte Video 12, and at Paraquay 4. The wheat is considerably smaller than that of Spain ; but the bread extremely good. The average quan tity produced is 2\V,oQQ Jane gas of Castile, 70,000 of which are consumed in the country, and the rest exported to the Havanah, Paraguay, Brazils, and the island of St. Maurice. Bread is, however, by no means the staff of life in this country : meat, and the great variety of roots and other grains with which the country abounds, afford to the poor in habitants an equally healthy and even more nutri tious sustenance. Mendoza, situated at the foot of the Andes of Chile, annually furnishes 3313 bar rels of wine, and St. John s 7942 of brandy, to Buenos Ayres and Monte Video ; but the low lands of Peru, particularly the valley of Pisco, possesses the best vine and olive grounds that are to bo found in the s. continent. The commerce be tween Peru and Buenos Ayres is chiefly for cattle and mules, to an immense value. When the Eng lish had the advantage of the asiento contract, Negro slaves were brought hither by factors, and sold to the Spaniards. Goods are conveyed in carts over the pampas of Buenos Ayres to Mendoza in one month. From thence they cross over the Cordilleras of Chile on mules to San Jago, a dis tance of 80 leagues, and thence in carts to Valpa raiso, 30 leagues, which journey is performed in 15 days. The climate is here healthy, provisions and cattle abundant ; and when the projected road is established through Villarica to the portofTalcahuano in the S. seas, the conveyance will be shortened one-third, and the precarious passage of the Cordilleras
 which can only be made during the summer months, in consequence of the snows, will be avoided. Buenos Ayres is therefore a good na tural deposit for Chile, Peru, and Potosi. 
Buenos Ayres, previous to the war, has afforded 1,000,000 of hides annually, and the meat of 250,000 oxen, sufficing for the consumption of its inhabitants and its exports ; the remainder was of consequence lost, for besides the tallow, the tongue was the only part cured. We are glad to find that the enterprise of some individuals has induced them to salt some of this waste beef, and that the British government, in case of need, may here per- 
|BUENOS AYRES. 
225 
ceive the favourable means of supplying tbeir navy, and even the West India islands. 
Paraguay furnishes to the interior trade of Chile 3,750,000 Ibs. of Paraguay tea, and 60,000 mules, in exchange for wine and brandies, and 150,000 ponchos, &c. Paraguay also furnishes Buenos Ayres with 4,900,000 Ibs. of tea, tobacco, woods, gums, &c. i.i exchange for European luxuries. It is, however, extremely difficult to establish the precise amount of the interior trade of a country wherein the duties of afcabala t the only sure means of ascertaining it, are farmed out to individuals, and where the imports and exports are often landed and shipped in a clandestine manner. 
2. Imports and exports. At Buenos Ayres, the annual importation of Negroes, fro:i, 179*2 to 1796, amounted to 13*38 ; and the number has been pro bably increasing ever since. About 500 are intro duced annually into Peru, and about 100 into Mexico. 
The progress of Buenos Ayres and other Spanish settlements on the river Plata, since they were placed under a separate viceroy of their own, has been most unequivocal. The fate of those pro vinces, for the two preceding centuries, had been singularly hard. Debarred from a free intercourse with Europe, lest the free importation of goods by the river Plata should injure the trade of the gal leons, they had no market for their surplus pro duce, nor means of supplying themselves with fo reign commodities, except by vessels occasionally permitted to trade with them under license, or by the contraband commerce which, as before ob served, they maintained with the Portuguese. Under the influence of this narrow and oppressive system, they languished in poverty and obscurity till 1778, when, after the erection of Buenos Ayres into the capital of a new viceroyalty, the former restrictions on its commerce were removed. 
The following table, extracted from authentic documents, will show the value of its exports du 
ring the four years preceding the rupture with Eng land in 1796. 
In 
Exports from the river Plata. 
Value in dollars. 
1793, 1794, 1795, 1796, 
Annual average, 
3,570,690f
.- 5,564,704 
4,782,3151 
5,058,982| 
Total, 18,976,693 
Annual average from 1748 to 1753, 1,677,250 
According to Humboldt, the dollars imported into Buenos Ay res, in 1803, amounted to 3, 500,000, and the exports consisted of produce to the value of 2,000,000 dollars, besides 5, 000,600 dollars in specie. 
3. Coinage. In the upper provinces of the viceroyalty of Buenos Ayres, are situated many valuable mines of gold and silver, of which the celebrated mine of Potosi is the best known in Eu rope, though it has long ceased to merit the repu tation which it once enjoyed, of being the richest and most abundant mine of the new world. The quantity of the precious metals obtained from these mines, may be estimated by the coinage of the mint of Potosi ; and from the following statements, founded upon the best attainable authorities, it would seem that the amount of their produce has been of late years rapidly increasing. 
Coinage of Potosi. 
|GOLD. SILVER. 
Value in Dollars. Reals. Dollars. Reals. Annual average from 
1780 to 1790, 257,247 1 3,960,010 7 
Coinage of 179 J, - 257,526 4,365,175 
Coinage of 1801, - 481,278 7,700,448 
|TABLJE 
934 
|BUENOS AYRES. 
|TABLE of the Population of the Government of Buenos Ayres, according to the Work 
of AZARA, published in 1809. 
N. B. The letter c. indicates citjr; t. town; p. parish; g. settlement of Indians; f. military fort; and d. siguilies doubtful. 
Names of the cities, towns, settlements, and parishes. 
Years of their oundalion
Latitude south. 
Longitude west from London. 
Number of souls. 
S. Josef, s. . 
1633 1631 16:,2 1620 1626 1633 J629 E627 1632 1691 1632 1698 1707 1626 1629 1632 1690 1588 1588 1588 1770 1748 1795 1765 1743 1749 J580 1677 d 1C50 1535 1730 d 1730 1730 1730 1769 1730 d. 1772 1772 1730 1780 1730 1780 1749 
. / // 
27 45 52 27 44 36 27 54 43 27 58 44 27 53 44 27 47 37 27 51 8 28 12 28 25 6 28 27 24 28 32 26 28 26 56 28 17 19 29 31 47 29 29 1 28 32 49 28 39 51 27 27 31 27 17 28 59 30 28 28 49 29 10 20 29 43 30 29 57 30 32 15 31 9 20 34 46 35 33 38 45 33 23 56 34 36 28 35 5 6 35 2 20 34 40 10 34 28 34 24 56 34 36 34 25 56 34 16 22 34 14 2 33 39 47 34 4 JO 33 53 28 33 19 
Carried fo 
o / // 
55 48 57 55 57 12 55 49 19 55 37 13" 55 26 4 55 20 2 55 14 4 55 19 53 55 2 14 54 48 30 54 39 27 54 28 40 55 40 12 56 38 28 56 28 28 55 57 43 55 55 58 58 35 12 58 11 38 58 58 2 58 51 40 59 23 46 60 20 30 60 17 60 7 15 60 19 59 46 30 58 16 50 58 18 20 58 20 30 57 35 40 58 26 30 59 54 45 58 23 10 58 33 30 59 20 30 59 13 40 59 23 30 59 47 10 59 53 60 27 10 60 43 5 60 25 4 
1352 1280 182} , 2104 911 937 1379 3667 3500 1 L &gt;75 1973 2388 1986 5500 2500 1500 1800 60 712 192 218 482 600 643 1308 67 d 900 d 800 d 1700 40000 3000 1750 1100 2000 2000 1500 2058 1772 2300 
d 60 1728 1200 4220 
S. Carlos, s 
Aposteles, s. , 
/L&lt;oncepcion, 5 ; 
S. Maria la Mayor, s. . . T . " Mart ires, s. . . . ". . 
 . " * 
S. Xavier, s. . . . . . - i- . 
S. Nicolas, s. . . * 
S. Luis, s 
S. Lozenzo, 5 
S. Miguel, s. . . . f ". . v i I 
S. Juan, s. . . .
. . . . 
S. -Angel, s. 
La Cruz, s 
Srn . loine, s. . , ... 
Guacaras, s . . , ( . . ". . 
Ytaty, s. 
Garzas, s. . . . . . 
. . 
S. Gt ronimo, s. . . ***. . ; 
Ynispin, or Jesus Nazareno, s. . S. Pedro, * 
Baradeio, s 
On ilmes , 5. . . . ". . *. 
S. Domingo Soriano, 5. . . 
\ Buenos Ay res, c. . . . 1 .
 
Magdalena, p. . . *. L . 
S. Vincente, p. * t
 ( . . , . 
S. Ysidro, p. ....... 
Conchas, p. ....... 
Lusan, t 
Pilar, p 
Cruz, p. . 
Areco, t 
S. Pedro, p 
Arrecife, t 
" S. Nicolas, t 
rward . . . 109783 
|BUENOS AYRES. 
225 
Names of the cities, towns, settlements, and parishes. 
Years of 
their bundation. 
Latitude south. 
Longitude west from London. 
Number of souls. 
Brought forward . 
Choscumus,/. , 
Ranches, f ........ 
Monte, /. 
Lujan,/
Salto,/. 
 
Roxas,/. ...... . . . 
Melincue, p. . . . . . . 
 
Montevideo, c 1724 
Piedras, p. . . 1780 
Canelon, t 1778 
S. Lucia, t 1781 
S. Josef, t 1781 
Colla, s 1780 
Colonia, t. . . *V, . . . 1679 
Real Car los, p 
 1680 
Vivoras, p r ~ 1680 
Espinillo, p 1680 
Mercedes, or Capilla Nueva, p. 1791 
Martin Garcia, p 4 
Arroyo de la China, &lt;..... 1780 
Gualegaichu, t 1780 
Gualeguay, t 1780 
Pando, p d. 1782 
Maldonado, c 1730 
S. Carlos, t 1778 
Minas, t 1783 
Rocha, t 1800 
S. Teresa,/. 1762 
S. Miguel,/. 1733 
Meto, t 1*95 
S. Tecla,/. 17/3 
Batoby, t ,- 1800 
Corrientes, c. . . ". I. x 1588 
Caacaty, ;;. . . .-,* . "7 .-* 1780 
Burucuya, p 1780 
Aladas, p 1780 
S. Roque,p 1781 
Santa Fe, c 1573 
Baxada, t 1730 
Novcya, p 1393 
Cororida, t 1768 
Rosario, t 1730 
Rioncyro, t 1781 
Maluinas, p 
109783 
35 35 35 34 34 34 S3 34 34 34 34 34 34 34 34 33 33 33 34 32 32 33 34 34 34 34 34 33 33 32 31 30 27 &lt;/.27 d.27 28 28 31 31 32 31 32 40 51 
33 40 
30 30 
25 40 
39 30 
18 45 
11 30 
44 30 54 36 
45 24 
35 23 
30 35 22 17 
19 39 
26 10 25 8 
56 20 33 30 
12 30 11 5 29 18 59 15 
8 19 
41 18 
53 12 
44 45 
21 30 
22 58 5 44 44 
23 14 
16 8 
36 1 
27 21 
31 
57 50 15 20 33 33 
40 29 44 15 
17 43 
58 47 56 4 50 
32 
58 2 
58 16 
59 50 
59 44 
60 34 
60 59 
61 49 56 10 56 12 56 14 56 20 
56 53 
57 21 57 49 
57 49 
58 ir 58 12 
57 57 
58 13 58 13 
58 27 
59 28 55 49 54 47 
54 44 
55 5 54 12 53 34 
53 35 
54 17 
54 14 
55 46 58 46 58 1 58 15 58 30 58 37 
60 52 60 44 60 4 60 1 60 51 
62 23 57 37 
15 14 54 50 40 50 56 42 
4 55 41 22 43 15 56 30 15 40 40 55 
8 10 
4 44 
4 34 58 15 30 44 24 24 
25 20 30 30 30 34 50 20 30 30 
1000 800 750 2000 750 740 400 15245 800 3500 460 350 300 d* 300 - 200 1500 1500 d- 850 200 d-3500 rf-2000 
300 2000 400 450 350 d. 120 40 820 130 948 4500 d. 600 356 d. 1200 1S90 4000 3000 d. 1500 2000 3500 d. 300 d. 600 
Total .... 176832 
|VOL. I. 
G C 
226 
|BUENOS AYRES. 
The population in Azara s table of Paraguay, of the above date, is enumerated at 97,480 souls ; and the total population of the vice-royalty of La Plata, 1803, appears, from the authority of the same author, and of Alvcar de Ponce, to have amounted to 972,000 souls. 
5. Present state. In June 1806, a British expe dition entered the waters of the Plata, and took possession of the capital on the 27th of the same month. The circumstances attending it are so frcsli in the minds of the public that it is unnecessary for us to dwell upon them further than to record, that it gave rise to the famous trial of General Whiteleck. The succeeding history of this place will be found under the article La Plata : suffice it to observe for the present, that Buenos Ayres is a city, of all others in America, rising into notice ; and that it is daily the scene of great warfare and disquiet, owing to the separate interests of the old regime, or Spanish government, and oi the provin cial junta, installed on the 26th August 1808, and, as it is said, amidst the general acclamation of the inhabitants. Long. 58 26 . Lat. S439. 
Bishops who have presided in Buenos Ayres. 
1. Don Fr. Pedro Carranza, of the order of Nuestra Seiiora del Carmen, born in Seville, where, at the age of 15 years, he took the habit, studied, and read arts and theology ; obtained a degree of master of arts in the university of Osuna, and dedicated himself to the pulpit with great ap plause ; was prior of the convents of Antequera, Ecija, Jaen, and Granada, difinidor of his pro
vince, provincial and consultor of the holy office, and assisted at two general chapters : present ed to the bishopric of La Plata in 1627 ; he died in 1632. 
2. Don Fr. Christobal de Aresti, of the religious of the Benedictine order, native of Vallndolid, took the habit in the royal monastery of San Ju lian de Samos, in Galicia, in 1585 ; was lecturer of arts in San Vincente de Oviedo, abbot of Corneliana, public professor of writing, twice abbot of Samos, and difinidor general : elected bishop of Paraguay, and promoted to this in 1635 ; he died in 1640. 
3. Don. Fr. Christobal de la Mancha y Velasco, a monk of the order of St. Dominic, native of Luna, who was lecturer in theology in the con vent of Cuzco, 12 years a teacher in various settlements, an eminent theologist and preacher, callficador oHhe supreme council of the inquisition, procurator-general of his province to the courts of Madrid and Rome : he returned to the Indies with the commission of visiting the churches of the 
kingdom of Chile, and was elected bishop of Bue nos Ayres in 1641 ; he died in 1658. 
4. Don Antonio de Az .-ona de Imberto, elected in 1660: he died in 1681. 
5. Don Fr. J nan Bautista Sicardo, a monk of the order of SL Augustin ; elected in 1704 : he died in 1708. 
6. Don Fr. Pedro Faxardo, of the order of the most Holy Trinity ; elected in 1708 : he died in 1730. 
7. Don Juan dc Arregui, elected in 1731 : he died in 1734. 
8. Don Fr. Joseph dc Peralta, of the order of St. Dominic; elected in 1740 : he died in 1746. 
9. Don Cayetano Pacheeo de Cardenas, eu-cted in 174 i : he renounced his p.ace, and in his stead was elected, 
10. Don Cayetano Marcellano y Agramont, in 1747 : promoted to the archbishopric of Charcas in 1758. 
11. Don Joseph Antonio Basurto y H.rrera, elected in 1558 : he died in 1702. 
J2. Don Manuel de la Torre, elected in 1763: he died in 1778. 
13. Don Fr. Sebastian Malbar, of the order of St. Francis ; elected in 1779, and promoted to the archbMiopric of Santiago, in Spain, in 1784. 
14. Don Manuel Azanior y Ramirez, elected in 1785. ; 
Governors of Buenos Ayres and the Rio de La Plata. 
1. Don Pedro de Mendoza ; who, after having served with great renown in the armies of the Em peror Charles V. distinguishing himself in the tak ing and sacking of Rome, obtained of his Majesty permission to undertake the conquest of the Rio de la Plata ; whither he set out with a power ful armament, 1535 ; he died at sea, on his re turn to Spain, in 1537. 
2. Don Juan dc Ayolas, who took the govern ment upon the decease of the predecessor ; and who, upon the news having reached Spain, had immediately a nomination sent over to him in 1538; he was killed by the Payaguas Indians in 1539. 
3. Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca, well-known on account of his ship-wrecks in Florida, and his travels as far as Mexico : he was elected to this government, for which he embarked in J540 ; but being persecuted Avith calamities and misfortunes, he returned to Spain in 1545, where, being ac quitted by the Council of the Indies, he was des tined by the king to the office of -oidor of the royal audience of Seville. 
|BUENOS AYRES. 
227 
4. Don Domingo Martinez de Irala, who was in the interim governor, namely, during the ab sence of the predecessor, and remained in office till 175S, when he died. 
5. Don Gonzalo de Mendoza, nominated provi sionally : he governed until he was deposed, in 1565, by the royal audience of Lima ; and in the interim was nominated, 
6 Don Juan Ortiz de Zarate, an officer of much credit, whose appointment was confirmed by the Emperor in 1573 : he governed until J581, when he died, leaving as governor in the interim his nephew, 
7. Don Diego de Mendieta, who entered upon the government immediately after the death of his uncle : but he was so much disliked, and caused such disturbances, that he was obliged to throw it up, and to send back his credentials to Spain ; but endeavouring to secrete himself as he was proceed ing home from a tour, he was killed by some Indians in 1596. 
8. Hernando Arias de Saavedra ; in whose lime the regulars of the company were established in the city of Buenos Ay res : he entered in 1598, and governed with such address, and so much with the good will of all parties, that he held the office five successive times, and exercised it until 1609. 
9. Don Diego Martin Negroni, who entered in the above year, and governed until 1620. 
11. Don Diego de Gongora ; in whose time the government of Buenos Ayres and Paraguay were divided into two governments, there being regular limits to their respective jurisdictions : he entered in the above-mentioned year, 1620. 
j 2. Don Luis de Cespedes ; who had governed in Paraguay, and entered this government in 1626, where he remained until 1635. 
13. Don Pedro Estevan de Avila ; who governed from the above year until 1644, when arrived his successor, 
14. Don Jacinto de Laris, knight of the order of Santiago, until the year 1652. 
15. Don Pedro Baigorri, until 1663. 
16. Don Alonso Mercado de Villacorta, knight of the order of Santiago; promoted from the go vernment of Tucuman to this, which he exercised until 1664, when he was commanded by the king to leave it, and resume his former office : he was succeeded by, 
17. Don Juan Martinez de Salazar, who took possession in 1665, and governed until 1668. 
18. Don Joseph de Garro, who entered in 1669 : in his time the establishment of the Portu guese took place in the colony of Sacramento; 
from whence he dislodged them by order of the king in 1680 ; and in the same year the govern ment \vas delivered up to his successor, 
19. Don Andres de Robles, colonel of infantry ; in whose time the Portuguese returned to re establish and people the colony : he governed until 1703. 
20. Don Juan Alfonso de Yaldes Inclan, colo nel of militia : he entered in the above year, with fresh orders to dislodge the Portuguese from the colony, which he executed, having sent for this purpose the serjeant-major, Don Baltasar Garica Ros, in 1705 ; he governed until 1710. 
21. Don Manuel de Velasco, until 1715. 
22. Don Bruno Mauricio de Zavala, brigadier of the royal armies, an officer of distinguished merit : he was captain of grenadiers of the regi ment of Spanish guards, when he was sent for on account of the revolutions that were taking place in Paraguay, between Joseph de Antequera, provi sional governor, and the regulars of the company ; in this business he manifested talent, prudence, and military knowledge : he was governor until the year 1734, when he died, having first, how ever, been promoted to the presidency of Chile, and to the rank of field-marshal. 
23. Don Miguel de Salcedo, brigadier in the royal armies : he was appointed here in 1735, and governed until 1738, when arrived his suc cessor, 
24. Don Domingo Ortiz de Rozas, who was colonel of a regiment of infantry in Spain, also a brigadier, and exalted to the rank of field-mar shal in this government, which he held until 1746. 
25. Don Joseph de Andonaegui, brigadier iu the royal armies : he took possession in 1746, and governed until 1756, when, from the resist ance made by the Indian settlements ceded to the crown of Portugal, in change for the colony of Sacremento, there was nominated for his suc cessor, 
26. Don Pedro Ceballos, lieutenant-general in the royal armies, comendador of Sagm and Senet, in the order of Santiago, and military command ant of the body of invalids of Madrid : he passed over with a thousand regular troops to oblige the Indians to surrender ; but not being able to ac complish his purpose, returned to Spain in 1756, and delivered the government to, 
27. Don Francisco Bucareli and Ursua, lieute nant-general in the royal armies, comendador of Almendralejo, of the order of Santiago : he entered Buenos Ayres in the aforesaid year, 1756, at which time the banishment of the regulars of the com
G G 2 
28 
pany of Jesuits took place: he returned to Spaiu in 1770, and the government was delivered to, 
28. Don Juan Joseph de Y r ertiz, fie Id- marshal of the royal armies, comcndadorjpf Puerto Llano, of the order of Calatrava, captain of grenadiers in the regiment of Spanish guards, and elected for his acknowledged merit ; renowned uo less in the late war than in the rebellion of the Indians. In his time the government was raised into a viccroyalfy, and he was commissioned to make the di vision of the provinces, having been the first who held this important office with the rank of lieute nant-general : lie returned to Spain in 1784. 
29. Don Nicolas del Campo, marquis of Loreto, a brigadier, who had served as a colonel in a mi litia regiment in the provinces of Seville: he was second viceroy, and took possession of his office in 1784. 
|BUEY, SALTO DEI,, a river of the province nnd corregimiento of Piura in Peru. It runs into the sea at the bay of Tumbez. 
BlIFADERO, a port of the island of Marga rita, in the n. coast, and to the e. of the port of Tnnar. 
|BUFADRRO, another port of the S. sea, on the coast of the province and corregimiento of Truxillo in Peru. 
|BUFFALOE Lake, in British America, is near Copper-mine river. Lat. 67 12 n. Long, from Greenwich 111 w. The Copper-mine Indians inhabit this country. 
|BUFFALOE Lick. See GUEAT Ridge. 
|BUFFALOE Creek, in New York, is a water of Niagara river from the e. into which it empties, near its mouth, opposite lake Erie. The Se neca Indians have a town five miles from its month, wliich is able to furnish 80 warriors. 
|BUFFALOE, a township zu. of Susquehanna ri ver, in Pennsylvania. See NORTHUMBERLAND County. 
|BUFFALOE River, in the Tennesseegovernment, runs s. w. into Tennessee river. 
|BUFFALOE River, a water of the Ohio, which it enters at the s. bank, 60 miles above the mouth of the W abash. 
|BUFFALOE Low-lands, a tract of land in Nor thumberland county, Pennsylvania, about 88 miles s. e. from Presque isle. 
|BUFFALOE Swamp, in Pennsylvania. See GREAT Swamp. 
|BUFFLE-NOIR, a river of S. Carolina: it runs e. and enters the Chicachas. 
|BUFFLES, a river of Louisiana, which runs .. and enters the Chicachas. 
|BUFFLES, a small river of Virginia, which runs n. w. and enters the Ohio, between the rivers Conhaway, Large and Little. 
|BUGA, GUAOALAXARA DE, a small city of the province and government of Popayan. It is of a hot and moist temperature, situate in a beautiful valley, which is watered and fertilized by several small rivulets ; from whence it abounds in every kind of production : it is small, moderately peopled, and not without commerce : it was founded by Captain Domingo Lozano in 1588 ; is inhabited by some noble families, and has a con vent of St. Francis, another of St. Augustin, and a college, which belonged to the regulars of the company of Jesuits. It suffered much by an earthquake in 1766. It is washed on the a , side by the river Cauca, this being scarcely at a league s distance from the city. It is 15 leagues to the n. e. of its capital. Lat. 2 3 58 n. 
|BUGAVA, SAN JOSEPH DE, a settlement of the district of Chiriqui, in the province and go vernment of Veragua, and kingdom of Tierra Firme. It is two leagues from its head settlement, in the royal road which leads to the province of Costa-rica. 
|BUIA, a settlement of the missions belonging to the religious order of St. Francis, in the province of Culiacan, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya, situate between the rivers Elota and lalaba. It produces maize, French beans, honey, and wax, in abund ance. 
BUISACO, a large and rapid river of the king dom of Quito, in the province of Pasto : it runs from e. to w. leaving this city, and then turning its course n. enters on the s. side the river Juanambu. 
|BUISACO, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Pastes, in the jurisdiction and district of the presidency of Quito. It is situate on the shore of the large river of Juanambu, which is passed en tara-cita, where every person pays a silver real ; the same being the toll for a horse, bundle, coffer, chest, &c. It is submitted to the care of the Indians of this settlement to keep this river clear, and its passage free. This parish is the last of the bishopric of Quito. 
|BUISAQUILLO, a settlement of the province and government of Popayan, in the corregimiento of Pasto*. 
|BUJURURU, a settlement of the captainship and province of Rey in Brazil, situate on ihs coast between this province and the large lake of Los Pastos, to the n. of the Poblacion Nueva, or New Settlement. 
|BUR 
|BULDIBUIO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Cajamarquilla in Peru, an nexed to the curacy of Chilia. 
|BULFINCH S Harbour, so named by Capt. Ingraham, on the n. w. coast of N. America. 
|BULKLEY, a settlement of the island of Barbadoes, in the district of the parish of St. George. 
|BULL, a small island on the coast of Georgia, between that of Long island and the bay of Sewy. 
|BULL, a small river of the same province; ii rises to the s. and runs into the sea at Port Royal. 
|BULLIT S Lick lies on Salt river, in Ken tucky, from which salt spring the river takes its name. It lies 20 miles from the rapids of the Ohio, near Saltsburgh ; and is the first that was worked ifl the country. 
|BULL Island, one of the three islands which form the n. part of Charlestown harbour, S. Ca. rolina.l 
|BULLOCK, a new county in Georgia. 
|BULLOCK S Point and Neck, on the e. side of Providence river, Rhode island. 
|BULL S Bay, or BABOUL Bay, a noted bay in Newfoundland island, a little to the s. of St. John s harbour, on the e. side of that island. It has 14 fathoms water, and is very safe, being land-locked. The only danger is a rock, 20 yards from Bread-and-cheese point, oft Mogotty cove. Lat. 47 21 . 
|BULL S island, a small isle n. of Gharlestown harbour. See S. CAROLINA. 
|BULLSKIN, a township in Fayette county, Pennsylvania. 
|BUMBO, a port of the coast of the province and colony of New Jersey, within the bay of De laware. 
|BUNCOMB, the largest and most zo. county of N. Carolina, and perhaps the most mountain ous and hilly in the United States. It is in Mor gan district, bounded zo. by the state of Tennessee, and s. by the state of S. Carolina. The Blue ridge passes through Buncomb, and gives rise to many large rivers, as Catabaw, Wateree, Broad river, and Pacolet. 
|BUONO, a considerable river of the kingdom of Chile ; 18 leagues to the s. of Valladolid. It runs from e. to zo. collecting the waters of six other smaller rivers, and enters the Pacific ocean in lat. 40 37 s. 
|BURAIS, a barbarous nntion on the s. shore of the river Marafion, at a small c i tance from the mouth of Cayari ; bounded w. by the nation of the Gusmagis, and f. by that of Los Punovis. It is but little known. 
|BUR 
|BURARI, a river which enters the Orinoco on the n. side. In the woods which are in its vicinity dwells the barbarous nation of the Seruras Indians. 
|BURAURE,-n ancient province of the govern ment of Venezuela, in the jurisdiction of Coro ; discovered by George Spira in 1535. It is situate in a beautiful and fertile territory, although the climate is hot. It is nearly desert. 
|BURBURATA, a settlement of the province and government of Venezuela, situate on the coast and by the bay of this name, between port Cabello and the morro or mountain of Ocumare. The French privateers sacked it in 1541. It was formerly very populous and rich, and in its vici nity are many good salines. It is 52 leagues to the zo. of Coro. 
|BURBUKATA, a number of very small islands of the province of Venezuela, opposite the former port and settlement. 
|BURDENS, a settlement of the province and colony of New Jersey, in the county of New Bur lington, on the shore of the river Delaware. 
|BUREAU, a river of the island of Laxa, in the kingdom of Chile. It runs n. n. zo. and enters the Biobio, opposite the mouth of the river Duqueco. On its banks are the estates of Cupayan, Dunatil, Mulchen, Ancamen, and Chumulco. 
|BURGADOS, PUNTA DE LOS, an extremity of the w. head of the island of St. Domingo, in the French possessions. It is one of those which, with the cape of this name, form the bay of Tiburon. 
|BURGAI, PARAMO DE, a very lofty moun tain covered with snow, in the province and corregimiento of Cuenca, of the kingdom of Quito. At the foot of it are the estates of Surampalte and Namurete. 
|BURGEO Isles lie in White Bear bay, New foundland island. Great Burgeo, or Eclipse island, lies in lat 47 35 w. 
|BURGO, a town of the province and colony of Surinam, in that part of Guayana possessed by the Dutch. It is situate on the coast, at the mouth of the rivers Cuyuni and Esquivo, and opposite the island formed by these rivers at their em bouchure. 
|BURGO, another settlement, in the same pro vince and colony, situate on the shore of the river Esquivo. 
|BURGOS, a city of the province and govern ment of the Sierra Gorda, in the bay of Mexico, and kingdom of Nueva Espana, founded in 1750 by the Count Sierra Gorda, Don Joseph de Escandon, colonel of the militia of Queretaro. 
|BURGUILLOS, a settlement of the province 
230 
|BUR 
and correghnento of Paria in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Challacolla. 
|BURGUIN, a city of the province and colony of New Jersey. 
|BURIA, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Venezuela ; situate on the shore of the river Sararre, where this unites -with that of San Juan. 
|BURINS, a point of the s. coast of the island of Newfoundland, at the entrance of the bay of Plaisance. 
|BURITICA, a town of the province and go vernment of Antioquia in the Nucvo Reyno de Granada, situate in a valley of the same name, and hear a mountain abounding in gold mines, disco vered by Juan Badillo in 1537, but at the present day is scarcely worked at all. Twenty leagues from its capital. 
|BURKE County, in Morgan district, N. Caro lina, has 8118 inhabitants, including 595 slaves. Its capital is Morgan town. 
|BURKE County, in the lower district of Georgia, contains 9467 inhabitants, including 595 slaves. Its chief towns are Louisville and Waynesborough. 
|BURKE, a township in Caledonia county, in Vermont; distant from Bennington 134 miles n. e.l 
|BURLINGTON, a capital city of W. Jersey, situate in an island in the middle of the river Dela ware, opposite Philadelphia : it is regularly built, and the streets are wide. It is the residence of the tribunals, and here are celebrated the assemblies or meetings of the province. It was founded in 1688, and has been improving ever since. Its situation, and the circumstance of its being contiguous to some small bays, have naturally turned the minds of the inhabitants to fishing. The territory abounds in every kind of grain and provision*, especially in flour, pigs, and white pease, which are carried to the markets at New York to be forwarded to the islands. It carries on a great commerce in hides, whale-bone, oil, and fish. It formerly gave name to a county ; has a large town-house, an excellent exchange for merchants, and two very good bridges, the one called London and the other York. Its convenient communication with Philadelphia makes it a place of great commerce by the river Salem, which empties itself into the bay of Delaware, in Lat. 40 4 . Long. 74 55 w. 
Bu ISLINGTON, a township in Otsego county, New York, was divided into two towns in 1797 by an act of the legislature. 
|BURLINGTON is a pleasant township, the chief in Chittendon county, Vermont, situated on the 
|BUR 
s. side of Onion river, on the e. bank of lake Champlain. It has 332 inhabitants. It is in this healthy and agreeable situation that the governor and patrons of the college of Vermont intend to found a seminary of learning, where youth of all denominations may receive an education. In digging a well, about 15 rods from the bank of the river, frogs have been found, at the depth of 25 feet, where no cavities or communication with the water appeared, through which they might have passed ; and when exposed to the heat of the sun, they became full of life and activity. Here stumps of trees are found 40 feet deep. It is conjectured that these animals must have been covered up some hundred years ago, by some inundation of the river. Burlington is 22 miles n. of Vergennes, 122 from Bennington, and 332 in the same direction from New York city. 
|BURLINGTON orOuiNESKEA Bay, on the &lt;?. side of lake Champlain, about 34 miles n. by &lt;?. from Crown point, 69 s. e. from lake St. Francis in St. Lawrence river, aud 70 s. from St. John s. 
|BURLINGTON County, in New Jersey, extends across from the Atlantic ocean on the s. e. to Delaware river, and part of Huntingdon county, on the n. w. in length about 60 miles. A great proportion of it is barren ; about ths of it, however, is under good cultivation, and is generally level, and pretty well watered. It has 18,095 inhabitants, including 227 slaves. 
|BURLINGTON, a township on the e. side of Unadilla river, in Otsego county, Ne\v York, is 1 1 miles o&gt;. of Cooper s town. By the state census of 1796, 438 of its inhabitants are electors. 
|BURNT-COAT Island. See PKNOBSCOT Bay. 
|BURNET S-FIELD, a settlement of the En glish, in the province and country of the Iroquces Indians, and on the shore of the river Mohawks, on the confines of Pennsylvania. 
|BUROS, a small island of the lake of Maracaibo, in the province and government of this name, situate on the e. side of the channel of its entrance. 
|BURRERO, a settlement of the province and government of Maracaibo, situate on the shore of the river Matazan, to the w. of the city of Truxillo. 
|BURTON, a settlement of the island of Barbadoes, on the w. coast, and in the district and parish of Santiago. 
|BURTON, a small township in Gr.nffon county, New Hampshire, which was incorporated in 1766, and contains 141 inhabitants. 
|BUS 
|BURTON, a township in the British province of rfew Brunswick, situated in Sunbury county, on the r ver St. John. 
|BUJIUCUYA, a parish of the province and government of Buenos Ayres, situate a little below the mouth of the Parana and Paraguay, iri Lat. 27 57 50". Long. 58 15 25" zc.~\ 
|BURURU, a settlement of the captainship and province of Para in Brazil, situate on the s. shore of the river Arnazonas. 
|BUSANIO, a settlement of the province and government of La Sonora in Nueva Espafia, situate at the source of a river, near the settlement of Aquimuri. 
|BUSBANZA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of a cold temperature, situate on a plain producing wheat, maize, barley, and other productions of a cold climate. It is poor and mean, though its inhabitants may amount to 100 Indians, and a. few whites ; annexed to the curacy of Tobasia. It is renowned in antiquity, as hav ing been the court of the second elector of the kingdom of Tunja, and it stood in the province of Sogamosa. At the present day nothing remains of its greatness save its name. Eight leagues n. of Tunja. 
|BUSCIES, a small river of Canada, which runs a?, near the Oulamanti, and enters lake Mi chigan. 
fBUSEY Town, in the island of St. Domingo, lies near Port au Prince, and has a fort. 
|BUSH, a town of the colony of New En gland, at the extremity and w. cape of Long island. 
Brsir , a small river of the province and colony of Virginia, in the county of Amelia. It runs n. and enters the Appomatos. 
|BUSH, another small river of the province and colony of Maryland. It runs s. e. and enters the bay of Chesapeak. 
Busii Town. See HARFORD, MARYLAND. 
|BUSH WICK, a small but pleasant town, in King s county, Long island, New York. The in habitants, 540 in number, are chiefly of Dutch ex traction ; 99 of these are electors. 
|BUSHY Run, a n. e. branch of Sewickly creek, near the head of which is:General Boquet s field. The creek runs s. w. into Youghiogeny river, 20 miles s. e. from Pittsburg in Pennsylvania. J 
|BUSIOS, a small island of the coast of Brazil, in the province and captainship of St. Vincente, between the island of Puercos and the great island of San Sebastian. 
|BUSONGOTE, the most celebrated fortress 
|BUZ 
23 1 
that belonged to the Zipas or kings of Bogota, in the ancient province of Caxica, near the river Funza. It was taken by Gonzalo Ximinez de Quesada, in 1537, after the victory he gained against the Uzaquez. It is at present ciestroyed, arid nothing but the memory of it remains. 
|BUSTARD River, in Upper Canada, runs into St. Lawrence river, s. w. of Black river, in a bay of its own name. It runs a great way in land, and has communication with several lakes ; and at its mouth lie the Osiers islands. 
|BUTCHERS, a small river of N. Carolina. It runs s. and enters the Conhaway. 
|BUTLER S Town, ontheo&gt;. side of the head waters of the Ohio. 
|BUTTERFIELD, a settlement in Cumberland county, district of Maine, having 189 inhabitants. It lies about 43 miles n. from Falmouth, on Casco bay ; having Butterfield slip on the n. and Bucktown on the s.~ 
|I3UTTERHILL, a high round hill, on the w. bank of Hudson river, at the n. entrance of the highlands. In passing this hill, ascending the river, the passenger is presented with a charming view of New Windsor and Newbur
h. 
|BUTTON S Bay, in the w. part of Hudson bay, n. of, and near to, Churchill river. Sir Tho mas Button lost his ship here, and came back in a sloop built in the country. Button s isles lie on the s. side of Hudson straits, at the entrance of cape Chid ley. 
|BUTURUNE, a settlement of the province-and captainship of San Vincente in Brazil ; situate on the shore of the river Tiete, and at the mouth of the Capibaci. 
|BUXALOONS, an Indian town on the n. w bank of Alleghany river, nearly 25 mites from fort Franklin, at its mouth. 
|BUXTON, a township in York county, dis trict of Maine, situated on Saco river ; 16 miles n. z. from Pepperelborough, at the mouth of that river, and 118 miles n. e. of Boston ; containing 1564 inhabitants. 
|BUZOS, Rio DE LOS, a river of the province and captainship of the Rio Grande in Brazil. It rises near the coast, runs e. and enters the sea, be tween the rivers Pirang and S. Juan. 
|BUZZARD S Bay, in Massachusetts, together with Barnstable bay, on the n. e. form the peninsula whose extremity is called cape Cod. It lies between lat. 41 25 and 41 42 n. long. 70* 38 and 71 w. from Greenwich, running into the land about 30 miles n. e. by n. and its breadth at an average is about seven miles. Its entrance has Seakonet point and rocks w. and the Sow and Pigs 
232 
|CAB 
off the s. w end of Cattahunk, one of the Elizabeth islands, on the e.~\ 
BY BERRY, a township in Philadelphia county, Pennsylvania. 
|BYEFIELD, a parish in Newbury, Essex county, Massachusetts. In a quarry of limestone here is found the asbestos, or incorruptible cotton, as it is sometimes called. Beautifully variegated marble, which admits a good polish, has likewise been found in the same vicinity. Here is also a flourishing woollen manufactory, established on a liberal scale, and machinery for cutting nails. 
|BYRAM River is a small stream, only notice able as forming part of the w. boundary of Connec
ticut. It falls into Long island sound, opposite Captain s islands. 
|BYRAN Town, in Charles county, Mary land, is about nine miles n. e. from port Tobacco, and 24 s. e. from the Federal city. 
|BYRD Fort lies on the e. bank of Monongahcla river, on the s. side of the mouth of Redstone creek ; 35 miles s. from Pittsburg, and about 39 n. w. from Ohiopyle falls. On or near this spot stands the compact part of the town of Brownsville. See BROWNSVILLE. 
|BYRON S Bay, on the n. e. coast of La* brador. 
, a parish of the province and go vernment of Buenos Ay res, situate on the Parana, to the n. of Corrientes, in Lat. 27 31 s. Long. 58 1 o&gt;. 
|CAACUPE, a parish of the province and go vernment of Paraguay, situate on a small river, 10 leagues e. of 
\ssuncion, in Lat. 25 24 21". Long/57 9 24" a&gt;. 
 CAAPUCU, a parish of the province and go vernment of Paraguay, situate on a branch of the river Tebiquari Guazu, in Lat. 26 11 21". Long. 57 15 23" w.l 
|CAAZAPA, a
 settlement of Indians of the province and government of Paraguay, situate on a branch of the river Tebiquari Guazu, in Lat. 26 1 1 18". Long. 56 29 49" a). 
|CABA, a river of the province and country of the Amazonas, which runs from w. to s. s. w. and enters the Rio Negro. 
|CABABURI, or CABURI, a very abundant stream of the province and country of the Ama zonas, in that part which is possessed by the Por tuguese. It runs from n. to s. receiving the waters of many others, and enters the Rio Negro. 
|CABALLA, a port on the coast of Peru, in the S. sea, in the province and district of lea. It is small and little frequented, from its want of shelter and safety. Two leagues distant from that of Pisco. 
|CABALLA, MORRO DF, a mountain of the same coast and district, at the entrance of this port. 
|CABANA, a settlement of the province and dis trict of Lucanas in Peru. 
|CABANA, another, of the province and govern ment of Santa Cruz de la Sierra in the same king dom ; situate on the shore of the Rio Grande, be tween this river and the mountain. 
|CABANA, a settlement of the province and district of Lampa in Peru. 
|CABANA, a bay on the n. coast of the island of Cuba, between Bahia Honda and La Domi nica. 
|CABANA, a river of the same island, on the n. coast, which enters the sea to the e. of the bay of Matanzas. 
|CABANILLA, a settlement of the province and district of Lampa in Peru. 
|CABARI, a settlement of the province and dis trict of Sicasica in Peru. 
|CABARITAS, a bay of the s. coast of the island of Jamaica. 
|CABARRUS, a new county in the district of Salisbury, North Carolina. 
|CABASSON, or CAPIRY, a river of the coun try of Guayana, in the part possessed by the French. 
|CABELA, or CABELLA, a cape on the coast of Tierra Firme, in S.America. Lat. 10 3 w. 
|CABELO DE VELHA, a bay of the coast of Brazil, in the captainship of Maranan, between the cape of Cuma and the isle of Para. 
|CABELLO, a port and settlement of the pro vince of Venezuela in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. It is very convenient, although small, frequented by
foreign vessels, who come to take in cargoes of tallow and hides, cattle being very numerous. 
|CAB 
It has a port for the security and defence of ves sels, and a good pier built by the company of Guipiezcoana, In the year 1743 it was attacked by Admiral Charles Knowles, with 17 ships and 12 bilanders, as he was returning from the attack of the port of La Guaira, in which he iailed, owing to the noble defence made by the governor of Ca racas, Don Gabriel de Zuloaga, Count dc Torrcalta. He was as little successful in the attack of this port. [Its population, according to Depons, is 7600 souls". 
|CAREZA, Bay of, on the . coast of the island of Jamaica. 
|CABEZAS, a small isle of the N. sea, near the coast of Vera Cruz, almost at the mouth of the river Alvarado. 
|CABIARI, a river of the province and govern ment of Pamplona in the new kingdom of Granada. It is an arm of the A pure, and afterwards enters it before this joins the Orinoco. 
|CABIERES, a river of the country of the mis sions of the Gran Paitite. It rises in the cordillera of the Yuncas Indians, to the n. of the Sicasica, from two small streams ; runs to the n. ; and in clining afterwards to n. e. divides itself to enter into the Marmore by two arms, which take the Jiame of San Xavier and La Travesia, in the pro vince and government of the Moxos. 
|CABIN Point, a small post-town in Surry county, Virginia; situated on Upper Chipoak creek, 26 miles e.s.e. of Petersburg!, 87 from Ports mouth, and 329 s. s. w. of Philadelphia. 
C A EIRE, a settlement of the province and government of Venezuela in the kingdom of Tierra Firme; situate to the e. of that of Bariquisimeto. 
|CABO, a settlement of the province and district of Cuenca in the kingdom of Quito. 
|CABO, another, with the surname of Largo, in the province and captainship of Rey in Brazil; situate at the source of the river Curutuba. 
|CABO, a river of Carolina, which runs to the s. and enters into the Albania. 
|CABO DE CKUZ, a bold point of land on the s. side of the island of Cuba. Lat. 19 48 n.~\ 
|CABO DE -ST. JUAN, the n. easternmost point of the island of Porto Rico. Lat, 16 24 n. 
|CABORCA, a settlement of the province and government of La Souora in Nueva Espana ; situate on the side of a river, at a little distance from the coast of the gulf of California, or Mar Koxo de Cortes. 
|CABORCA, a river in the same province and kingdom* 
|CABOT, a township in Caledonia county, 
|VOL. .1. 
233 
Vermont. It is situated on the height of land be" tween lake Champlain and Connecticut rivcr ? about 17 miles from the Fifteen-mile falls in the above nnmed river; ami contains 1202 inhabitants. CABRAj a small river of Brazil, in the fcrritory of the Guaiazas Indians. It runs to the n. n. e. and enters into the Tocantines at its source, and just before the toll-house of the river of Las Almas. 
|CABRERA, a river of the new kingdom of Granada, in the province and government of Neiba. 
|CABRILLOS, Lake of, on the coast of the province and government of Buenos Ayres, near the cape of Lobos. 
|CABRITO, a small river of the isle of St. Christopher, one ofihe Antilles, on the n. e. coast; it runs into the sea near to fort Louis. 
|CABRON Cape, the n. e. point of Presque isle de Samana, in the island of St. Domingo, 22 leagues s. e. by e. of old cape Francois. Lat. l!/* 23 w. 
|CABUIA, a river of the province and country of the Amazonas. It rises in the territory of the Encabellados Indians, runs to the n. and enters into the Puittmaio. 
|CAB RUT A, a settlement of the province and government of Caracas in the kingdom of Tierra Firme; situate on the shores of the river Orinoco. It is a strip of land farmed by this and the river Guarico. 
|CACAGUAL, a small settlement of the pro vince and government of Cartagena, in the divi sion of Zinu; situate on the side of the river of this name. 
|CACAGUAN, a large river of the province and government of San Juan de los Llanos in the new kingdom of Granada. It rises near to the ,T. of the city of Caguan, and running many leagues in an e. course, it inclines to the s. and being much enlarged, enters the Caqueta ; after which it goes also by the name of Tames. 
|CACAGUANA, with the dedicatory title of La Concepcion, a settlement of the above govern ment, which takes its name from the river, on the banks of which it is situate. 
C A CAM U ATE PEC, a small .settlement of the head settlement of Amuzgos, and ulcaldia mayor of Xicaian, in Nueva Espana. Here are eight fa milies of Spaniards, 14 of Mustfes and Mulattoes, and 48 of Indians. It is IS leagues to the ?. of its capital. 
|CACAHTJATRPEC, another, of the jurisdiction and government of Acapulco in the same kingdom, situate on the side of the river Pa pagaios. It belongs, in as much as relates to i(s spiritual jurisdiction, to 
U H 
the bishopric of the Puebla de los Angeles. It consists of 131 families of Indians, and is seven leagues to the w, of Tccaxtcpec. 
C A C A L O T E PE C , S A N T A M A R i A n E , a settle ment oi the head settlement of Xicula, and alcaldia mayor of Nixapa ; situate in an area upon an ele vation so lofty, that the access to it is a journey of two leagues. It is extremely cold, and constantly covered with clouds. It consists of 112 families ef Indians, who trade in nothing but cotton. 
|CACALOTEPI:C, SANTA MARIA BE, another, of the head settlement and alcaldia mat/or of Villalta. It consists of 125 families of Indians, and lies 11 kagues to the a?, of its capital. 
|CACAI OTEPKC, SANTA MARIA DE, another town of the alcalJia mayor of Guajuapa in the same kingdom. It consists of 98 families of Indians. 
|CACALOTEPEQUE, S. ANTONIO DE, a small Settlement of the head settlement of S. Andres de Cholula, and alcaldia mayor of this name, in Nueva Esparia. It contains 58 families of Indians, and is distant somewhat more than a league from its capital, 
|CACALUTLA, a village of the principal town and alcaldia mayor of Ostotipnquillo. Its climate is very warm, and it contains 35 families of Indians, who make large quan ities of sugar and honey from the sugar-cane, which abounds in these parts, and which is the only source of their commerce ; eight leagues to the n. zc. ot its capital. 
|CACAMOLOATLAN, a small settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Toluca in Nncva Espana. It consists of 72 families of Indians, and lies at a small distance to the zo. of its capital. 
|CACAPEHON, Summit of, a village of Vir ginia, situate on the bank of the river called South ern Branch. 
|CACAPEHON, a river of Virginia, which runs about 70 miles n. e. along the w. side of the North ridge, and empties into Potowmack river, 30 miles ti. from Frederick s town. 
|CACAS, a small settlement of the province and district of Tarma in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Reyes. 
|CACATEAPA, a small settlement of the head settlement of Amatlan, and alcaldia mayor of Guauchinango, in Nueva Espaua. 
|CACHA, SAN PEDRO DK, a settlement of the province and district of Canes and Canches in Peru, near to which, at a place called llaches, are the ruins of an ancient and noble edifice with nine gates. The walls, as high as the first stories, are made of carved stone, and the upper parts of 
earth. Here are also five stone galleries, which: form, as it were, so many other walls. It is said to be the famous temple of Viracocha, and to have belonged to the Indians in the times of their pa ganism. At a small distance there is an artificial lake, which is always kept at one height by means of aqueducts. This lake is upon a mountain of black stone, about two leagues in circumference; and not far from hence are vestiges of a large town. There is likewise found here a mineral earth, of which pitchers and vessels are made, and which are taken to be sold in the neighbouring province*. Twenty-three leagues from Cuzco. 
|CACHAGUAltAGE, a tribe of Indians of the province and country of the Iroquees, dwelling between two lakes, to the s. of the lake Ontario, and near the river Seneca. The English haye a fort and establishment in it. 
|CACHAL, a settlement of the province and alcaldia mayor of Zacapula in the kingdom of Guatemala. 
|CACHAPOAL, a large river of the kingdom of Chile, memorable for the number of persons who have been drowned in it. It has a bridge made of ropes, and at some distance below its source is joined by the Tinguiririca ; after which it takes the name of Rapel, until it runs into the sea* It is navigated by boats and rafts. 
|CACHI, a settlement of the province and dis trict of Andahiiiiilas in Peru. 
|CACHI, another, of the province and district of Vilcas Huaman in the same kingdom. 
|CACHI, another, of the province and govern ment of Tucuman in the same kingdom, of the dis trict and jurisdiction of Salta; annexed to the cu racy of Chiquianas. 
|CACHICAMO, a river of the province and go vernment of Cumana, which rises near to the w. of the city of San Fernando, runs s. and enters the Orinoco on the n. side. 
|CACIIICAMO, MLSA DE, a mountain or table land of the province and government of Maracaibo. It lies in the valley of Chama, to the s. of the Great lake, and nearly to the n. w. of the city of Merida. 
|CACHILLACTA, a settlement of the govern ment of Atacarncs, in the province of Quito. 
|CACHIMAIO, a large river of the kingdom of Peru. It rises in the province of Charcas, runs two leagues distant from the city of La Plata, and enters the Pilcomaio, in the territory of Santa Cruz de la Sierra. 
|CACHIN, a settlement of the province and dis trict of Calca and Lares in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Lares. 
235 
|CACHIN, another, of the province and district of Caxamarca in the same kingdom, annexed to the curacy of Hnambos. 
|CACHIPAMPA, a plain of the district of Cuzco in Peru, celebrated for the battle of the Sa linas, which took place here between the troops of the two parties of Pizarro and Almagro, two leagues from the city. 
|CACHIPO, a settlement of the province of Barcelona, and government of Cumana, in the king dom of Tierra Firme; one of those under the care of the religious of the order of San Francisco, mis sionaries of Peru. 
|CACHIPOUR, a river of the province and country of Cayenne. It is but small, runs from *. to n. and enters the sea on the side of the cape of Orange, between this and the bay of Vincente Pinzon. 
|CACHIR, a settlement of the province of Bar celona, and government of Cumana ; situate on the *hore of the river of its name. 
|CACHIR, a river of the same province and go vernment, which enters that of the Huere near its source. 
|CACHIRA, a river of the province and govern ment of Santa Marta. It rises near the city of San Faustino, and enters the river Lebrija. 
|CACHIRI, Cataract of, formed by the river Oyapoco, in the province of Guayana, and terri tory possessed by the French. 
|CACHIYACO, a settlement of the province tnd government of Tucuman, in the district of its capital, and situate to the s.s. e. of the same. 
|CACHIYACU, a small river of the province and district of Lamas in Peru. It rises in the serrania which divides it from Chachapoias ; runs from the w. to s. s. e. and enters the Guallaga. 
|CACHOEIRA, NUESTRA SENORA DEL RoIARIO DE, a settlement of the province and cap tainship of the bay of Todos Santos in Brazil. 
|CACHORA, a small settlement of the province and district of Abancai in Peru. 
|CACHORRO, a river of the province and cap tainship of Maraiian in Brazil. 
|CACHUI, a small settlement of the province and district of Yaucos in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Pampas. 
|CACHULA, a small settlement of the province and alcaldia mayor of Los Zoques in the kingdom of Guatemala. 
|CACLIUPANAS, a small settlement of the pro vince and government of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito; situate on the banks of the river Chupana. 
|CACLA, a small settlement of the province and 
district of Castro Vireyna of Peru, annexed to the curacy of Viaac, in Yauyos: 
|CACO, a small river of the province and colony of Surinam, in the part of Guayana possessed by the Dutch. It runs from ZD. to e. and enters the Mazarron at the beginning of its source. 
|CACOIOC, a small settlement of the head settle ment of Tetelzingo, and alcaldia mayor of Coantla, in Nueva Espana. It is composed of 32 families of Indians, live of Spaniards, seven of Mustees
 and four of Mulattoes, two leagues n. n. w. of its head settlement. 
|CACORE, a small settlement of the province and government of Santa Marta ; situate on the banks of the river Magdalena, at a small distance from the city of Tcnerifie. 
C A COT A DE SURATA, a small settlement of the government and jurisdiction of Pamplona in the new kingdom of Granada, near to the real of the mines of Bucaramanga. It is of a mild air, abounding in wheat and other fruits, of a warm soil ; situate in a pleasant and luxuriant valley, and consists of 50 houses. 
|CACOTA, another small settlement of the same name, distinguished by the sirname of Velasco, in the same government and jurisdiction. It is of a cold temperature, abounding in Indian corn, wheat, papas , and other fruits peculiar to this cli mate. It is delightfully situate on the high road, by the side of a hill. Its inhabitants consist of 100 housekeepers, and an equal number of Indians, and many others dispersed on the mountains bordering on the river Chitaga, which is very deep and rocky : this river has a handsome bridge with a gate and lock, at which toll is taken. This river is the head of the Apure, one of the most cele brated on the plains of Cazanare, which enters the Orinoco. The above village is distant two leagues to the s. of Pamplona. 
|CACRILLO, a village of the province and district of Castro Vireyna of Peru, annexed to the curacy of Arma. 
|CACUAR, a settlement of the province and 
fovernmcnt of Cumana in the kingdom of Tierra irme, situate in the middle of the serrania. It is one of those which belong to the missionaries of the Capuchins of A ragon. 
|CACULA, a head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Zayula. It is situate en an extensive plain, and being of a warm and must temperature. It contains SOO families, consisting of Spaniards, Mitstees, ;;nd Mulattoes, and 200 families of Indians, who carry on a commerce in soap, which they mnke, and in tanned hides, of which they manufacture shoes, boots, and sad
H H 2 
|CAD 
dies, for other parts. The parish church is the convent of Sf. Francisco. Just out of the town is a pleasant valley, extending tour leagues in length and two in breadth, in which are various pastures, wild cattle, and other cultivated lands, which cause the commerce to be very considerable. .Seventeen leagues to the . w. of its capital. 
|CADAJA, a lake of the country of the Amazo?ias, near to the river Puru, or Cuchivara. 
|CADAKOSES, a lake of the province of New York, near the river Hudson, and the fort of Sa ratoga. 
pADDOQUES. See CADODAQUES-. CADEREITA, a capital toAvn of the alcaldia mayor and jurisdiction of this name in Nueva Espaiia, founded in the year (j
7, by order of the viceroy, Marquis of Cadereita, who called it after his title. It is situate on the skirt of the Sierra (orda, on the mountains, and in the hollows of which the Fames Indians live retired. These have never emlwaccd the Catholic religion, not withstanding the endeavours of the religious order of San Francisco. These barbarous infidels, who are incrca.ving in numbers daily, keep this district in a continual state of warfare, having possession of the craggy descents and egresses of the sierra. They are much reduced, and consist only of some hordes and scattered families ; and thus both these, as well as the inhabitants of the capital, amounting to about 76 families of Spaniards, Mulattoes, and MuslccS). gain their livelihood by working at the mines of silver which are found in this district, as well as in the sierra. These mines are not very productive or advantageous, on account of the poverty of tine neigh bourhood, and the great expence of labour. The town is situate in the valley ef St. Juan, in a small inland formed by two rivers, the one called Silla, which descends from the sierra ) and the other taking its rise from some springs of water, known by the name of Santa Lucia. It has a very good parish church, and convent of San Francisco. Its situation is cheer ful, and its soil very fertile. It is supplied with water from the river at some distance by means of a fine aqueduct. Much wheat, maize, French beans, and pulse, grow in its territory, and it is famous for the breed of mules and horses. Forty rive leagues n. of Mexico. [Long. 99 22 . Lat. 20 2K 
|CAOEREITA, with the dedicatory title of San Juan, another settlement of the new kingdom of Leon, founded by the same viceroy as the former. Its district abounds in cattle, both of the larger and smaller kind ; but it is badly provided with grain and fruits. Many infidel Indians dwell about the 
|CAD 
suburbs, though without any communication with the town. Here is a convent of the order of San Francisco. Nine leagues 9. e. of its capital. 
|CADIZ, a capital city of the isle of Cubagua, founded in the year 1547 by lacome Castellon. Its commerce was formerly very considerable, owing to its pearl fisheries ; but when these were no longer carried on, it declined greatly. 
|CADIZ, a village in the island of Cuba, situate on the n. coast, between Caragayas and La Crux del Principe. [It is near 160 miles e. of Ilavannah, and .50 n. from Spiritu Santo. 
|CADODAQUES, a small settlement of Indians of Louisiana, situate on the shore of the river Rouge, or Roxo. [These Indians live about 35 miles tv. of the main branch of the Red river, on a bayau or creek, called by them Sodo, which is navigable for peroques only within about six miles of their village, and that only in the rainy season. They are distant from Natchitoches about 120 miles, the nearest route by land, and in nearly a n. w. direction. They have lived where they now do only five years. The first year they moved there the small-pox got amongst them r and destroyed nearly one half of them ; it was in the winter season, and they practised plung ing info the creek on the first appearance of the eruption, and died in a few hours. Some few years ago they had the measles, of which several more of them died. They formerly lived on the s. bank of the river, by the course of the river 37.5 miles higher up, at a beautiful praire, which has a clear lake of good water in the middle of it, sur rounded by a pleasant and fertile country, which had been the residence of their ancestors from time immemorial. They have a traditionary tale which not only the Caddus, but half a dozen other smaller nations believe in, who claim the honour of being descendants of the same family : they say, when all the world was drowned by a flood that inundated the whole country, the great spirit placed ou an eminence, near this lake, one family of Caddoques r who alone were saved; from that family all the Indians originated. The French
 for many years before Louisiana w-as transferred to Spain, had at this place a fort and some soldiers; several French families were likewise settled in the vicinity, where they had erected a good flour mill with burr stones brought from France. These French families continued there till about 25 years ago, when they moved down and settled at Carnpti, on the Red river, about 20 miles above INatchitoches, where they now live; and the Indians left it about 14 years ago, on ac count of a dreadful sickness that visited them. 
They settled on the river nearly opposite where they now live, on a low place, but were driven thence on account of its overflowing, occasioned by a mass of timber choking the river at a point below them. The whole number of what they call warriors of the ancient Caddo nation is mr.v reduced to about 100, who are looked upon some what like knights of Malta, or some distinguished military order. They are brave, despise danger or death, and boa.sl that they have "never shed white man s blood. Besides these, there are of old men and strangers who live among them, nearly the same number, but there are 40 or 50 more women than men. This nation has great influence over the Yattassees, Nandakoes, Nabadaches, Inies or Yachies, Nagogdochcs,Keychies, Adaize, and Natchitoches, who all speak the Caddo lan guage, look up to them as their fathers, vi.-il and intermarry among them, and join them in all their wars. The Caddoques complain of the Choctaws encroaching upon their country ; call them lazy, thievish, &c. There has been a misunderstanding between them for several years, and small hunting parties kill one another when they meet. The Caddos raise corn, beans, pumpkins, &c. but the laud on which they now live is prairie, of a white clay soil, very fiat: their crops are subject to in jury, either by too wet or too dry a season. They have horses, but few of any other domestic animals, except dogs ; most of them have guns, and some have rifles : they, and all other Indians that we have any knowledge of, are at war with the Osages. The country, generally, round the Caddos is hilly and not very rich : it is well cover ed with oak, hickory, and pine, interspersed with prairies, which are, for the most part, very rich, and fit for cultivation. There are here a good number of creeks and springs of fresh water. 
|CAEN, the chief city of Cayenne, in French Guiana, in S. America. See CAYENNE. 
|CAERNARVON, a township in Lancaster county, Pennsylvania. 
C/ESARiA River, or COHANSIE Creek, in New Jersey, empties into Delaware bay, after a s. w. course of about 30 miles. It is navigable for vessels of 100 tons as far as Bridgetown, 20 miles from its mouth. 
|CAETE, a city of the province and captainship of Pani in Brazil, situate on the shore of the sea, just at the point which is formed by the mouth of the river of the Amazonus. 
|CAETE, a small river of tiic province and captains/tip of Puerto Seguro in the same kingdom. It rises at the foot of the Cerro del Trio, runs to 
237 
the n.n.e. and enters the Piedras, between the Palmital and the Infierno. 
|CAELA, a small river of the province and government of Guayana, or Nueva Audalucia. It rises in the serrania of Parirne, runs n~ and en ters the Aredato. 
|CAFAIATE, a settlement of the province and government of Tucuman, in the jurisdiction of Salta, annexed to the curacybf Chiquiana. 
|CAGASSA, a celebrated gold mine of the pro vince and government of Jaen de Bracamoros in the kingdom of Quito. 
|CAGHNEVVAGA, a tribe of Indians in Lower Canada, some of whom inhabit near Mont real. 
|CAGHNEWAGA, the name of a small village or parish on the n. side of Mohawk river, in the township of Johnstown, about 21 miles w. of Schenectady. It is not improbable that the tribe of Indians -mentioned in the preceding article for merly inhabited this place. See JOHNSTOWN.. 
|CAGLA, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Venezuela, in the district of the city of Caracas, situate to the e. of the lake Tacarigua r and w. of the settlement of Victoria,, not far from it. 
|CAGUAN, a small settlement of the govern ment of Neiva in the new kingdom of Granada, founded on the shores of the large river Magdalena, by Juan Lopez de Herrera, in the year 553. It abounds in gold, maize, cacao, i/ucas, plan tains, sugar-cane, and various kinds of cattle. The climate is warm; in its church there is an image of San Roque, which is held particularly sacred, and to which pilgrimages are frequently made by those who dwell in these parts. It is two leagues distant from Neiva, towards Santa Fe. 
|CAGUAN, a river of this kingdom, running to the s. e. and entering the Caqueta, opposite the mouth of the Rio Negro. 
|CAGL ANA, or CAHUAPANA, a river of the province and government of Mainas in the king dom of Quito. It rises in the sierra of Chachapoias, runs . n. e. and enters the Maraiion. 
|CAIIABAT, a river of S. Carolina. It runs s. and enters the sea. 
|CAHABON, a settlement of the province and aha! dia mayor of Verapaz in the kingdom of Guatemala. 
|CAHETE, a small settlement belonging to the Portuguese, in the province and captainship of the Espiritu Santo in Brazil, situate on the banks of the small river of Sabara. 
|CAHLTE, a capital town of (he island of this name, which is in the river of the Amazonas, of 
the province and captainship of Maranan in Bra zil. In it is a good college, which belonged to the Jesuits. This town belongs to the door-keepers of (he king of Portugal. 
|CAIIETE, a large island of the river of the Amazonas, belonging to the province and captain ship of Maranan. 
|GAHETES, Indians of Brazil. See addi tional matter respecting the history, &c. of this kingdom. 
|CAHI, a river of the province and government of Paraguay, it rises to the n. of the ruins of the Cruz de Bolaiios. 
|CAIII, another river of the province and cap tainship of Hey in Brazil. It runs w. and enters the Rio Grande. 
C AH OKI A, a settlement in the n. w. territory, n. of Kaskaskias.J 
|CAIIOQUI, a tribe of Indians of the province and colony of Virginia, dwelling at the mouth of the river of the same name, and on the banks of the Mississippi. 
|CAHOQUI, a river of the above province, which runs to the .v. s. w. and enters the Mississippi. 
(JAM LAC, a small settlement of the province and district of Himmalies in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Pachas. 
|CAIIUANCA, a small settlement of the pro vince and district of Lucanas in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Condocondo. 
|CAUUNG-HAGE, a settlement of Indians of the province and country of the Iroquees, dwell ing on the banks of the lake Oneidos. 
|CAIAA, a lake of the province and country of the Amazonas. It is formed by a drain from the river of Madcra, near its banks, and on the side of the Tacoara, in the territory lying between that river and the Cuchibarfl. 
CAIABA, a river of the province and govern ment of Paraguay. It runs s. s. w. and enters the Paraguay, changing its name to that of Chiane. 
|CAIABACOA, a small settlement of the juris diction of Santiago de las Atalayas, and govern ment of Llanos, in the new kingdom of Granada. The climate is warm, and it abounds in the pro ductions of the other parts of the province. 
|CAIABOS, a small river of the province and government of Tucuman. It runs e. and joins another river near the city of San Miguel. 
|CAIACANCA, a settlement of the province and captainship of San Vincente in Brazil, situate on the banksof the river Yapo. 
|CAIAGA, a small river of Pennsylvania. It 
run* e. and enters the arm of the river Susquehanna, which follows the above course. 
|GAIAMBE, a settlement of the province and district of Otavalo in the kingdom of Quito. The climate here is extremely cold, on account of the desert of Cayamburo, which lies just behind it, in the middle of a plain, which gives its name to this town. Near it are the ruins of an Indian place of worship, situate upon high ground be longing to the town. They stand in a circular figure, 18 Spanish yards diameter, and 60 in cir cumference. The walls alone are remaining, these being from five to six yards in height, and about two in thickness, and so hard that although they are oniy built of clay, they have the con sistency of stone. Near it there is a large tract of land called Cossin. 
|CAIAMBUI1O, a very lofty and steep desert place of the Cordillera
 in the kingdom of Quito, situate on the n. side, and at the distance of Jl leagues from the capital. Many rivers have their source from it ; those of the n. and w. side run to meet the Esmeraldas, though some few the Mini, to empty themselves in the S. sea ; all those of the e. run to the Maranon. Upon its skirts there are symptoms of mines having been worked, and from them, it is said, the Indians acquired con siderable wealth. 
|CAIAMIi, a very abundant stream, and one of those which enter by the s. into the Amazonas. It rises in the cordillera of the Andes, in the pro vinces of Peru. 
|CAIAPA, a river of the province and governvernment of Cumana. 
|CAIAPAS, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Esmeraldas in the kingdom of Quito, having a wharf on the side of the river San Mi guel, where goods are embarked for the port of Limones in the S. sea. 
|CAIAPOS, River of the, in the territory of the Indians of this name in Brazil. It rises in the mountains, runs e. and directing its course im mediately to n. enters the large river of the Parana. 
|CAIARI, a small river of the country of the Amazonas or part of Guayana belonging to the Portuguese. It runs to the s. s. e. and enters the Amazonas, near its mouth, or where it empties itself into the sea, between the rivers Urupi and Irari. 
|CAIASTA, a settlement of Indians of the pro vince and government of Buenos Ayres, on the o&gt;. bank of the Parana, about 26 leagues w. of Santa Fe. Lat. 51 9 20" s. Long. 60 19 w. 
|CAICAIXIXAIS, a large island of the straits 
of Magellan, one of those which form the s. coast. 
|CAICO, GIIAKDE, or of the North, one of the islands which lie to the n. of St. Domingo, and the largest of them all. Its figure is long and broad, xtending itself in the form of a half-moon, \vhich figure is rendered perfect by many others. 
|CAICOS, the name of a large cluster of islands in the N. sea, situate on the n. of Hispaniola, or St. Domingo. Bet-ween them and the island ofMagnana, or Mariguana, there is formed a channel, called the Old Passage, which was navigated by vessels leaving the port of the Havanna for Europe, previous to the discovery of the Bahamas by An ton de Alaminos. This passage was abandoned on account of the navigation through so many small islands, which rendered it hazardous. It is at present frequented solely by small smuggling vessels. Notwithstanding this, it was entered by the whole squadron and convoy of Admiral Sir George Pocock, when he besieged and took the Havanna, in the year 1763. [The Caicos islands, commonly called the Caucasus, are a cluster of the Bahama islands, situate upon the edge of one of the Bahama banks. On the n. side of this bank are four or five islands of considerable extent ; the largest (called the Grand Caicos) is sbove sixty miles long, and two or three broad. It is about 400 miles from New Providence, and due n. from St. Domingo. There are several good reef-har bours and anchorages, particularly that at St. George s key, where there is established a port of entry and a small battery. This harbour ad mits vessels drawing 14 feet water. Besides cot ton and other produce which is common to the Bahama islands, some sugar plantations have been attempted in the Caicos, but, owing probably to tlv want of sufficient rain in that climate, or to the natural sterility of the soil, they have not succeeded. In 1803 there were about .40 white inhabitants upon the t aicos, and nearly J200 slaves, but many of the hitter have been since re moved. Previous to May 1803, lands were grant ed by the crown to the amount of 
9,695 acres for the purpose of cultivation. See BAHAMAS. 
|CAICAI, a settlement of the province and dis trict of Paucartambo in Peru, situate to the n. of the Cerro de Comanti. 
|CAICAKA, a settlement of the province and government oi Cumana in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, situate in the serrania. It is one of those which in that province belong to the mission aries of the Aragonese Capuchins. 
|CAICAUA, a lake of the province and go vernment of Venezuela. It is formed from the 
rivers Manacapra and San Bartolome, and empties itself into the Guarico. 
|CAIENA. See CAYENNE. 
|CAIGUA, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Cnmana in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, situate to the s. of Piritu. 
CA 111 OCA, a settlement of tli-e alcaldia mayor of Tabasco in Nueva Espafia; situate on the coast between the rivers Mizapa and Tonala. 
CAIJI, a small river of the province and go vernment of Paraguay. It runs w. and enters the Parana between the Ocoy and the large river of Curituba. 
|CAILLOMA, a settlement and anento of silver mines of the province of Collahuas in Peru ; founded on account of the discovery of this mi neral in a mountain at two leagues distance. It is one of the most ancient, and from it has been pro duced the greatest riches ; indeed, it has the pros pect of yielding these much longer, in as much as there are supposed to be many veins of this me tal as yet undiscovered. The metals are wrought in a mill worked by the water of a stream which rises at four leagues distance; and in order that there may never be a deficiency, the necessary sup ply of water is let upon the mills by means of locks, from an adjacent lake called Villafro, about a league in circumference. This is necessary only in time of drought, which occurs in the months of August, September, and October. The locks in the rainy season are kept shut, in order that the lake may fill, and be ready to yield its supply upon occasion. This settlement contains two parishes, one of Spaniards, the other of Indians : besides a church, which they call Del Hospital, since it was supported by the mines when these were in a flourishing stale. The soil about the country is very barren, and it can never produce herbage for cattle, being situate between two mountains al together lacking moisture, and extremely cold. In the church belonging to the Spaniards is reve renced a cross, of an opaque or ash-coloured crystal, extremely perfect, and something ex ceeding the size of a palm, Mhich, with two others (the one of which, according to tradition, was carried to Spain, and the other lost) were found in a mim- on the 2J of May, on the first discovery and taking of the metal, at the depth of 40 fathom. They were discovered in the form of a calvary, this of which we speak being the largest. 
|CAILLOU, a small river of the island of Guadaloupe, one of the Antilles. It rises in the mountains of the s. e. coast, runs in this course, and enters the sea near the town and parish of Punta Negra, or Black Point. 
240 
c A r 
|CAILLOU, another river of the province of Georgia. It runs in a very abundant stream to the s. w. and enters the Apalichicola. 
|CAILLOU, another river, distinguished by the surname of Little, in the same province. It runs s. and enters the former. 
|CAIMA, a settlement of the province and dis trict of Arequipa in Peru. 
|CAJMAN, a settlement of the province and go vernment i)f Dnrien, inhabited by gentile Indians, and bordering on the coast of the gulf. 
|CAIMAN, a river of this province, which runs into the sea in the gulf of Uraba, by the e. side-. On its shores is a fort -to defend ks entrance. 
|CAIMAN, another small river of the province and government of Buenos Ayres. It runs e. and enters the La Plata between the Alcarai and Ambalsado. 
|CAIM \N, another river of the kingdom of Chile, in the division of Guadalabquen. It runs w. be tween the Valdivia and the Callacalla, and flows into the former. 
|CAIMAN, two small islands, the one called Large, the other Small, situate in the N. sea, nearly a. , of Jamaica. They are barren and uncultivated, in habited only by seme poor Englishmen, whose oc cupation consists in fishing tor tortoise. They serve as a land-mark or signal to vessels sailing to V r era Cruz. [SeeCAYMANs. 
|CAIMA NES, a river of the province and coun try of the Amazonas. It rises in the territory of the Mures and Muris Indians, runs n.n.zs. and enters by two mouths into the Madera, opposite the mouth of the abundant stream of the Beni. 
|CAIMANFS, another rivor of the province and government of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito. It has it source from various small streams, which unite near to, and on the s. of, the town of Santa Rosa la Nueva. It begins its course towards the w. and turning to the n. enters the Itenes. 
CAIMITO, a settlement of the province and government of Cartagena, situate near one of the arms of the river Cauca, to the s. of the town of San Benito Abad, from whence it is distant eight leagues. 
|CAIMITOS, EVSENADA DE LOS, a creek on the n. coast, and at the n. head, in the part pos sessed by the French, in the island of St. Domingo. It is very large and beautiful, formed by the point or beak of Marecouin. 
|CAIMITOS, some islands of the N. sea, situate near the n. coast, at the a. head, and opposite the former bay, of the island of St. Domingo. They are two, the one larger than that nearest to the coast. 
|CAINA, a settlement of the province and r c|is* trict of Tarma in Peru. 
|CAIO, a settlement of the island of Cuba, situate on the n. coast. 
|CAIO, with the addition of De Frances, a small island, which is one of the Caicos, situate s. of the Caico (Grande, between the island Arena and Caico Pequeno. 
|CAIO, another, with the surname of Arena, between those of Caicos and Panuelo Quadrado. 
CAIOLA, a river of the province and alcaldia mayor of Tecoantcpec in Nueva Espana. It runs 5. and enters the sea of this name in the port of Los Angeles. 
|CAIO
U LGI, a settlement of Indians of S, Carolina, near the river Cousa. 
|CAIOiN A, a river of the province and govern ment of Guayana, in the part possessed by the Dutch. 
|CAIONE, a settlement and parish of the island of St. Christopher, one of the Antilles ; situate on the borders of the . w. coast, and by the river of its name. 
|CAIOXE, a river of the above island, which rises in the mountains of the interior, runs e. and enters the sea near the settlement of the same name, in the n.w. coast. 
CAIO8, The, a settlement of the French, in their possessions in the island of St. Domingo. It is on the s. coast, having a good port, between, the point Margaret and that of Belle Roche. 
|CAIPI, a settlement of the province and dis trict of Aimaraez in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Lambrama. 
|CAIQUER, a settlement of the province and government of Choco, in the division of Barbacoas, situate on the side of the river Telembi. 
|CAIRAIXAIISGUA, Island of, in the straits of Magellan, at the outlet of the third narrow pass lending to the S. sea, called the Passage. It is of one entire rock ,; and the commander Byron gave it the namex&gt;f cape Providence. 
CAIRAN, a settlement of the province and district of Iluanuco in Peru, annexed to the cu racy of Uuacar. 
|CAIRU, a lake of the province and government of Buenos Ayres, to the e. of the settlement of Canada Larga. 
|CAIRU, a mountain of the same province and government, situate near to the above lake. 
|CAIRU, a settlement of the Portuguese, of the province and captainship of Ilheos in Brazil. 
|CAITAPERA, or FEMIAN, a river of the pro vince and captainship of Para in Brazil. It runs n. and enters the sea to the 
. of the city of Caete. 
|CAIUGAES, Bay of, on the s. coast of the lake Ontario. 
CAIUGUA, a small river of the province and government of Buenos Ayres. It runs to the n. and enters the Guacaruguay. 
CAIUZ, a settlement of the province and govern ment of SantaMarta, in the division of Rio de Hacha, situate on the side and near the port of this river. 
|CAIZA, a settlement of the province and dis trict of Porco in Peru. In its district there are two springs of medicinal waters, the one cold and the other hot, where they have begun to build some baths. It is situate on the banks of the river Paspasa, 12 leagues from Potosi. 
|CAIZA, another settlement in the province and government of Chaco, in the plains of Manso, on the banks of the river Pilcomaio. 
|CAJAMARCA. See CAXAMARCA. CAJAS, a settlement of the province and dis trict of Xauxa in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Huancaio. 
|CAJIARI, a river of the country of the Amazonas, in the part possessed by the Portuguese. It rises under the line, runs nearly due 5. and enters the river Negro before this is joined by the Catabahu. 
|CAJONES, SAN FRANCISCO DE LOS, a head settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Villalta. It is of a cold temperature, and contains 158 Indian families. Its division consists of five other settle ments or villages, and is eight leagues to the s. of its capital. 
|CAJUBABAS, a lake quite in the interior of the country of the Amazonas, and from whence, it is affirmed, the river Madera takes its rise. 
|CAL, SAN ANTONIO DEL, a settlement of the head settlement of the town of Marquesado, and alcaldia mayor of Quatro Villas, in Nueva Espana. It contains 50 families of Indians, who occupy themselves in the cultivation and commerce of co chineal, wheat, maize, fruits, wood, coal, salt, and timber ; and from the revenues arising from these two last articles the city of Oaxaca derives her whole subsistence ; one league s. e. of its capital. 
|CALABOZO, or CALABOSO, a settlement of the province and government of Venezuela, in the kingdom of Tierra Firme ; founded in this cen tury (18th), after the establishment of the company of Guipuzcoa, now the Philippines, on the banks of the river Guarico. [Calabozo is a city of re cent date, having been at first an Indian village, which was increased by the Spaniards, who have fixed their residence there, in order to be near at hand to watch and take care of their flocks. The company of Guipuzcoa arrogate to themselves, in 
|VOL. I. 
241 
their memoirs, the merit of having given to Cala bozo that degree of increase which was necessary to its being inscribed on the list of cities. Its tem perature is excessively hot, although vrry regu larly moderated by the w. e. breezes. The soil is hardly proper for any thing else but grazing ; and this is the only use they make of it. The pas ture is good, and the horned cattle very numerous ; but a sort of banditti are constantly over-running the immense plains from the jurisdiction of Cala bozo as far as the borders of Guarapiche, and steal as many oxen and mules as they can, conveying them in safety toGuayana or Trinity. Often, in deed, do they kill the ox and skin it on the spot, merely taking away the hide and the tallow. It is thought that if prompt and vigorous measures be not taken, the pens distant from the city (as aU most all of them are so situate) will be made mere deserts. The city is situate between two rivers, the Guarico to the w. and the Orituco to the e, but much nearer the former than the latter. These two rivers, whose courses are from n. to s. join their waters about four or five leagues above Calaboso ; then, at a distance of about 20 leagues, fall into the Apure, and increase under this name the Orinoco. When the rains force these two rivers from their beds, which happens every year, the inhabitants find themselves extremely distressed. Their travelling, their work, and every thing else, is suspended. The cattle retire to the heights un til the waters quit the plains, and allow them to return to their pasturage. The streets and houses form an agreeable prospect ; and the church, with out being very handsome, is decent. In 1786, there were in Calabozo, and the five villages that belong to it, 549 houses, 1680 white people, 1186 free Indians, not tributary, 3301 persons of co lour, 943 slaves, 116 country houses and pens, 1872 mules, and 26,557 oxen and cows. In 1804, the population of the city amounted to 4800 people. It is situate in lat. 8 54 , at 52 leagues 5. of Caracas, and nearly as many n. of the Orinoco. 
|CALABOZO, another settlement of the province and government of Santa Maria, in the district of the Rio del Hacha, situate on the sca-coasf. 
|CALA-CALA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Chayanta or Charcas in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Laimes. 
|CALA-CALf , a settlement of the kingdom of Quito, in the (on-egimiento of the district of Cinqo Leguas de la Ciudad. 
|CALACOTO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Pacages in Peru, situate on the shore of the river Desaguadero. i i 
242 
|CALAHUAIA, a settlement of the province and correguiiiento of Guarochiri in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of its capital. 
|CALAIS, a township in Caledonia county, Ver mont, 105 miles n. e. of Bennington. Jt has 45 inhabitants. 
|CALAJAU, a river of the province and govern ment of La Guayana, which enters the Apure. 
|CALAMA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Atacama in Peru, of the arch bishopric of Gharcas, annexed to the curacy of Chiuchiu : In its district are many minerals of jasper, talc, vitriol, lipes stone, and alum ; and it has this peculiarity, that no other animals can breed here except oxen and calves ; horses and mules in variably running mad, and killing themselves by dint of violent exertions. 
|CALAMAR, a settlement of the province and corregimiento ot Luyaand Chillaos in Peru. 
|CALAMARCA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Sicasica in Peru; 13 leagues distant from the capital. 
|CALAMBUCO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Pastos in the kingdom of Quito, situate on the road which leads from Popayan. 
|CALAMUCHITA, a settlement of the province and government of Tucuman, in the valley of its name, and in the jurisdiction of the city of Cor dova. 
, CALAMUCHITA, a valley of the above province and government, between the rivers Tercero and Quarto. 
|CALANDAIMA, a settlement of the jurisdic tion of Tocaima, and government of Mariquita, in the new kingdom of Granada, situate on the side of the river Bogota. It is of a very warm tempera ture, abounding in. maize, z
cas, plantains, and par ticularly in sugar-canes : It contains somewhat more than 50 inhabitants, and is a day s journey from Santa Fe, and a little less from the cily of To caima. 
|CALANGO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Lampa in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of its capital. 
|CALAPUJA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Lampa in Peru, annexed to the curacy of the capit- il. 
|CALAUERA, Bay of the, on the coast of Bra zil, and in the captainship of Iley , betweenthe island CastillosGrundes and that of Ratones, by the side of the cape of Santa Maria. 
|CALBAMiiA, a small river of the province and government of Guanuco ; it rises to the n. of the 
city of Guanuco el Viejo, runs towards this city r and enters the Guallagna at its head. 
|CALBUCO, a city of the province and corregimiento of the island of Chiloe, in the kingdom of Chile. 
|CALCA and LARES, a province and corregi miento of Peru ; bounded s. by Quispicanchi, e. by Paucartambo, s. za. by the jurisdiction of Cnzco, from whence it lies four leagues ; by Abancai ; its limits being a long chain of snow-clad mountains ; and n. e. and n. by the Cordillera of the Andes, and mountains of the infidel Indians. The whole of this province is a broken uneven territory, 30 leagues in length from n. to s. and from two to five in width. Its temperature is mild, excepting in the heights of either side, where it is very cold. Its productions are those of a warm and cold climate, namely, wheat, maize, and other grain in abundance, a variety of fruits, papas, ;nd many sweet-smelling flowers. Its breed of cattle is very con siderable. On the e. it intersects the corditlera by twoextensive valleys, called Quillobamba and Amaibamba,of a warm and moist temperature, very iertile, and in which there are many plantations of canes, from wh ich is made the best sugar in the w hole kingdom. There is also in the n, e. part a pass through the cordillera by the valleys of Ocabamba and Lares, abounding in wild fruits, wood, ani mals, and insects. The fertility of this province is so great, that the sugar-canes being once-plantedj perpetuate themselves for several years, and be come ripe in 14 months; their first produce being extremely fine. There are at present no mines worked, although formerly much silver was pro cured from those which are now abandoned, either on account of their having rilled with water, or from the baseness of the metal produced. There are some indeed of saltpetre, which is carried to Cuzco lor the manufacture of gunpowder. The principal river which waters it is the Vilcomayo, \vhich runs through the broken ravine or valley, and has thrown across it in various parts bridges formed of wicker-work. The number of its inha bitants is 10,000 ; its repartimisnto used to amount to 63,300 dollars, and it paid yearly 508 do .lars for almbala. Its jurisdiction comprehends 18 settlrn cuts, which are, The capital, of the same Ilualiaj 
name, Cachin, 
Pizac, Ghuquicancha, 
San .Salvador, Chinch&lt;&gt;ro, 
Taray, Oilantastambaj 
Goya,. Silque, 
Lares, 
Habitantes del Valle de Ocabamba. 
S.Francisco de la Vic toria, St Juan de Luima, ylos 
|CALCAMAIO, a river of the province and corregimiento of Castro Vireyna in Peru : it rises from a small lake near the cordillera, runs e. and enters the pampas. 
|CALCAHUALCO, SAN SALVADOR DP, a settlement of the head settlement of Yxhuatlan, and akaldia mayor of Cordoba, in Nueva Espana. It contains 66 families of Indians, and is nine leagues n. n. w. of its capital. 
|CALCAUZO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Aimaraez in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Mollebamba. 
|CALCAYLARES. See CALCA and LARES. 
|CALCHA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Chichas and Tarija in Peru. 
|CALCHAQUI, a settlement of the province and government of Buenos Ayres, situate at the mouth of the river Monge, and on the shore of the Parana, close to the rincon or corner of Gaboto. 
|CALCHAQUI, another settlement of the province and government of Tucunwn, situate in the valley of its name, and in the jurisdiction of Salta. 
|CALCHAQUI, a large, fertile, and beautiful valley of the same province. 
|CALDAS, NULSTRA SENORA DE LAS, a settle ment belonging to the missionaries of the religious order of San Francisco, in Nuevo Mexico. 
|CALDERA, a settlement of the province and corrcgmiento of Cuenca in the kingdom of Quito, annexed to the curacy of Paccha. 
|CALDFRA, a river of the alcaJdia mayor of Nata in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, and government of Panama. It rises in the mountains of the s. and and runs into the Pacific ocean, on the side of the Punt a Mala. 
|CALDERA, a river of the province and govern.ment of Tucuman, in the district of the city of lujui. It runs e. and enters the Salado between the Ilubierna and the Blanco. 
|CALDERON, a settlement of the province and government of Atacames, or Esmeraldas, situate at the junction of the rivers Santiago and Bagota, near the coast of the S. sea. 
C ALDERS BURG, a township in Orleans county in Vermont, is about 151 miles n. e. from Bennington, and 11 w. of Connecticut river. 
|CALDEUA, a settlement of the province and captainship of the Rio Grande in Brazil, situate on the shore of the river Carabatang, near the coast. 
|CALDONO, a settlement of the province and government of Popayan, in the new kingdom of Granada. 
|CALEBASSE, MORNE DE LA, or MORRO DE LA CALABAZA, a very lofty mountain, full of sharp points, resembling the Monserrate, in the centre of the island of Martinique, and on the side which looks to the n. e. 
|CALEDONIA County, in Vermont, contains 24 townships, and has Connecticut river 5. e. ; Or leans and Chittenden counties n. w. ; Essex county n. e. ; and Orange county, of which, until lately, it formed a part, s. w.~ 
|CALEDONIA, a port on the isthmus of Darien, in the N. sea, 25 leagues n. w. from the river Atrato. It was attempted to be established by the Scotch nation in J698, and had at first all the promising appearance of success ; but the English, influenced by narrow national prejudices, put every impedi ment in their way, which, joined to the uuhealthiness of the climate, destroyed the infant colony. See DARIEN. 
|CALEGUALA, a settlement and asicnto of the alcaldia mayor of Tonala in Nueva Espana. 
|GALE MAR, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Caxamarquilla or Pataz in Peru, with a good fort, in the river Maranon. By means of this river, commerce is carried on, and facilitated, with Huanmachuco. 
|GALES, Point of, on the coast of Peru, of the province and corregintiento of Arica ; one of those which form port Ylo. 
|CALETA, a creek on the coast of Peru, in the province and corregimtento of Santa, close to the serial or land-mark of Mompon. 
|CALI, SANTIAGO DE, a city of the province and government of Popayan in the kingdom of Quito ; founded in the beautiful plain at the foot of the sierra, and on the banks of the rich stream Cauca, by Miguel Munoz, in the year J5S7 : it was trans ferred from that spot to a place at a small distance, where it at present is, by Miguel Lopez. It is very populous, fertile, and abounding in mines, vegetable productions, and cattle, which is a great article of commerce : It is of warm temperature ; its na tives are esteemed the most skilful and ingenious in the province, and its Indians were of so warlike a nature, that they never would perhaps have been brought into subjection, but for the persuasions of the venerable Fr. Augustin of Coruna, bishop of Popayan. It is the native place of Father Diego Caizedo, a singular missionary, and a man of ex traordinary virtues; also of Father Miguel of Silva, a missionary in the province of Mainas ; both of the abolished society of the Jesuits. Twenty-nine leagues from its capital, and 28 from the port of Bue naventura in trie S. sea. Long. 76 23 . Lat. S 24 . 
|CALIBIO, a settlement of the province and i i 2 
244 
government of Popayan in the kingdom of Quito. 
|CALIBOGIE River and Sound, on the coast of S. Carolina, from the outlet of May and New rivers. 
|CALIDONIA, a capacious, convenient, and se cure port of the province of Darieu, and kingdom of Tierra Firme, on the coast of the N. sea. Here the Scotch founded a colony and establishment, but -were dislodged by order of the king, by the Colonel Don Juan Diaz Piniienta, governor of Cartagena, in the year 1699. The ruins arc yet to be seen of the above colony ; as also of a castle. The French afterwards established themselves here in 1764, but were put to death by the Indians, who immediately admitted the English, who possess a small compact settlement, called jMew Edinburgh. In an uneven ground towards the s. there grows a small plant of two long narrow leaves, each of them of a distinct green colour. When taken to gether, they produce no effect ; but being se parated, that of the lighter colour is a most active and efficacious poison, and produces instant death, though the other is always an antidote. Of this herb the Indians make use, applying the fatal secret to their purposes of vengeance. 
|CALIFORNIA, OLD, isan extensive peninsula of N.America, lying between the tropic of Cancer and the 33 n. lat. ; washed on the e. by a gulf of the same name, and on the w. by the Pacific ocean, or great S. sea ; lying within the three capes or limits of cape St. Lucas, the river Colorado and cape Blanco dc San Sebastian, which is called its 10. limit. The gulf which cashes it on the e. called the gulf of California, is an arm of the Pacific ocean, intercepted between cape Corrientes on the one side, and cape St. Lucas on the other ; that is, between Mexico or New Spain on the n. e. and that of California on the w. It is nearly 300 leagues in length from the cape of San Lucas to the last reduced territory towards the n. Its width Js various, for, being at the aforementioned extre mity, 10 leagues, it continues increasing to 20, 30, and 40 leagues from one sea to the other. The cli mate is various, according to the different heights of the land ; but for the most part it is excessively hot. The ground is uneven, rough, and barren, full of ridges of mountains, stony and sandy places; lacking moisture, but abounding in mules, horses, and neat cattle, and all sorts of swine, goats, and sheep, which have multiplied in the same propor tion as the dogs and cats introduced by the Spa niards. There is found in the woods a kind of ani mal, which, in the language of the country, is called tat/?) about the size of a calf of a year and an half 
old, and very much resembling one; its head and skin being like to those of a deer, its horns very thick, and similar to those of a ram : its hoof is large, round, and cleft like that of an ox ; the tail is small, and the flesh is well tasted and delicate. There is also another animal here very like a sheep, although somewhat larger ; of these there are black and white, bearing quantities of wool very easy to be spun, and their flesh is very delicate. Here are also found deer, hares, rabbits, berrendos, and coyotes, a species of fox, and called by this name in Nueva Espana. Sometimes leopards have been seen here, and a few years since some Indians killed a wolf, an animal which had never before been known in these parts. In the serrama
 or mountainous pads, there are wild hogs, cats, tigers, and a species of beaver. This country abounds in reptiles, as vipers, snakes of different sorts, scor pions, spiders, ants, lizards, and tarantulas : but it is free from bugs, fleas, and niguus. Of birds, it produces turtle-doves, herons, quails, pheasants, partridges, geese, ducks, wild ducks, ring-doves, and some birds of prey, as sparrow-hawks, vul tures, falcons, horned ouls, eagles, and also jack daws, those too which they call zopilotes in (Nueva Espafia, and others which they call auras
 (or West Indian crows), screech-owls, and different birds not known in any other parts. This country is ex tremely barren of wood ; and only towards the cape of Sanducas, where the country is most level, fertile, and temperate, are there any trees to be found. Here, however, we have that peculiar tree called the pitajain
 the branches of which are fluted, and grow up straight from its trunk, bear ing no leaf; on the same branch hangs the fruit, having the rind covered with prickles; so that it appears to some to be a species of i\iQtrmau (thistle plant), although the fruit is whiter and more deli cate : some produce fruit of a reddish, and some of a yellow tint, which is extremely well flavoured, and is either sweet, or a little acidulous ; the same is esteemed an excellent medicine in the venereal disease. From the fruit trees aromatic gums are gathered in such abundance that they are mixed with grease for careening the bottoms of ships ; and from the crude root of the mczcales they com pose the drink so called. They have a sort of aloes, from strips of which they make nets; and from other herbs, in a manner which is truly curi ous, they manufacture bowls and cruets to eat and drink out of. The Indians who inhabit the river Colorado, fabricate from the same herbs troughs or trays, which they call coritas, so large as to con tain two hundred weight of maize. In them they carry by water fruits and different articles from one 
|CALIFORNIA. 
245 
shore to another. They have besides the alimen tary herb called yucas, the Spanish potatoe, and the gicamas. This country produces also olives, figs, vines, wheat, maize, French beans, water melons, melons, gourds, chickpeas, and all kinds of garden herbs, for which it is indebted to the Je suits, who first planted them here. No mines have been discovered here ; but there are sufficient in dications of the existence of every sort of metal. The quantity of fish and shell fish found on its coasts is incredible ; it is of every description, and among others, the profusion of pilchards is most astonishing ; these being at certain seasons left in shoals dry upon the beach. W hales are also found here, and on the exterior coast shells of the most beautiful lustre may be collected ; some of these being more brilliant than the finest mother of pearl, and covered with a blue similar to that of the most delicate lapis lazuli. Nor are pearls themselves to be found in less abundance. It is true that the Indian formerly used to throw the shell bearing this precious treasure into the fire, in order that he might extract the oyster lor his food ; but now, it appears, he has learned to hold it indue estimation, instructed by the Europeans. The pearl fisheries in these parts are much iavoured by the shallowness of the wfiter. This country was discovered in the year 1526 by the celebreted Hernan Cortes, as he was endeavouring to find a passage from the N. to the S. sea. Its conquest from that time had often been attempted, but without etlect, until the year 1679, when, pursuant to the king s direction, it was invaded by Admiral Don Isidro Otondo, and was settled by the missionaries of the extinguished order of the Jesuits, under the direction of the Fa ther Eusebio Francisco Kino, who first began to bring the infidel Indians under subjection. Many changes and conquests have since taken place here, under different officers appointed on the several occasions; the relation of which would however, perhaps unnecessarily, dilate this article beyond its proper limits. [The peninsula of Old California, which equals England in extent of territory, and does not contain the population of the small to\vns of Ipswich or Deptford, lies under the same parallel with Bengal and the Canary islands. The sky is constantly serene and of a deep blue, and without a cloud ; and should any clouds appear for a mo ment at the setting of the sun, they display the most beautiful shades of violet, purple, and green. All those who had ever been in Old California, pre served the recollection of the extraordinary beauty of this phenomenon, which depends on a particular state of the vesicular vapour and the purity of the air in these climates. No where could an astrono 
mer find a more delightful abode than at Cumana, Coro, the island of Margerita, and the coast of California. But unfortunately in this peninsula the sky is more beautiful than the earth. The soil is sandy and arid, like the shores of Provence ; vegetation is r.t a stand : and rain is very unfrequent. A chain of mountains runs through the centre of the peninsula, of \vhichthe mokt elevated, the Cerro de la Giganta, is from 1400 to 1500 metres (from 4592 to 4920 feet) in height, and appears of volcanic origin. This Cordillera is inhabited by animals, the most peculiar of which have been already enumerated. At the foot of the mountains of California we discover only sand, or a stony stratum, on which cylindrical cacti (organos del tunal) shoot up to extraordinary heights. We find few springs ; and through a particular fatality, it is remarked that the rock is naked where the water springs up, while there is no water where the rock is covered with vegetable earth. Whereever springs and earth happen to be together, the fertility of the soil is immense. It was in these points, of which the number is far from great, that the Jesuits established their first missions. The maize, the jatropha, and the dioscorea
 vegetate vigorously ; and the vine yields an excellent grape, of which the wine resembles that of the Canary islands. In general, however, Old California, on account of the arid nature of the soil, and the want of water and vegetable earth in the interior of the country, will never be able to maintain a great po pulation any more than the n. part of Sonora, which is almost equally dry and sandy. Of all tl&gt; natural productions of California the pearls have, since the 16th century, Uecn the chief attrac tion to navigators for vi.siling the coast of this de sert country. They abound particularly in the s. part of the peninsula. Since the cessation of the pearl fishery near the island of Margerita, opposite the coast of Araya, the gulfs of Panama and California are the only quarters in the Spanish colonies which supply pearls for the commerce of Europe. Those of California are of a very beauti ful water and large ; but they are frequently of an irregular figure, disagreeable to the eye. The shell which produces the pearl is particularly to be found in the bay of Ceralvo, and round the islands of Sam a Cruz and San Jose. The most valuable pearls in the possession of the court of Spain were found in 1615 and 1665, in the expeditions of Juan Yturbi and Bernal de Pinadero. During the stay of the Visitador Galvez in California, in 1768 and 1769, a private soldier in the presidio of Loreto, Juan Ocio, was made rich in a short time by pearl fishing on the coast of Ceralvo. Since that period 
246 
|CALIFORNIA. 
the numbers of pearls of California brought annually to market is almost reduced to nothing. The Indians and Negroes, who follow the severe occupa tion of divers, are so poorly paid by the whites, that the fishery is considered as abandoned. This branch of industry languishes from the same causes which in South America have raised the price of the Peruvian sheep-skins, the caoutchouc, and the febrifugal bark of the quinquina. In California the Jesuits obtained a complete victory over the soldiery posted in the presidios. The court decided by a cechtla rettf, that all the detachment of Loreto, even the captain, should be under the command of tire father at the head of the missions. The interest ing voyages of three Jesuits, Eusebius Kiihn, Maria Salvatierra, and Juan Uguarte, brought us acquainted with (he physical situation of the coun try. The village of Loreto had been already founded, under the name of Presidio de San Dionisio, in 1697. Under the reign of Philip V. espe cially after the year 1744, the Spanish establish ments in Californa became very considerable. The Jesuits displayed there that commercial industry and that activity to which they are indebted for so many successes, and which have exposed them to so many calumnies in both Indies, in a very few years they built 16 villages in the interior of the peninsula. Since their expulsion in 1707, Cali fornia has been confided to the Dominican monks of the city of Mexico ; and it appears that they have not been so successful in their establishments of Old California, as the Franciscans have been on the coasts of New California. The natives of the pen insula who do not live in the missions, are of all sa vages, perhaps, the nearest to what has been called the state of nature. They pass whole days stretched out on their bellies on the sand, when it is heated by the reverberation of the solar rays. Like se veral tribes of the Orinoco, they entertain a great horror for clothing. u A monkey dressed up docs not appear so ridiculous to the common people in Europe," says Father V r cnegas, " as a man in clothes appears to the Indians of California." Not withstanding this state of apparent stupidity, the first missionaries distinguished different religious sects among the natives. Three divinities, who carried on a war of extermination against each other, were objects of terror among three of the tribes of California. The Pericues dreaded the power of Niparaya, and the Menquis and the Vehities the power of Wactipuran and Sumongo. Accord ing to the information obtained from the monks who now govern the two Californias, the popu lation of Old California has diminished to such a degree within the last thirty years, that there are not 
more than from 4 to 5000 native cultivators (Tndios reducidos) in the villages of the missions. The number of these missions is also reduced to 16. The savages amount to only 4000, and it is observed that those inhabiting the n. of California are somewhat more gentle and civilized than the natives of the s. division. The principal villages of this province are Loreto, Santa Ana, and San ( Nite-va California). It is a long and narrow exJoseph. 
The part of the coast of the great ocean which extends from the isthmus of Old California, or from the bay of Todos los Santos (s. from the port of San Diego) to cape Mendocino, bears on the Spanish maps the name of New California tent of country, in which for these 40 years the Mexican government has been establishing mis sions and military posts. No village or farm is to be found n. of the port of St. Francis, which is more than 78 leagues distant from cape Mendo cino. The province of New California in its present state is only 197 leagues in length, and from nine to ten in breadth. The city of Mexico is the same dis aace in a straight line from Philadelphia as from Monterey, which is the chief place of the mis sions of New California, and of which the lati tude is the same within a few minutes with that of Cadiz. At the time of the expedition of M. Galvez, military detachments came from Loreto to the port of San Diego. The letter-post still goes from this port along the n. to. coast to San Francisco. This last establishment, the most n. of all the Spa nish possessions of the new continent, is almost under the same parallel with the small (own ofTaos in New Mexico. It is not more than 300 leagues distant from it ; and though Father Escalante, in his apostolical excursions in 1777, advanced along the id. bank of the river Zaguananas towards the mountains De los Guacaros, NO traveller has yet come from New Mex ico to the coast of New Ca lifornia. 
From the example of the English maps, several geographers give the name of New Albion to New California. This denomination is founded on the inaccurate opinion of the navigator Drake, who first discovered, in 1578, the n. w. coast of Ame rica between the 38 and the 48 of latitude. The celebrated voyage of Sebastian Viscaino is no doubt 24 years posterior to the discoveries of Francis Drake; but Knox and other historians seem to forget that Cabrillo hnd already examined, in 1542, the coast of New California to the parallel of 43, the boundary of his navigation, as we may see from a comparison of the old observations of latitude with those taken in our own days. AI- 
|CALIFORNIA. 
247 
though the whole shore of New California was carefully examined by the great navigator Sebas tian Viscaino, (as is proved by plans drawn up by himself in 1602), this fine country was only, how ever, occupied by the Spaniards 167 years after wards. The court of Madrid dreading lest the other maritime powers of Europe should form settlements on the n. w. coast of America, which might become dangerous to the Spanish colonies, gave orders to the Chevalier de Croix,the viceroy, and the Visitador dalvez, to found missions and presidios in the ports of S; n Diego arid Monterey. For this purpose two packet-boats set out from the port of San Bias, and anchored at San Diego in the month of April 1763. 
The soil of New California is as well watered and fertile as that of Old California is arid and stony. It is one of the most picturesque countries which can be seen. The climate is much more mild there than in the same latitude on the e. coast of the new continent. The sky is foggy, but the frequent fogs, which render it difficult to land on the coast of Monterey and San Francisco, give vigour to vegetation and fertilize the soil, which is covered with a black and spongy earth. In the 18 missions which now exist in New Cali fornia, wheat, maize, and haricots (frisoles) 9 are cultivated in abundance. Barley, beans, lentiles, and garhaiizo. , grow very well in the fields in the greatest part of the province. Good wine is made in the villages of San Diego, San Juan Capistrano, San Gai/riel, San Buenaventura, Santa Barbara, San Luis Obispo, Santa Clara, and San Jose, and all along the coast, s. and n. of Monterey, to beyond the 37 of latitude. The European olive is succcs.fully cultivated ii.-ar the canal of Santa Barbara, especially near San Diego, where an oil is made as good ns that of the valley of Mexico, or the oils of Andalucia. 
The population of New California, includingonly the Indians attached to the soil who have begun to cultivate their fields, was 
in 1790, - - 7. 748 souls in 1801, - - 13,&lt;)68 and in 1802, - - 15,
62 
Thus the number of inhabitants has doubled in 12 years. Since the fou-idation of tnese missions, or between 1 769 and ISO;?, there were in ;&gt;!l, ac cording to the parish registers, 33,7.7 baptisms, 8009 marriages, and 16,984 death*, We must not attempt to deduce from these data the pro portion between tin births and deaths, because in the number of b-plisn s the adult Indian* (los neofitos) are confounded with the children. The estimation of the produce of the soil, or the har 
vests, furnishes also the most convincing proofs of the increase of industry and prosperity of New California. In 1791, accordingto the tables pub lished by M. Galiano, the Indians sowed in the whole province only 874 bushels of wheat, which yielded a harvest of 15,197 bushels. The culti vation doubled in 1802; for the quantity of wheat sown was 2089 bushels, and the harvest 33,576 bushels. 
The following table contains the number of live stock in 1802. 
Oxen. 67,782 
Sheep. 107.172 
1040 
Horses. 2187 
Mules. 
877 
In 1791 there were only 24,958 head of black rattle (ganado mayor) in the whole of the Indian villages. The n. part of California is inhabited by the two nations of the Riimsen and Escelen. They speak languages totally different from one another, and they form the population of the presidio and the village of Monterey. In the bay of San Fran cisco the languages of the different tribes of the Matalans, Salsen, and Quirotes, are derived from a common root. Father Lasuen observed, that on an extent of 180 leagues of the coast of California, from San Diego to San Francisco, no fewer than 17 languages are spoken, which can hardly be considered as dialects of a small number of mo ther languages. The population of New Cali fornia would have augmented still more rapidly if the laws by which the Spanish presidios have been governed for ages were not directly opposite to the true interests of both mother-country and colonies. By these laws the soldiers stationed at Monterey are not permitted to live out of their barracks and to settle as colonists. The Indians who inhabit the villages of New California have been for some years employed in spinning coarse woollen stuffs, called frisadas ; but their princi pal occupation, of which the produce might be come a very considerable branch of commerce, is the dressing of stag-skins. In the cordillera of small elevation which runs along the coast, as well as in the neighbouring savannas , there are neither buffalos nor elks ; and on the crest of the moun tains which are covered with snow in the month of November, the btrrendos, with small chamois horns, feed by themselves. But all the forest and all the plains covered with gramina, are filled with flocks of sta
s of a most gigantic size, the horns of which are round and extremely large. Forty or fifty of them are frequently seen at a time : they are of a brown colour, smooth, and without spot. Their horns, which are not palmated, are nearly 15 decimetres (4| feet) in length. It is affirmed by every traveller, that this great stag of New Ca- 
248 
lifornia is one of the most beautiful animals of Spanish America. It probably differs from the wewakish of M. Hearne, or the elk of the United States, of which naturalists have very improperly made the two species of cervus Canaclensis and cervus Strongyloceros. The horns of these stags are said to be nine feet long, and the animal, when running, throws up its head to rest them on its back. 
The Spanish and Russian establishment being hitherto ihe only ones which exist on the n. w. coast of America, it may not be useless here to enumerate all the missions of New California which have been founded up to 1S03. This de tail is more interesting at this period than ever, as the United States have shown a desire to ad vance towards the w. towards the shores of the great ocean, which, opposite to China, abounds with beautiful furs of sea otters. 
The missions of New California run from s. to n. in the order here indicated : 
San Diego, a village founded in 1769, 15 leagues distant from the most //. mission of Old California. Population in 1802, 1560. 
San Luis Rcy de Francia, a village founded in 1798, 600. 
San Juan Capistrano, a village founded in 1776, 1000. 
San Gabriel, a village founded in 1771, 1050. 
San Fernando, a village founded in 1797, 600. 
San Buenaventura, a village founded in 1782, 950. 
Santa Barbara, a village founded in 1786, 1100. 
La Purissima Concepcion, a village founded in 1787, 1000. 
San Luis Obisbo, a village founded in 1772, 700. 
San Miguel, a village founded in 1797, 600. 
Soledad, a village founded in 1791, 570. 
San Antonio de Padua, a village founded in 1771, 1050. 
San Carlos de Monterey, capital of New Cali fornia, founded in 1770. 
San Juan Bautista, a village founded in 1797, 960. 
Santa Cruz, a village founded in 1794, 440. 
Santa Clara, a village founded in 1777, J300. 
San Jose, a village founded in 1797, 630. 
San Francisco, a village founded in 1776, with a fine port. This port is frequently confounded by geographers with the port of Drake further n. under the 38 10 of latitude, called by the Spaniards the Puerto de Bodega, Population of San Franciscoj 820. 
The number of whites, Mustees,and Muluttocs, who live in New California, either in the presidios, or in tbc service of the monks of St. Francis, may be about 1300 ; for in the two years of 1801 and 1802, there were in the cast of whites and mixed blood 35 marriages, 182 bap tisms, and S
 deaths. It Is only on this part of the population that the government can reckon for the defence of the coast, in case of any military attack by the maritime powers of Europe. The population of the intendancy of New California was, in 1803, 15,600. The extent of surface in square leagues 2125, the inhabitants being seven to each league. 
|CALIGASTA, a race of Indians of the pro vince and corregimiento of Qnillota in the king dom of Chile, to the w. of the city of San Juan de la Frontera. 
|CALIMAIA, a settlement and head settle ment of the a/caldia mayor of the Metepec in Nueva Espaiia. It contains 260 families of Indians, and is two leagues s. s. w. of its capital. 
|CALIMA, a mountain of the province and go vernment of Choco in the kingdom of Tierra Firmc, on the heights of which there is a watchtower, with a fort commanding and defending the entrance of the river San Juan. 
|CALLA-CALLA, a very abundant stream of the kingdom of Chile, in the district of Guada. labquen. It rises from the lakes of Huanague, runs w. and enters the Valdivia near the city. 
|CALLA-CALI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Collaquas in Peru. 
|CALLA-HUAIA, a large river of Peru, to the e. of Cuzco, which descends from the cordillera of the Andes. 
|CALLAO, a Peruvian city and port of the S. sea, much frequented, and carrying on a great commerce with the other provinces of America, and with Europe. It gained the title of city in the year 1671. It was well fortified when the Dutch commander Jacques 1 Hermite laid siege to it for the space of five months, in the yenr 1624 ; and here, it is said, that owing to his failure in this enterprise, he died of vexation. [On the n. side runs the river which waters Lima, on which side is a small suburb built only of reeds. There is another on the s. side ; they are both called Pitipisti, and inhabited by Indians. To the e. are extensive plains, adorned with beautiful orchards watered by canals cut from the river. The town, which is built on a low flat point of land, was strongly fortified in the reign of Philip IV. ; and numerous batteries command the port and road, 
|GAL 
which is the greatest, finest, and safest in all the S. sea. There is anchorage every -where in very deep water, without danger of rocks or shoals, except one, which is three cables length from the shore, about the middle of the island of St. Law rence, opposite La Galatea. The little island of Callao lies just before the town. In the opening between these two islands, there are two small islets, or rat her rocks; there is also a third very low, but half a league out at sea, s. s. e. from the n. w. point of the island of St. Lawrence. Near the sea-side is the governor s house, which, with the viceroy s palace, take up two sides of a square ; the parish churah makes a third ; and a battery of three pieces of cannon forms the fourth. The churches are built of canes interwoven, and cover ed with clay, or painted white. Here are five monasteries, and an hospital. The houses are in general built of slight materials; the singular cir cumstance of its never raining in this country renders stone houses unnecessary ; and besides, these are more apt to suffer from earthquakes, which are frequent here. The most remarkable happened in the year 1746, which laid |ths of Lima level with the ground, and entirely demo lished Callao ; where the destruction was so en tire, that only one man, of 3000 inhabitants, was left to record this dreadful calamity. Lat. 12 2 5. Long. 77 4 w.~ 
C A LI/ A PA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Picajes in Peru. 
|CALLAPAMPA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Huarochiri in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Yauli. 
|CALLAQUI, Volcano of, in the province and corresimienlo of Ytata, and country of the Pelluenches Indians, in the kingdom of Chile. 
|CALLAUCU-JAN, a lake ot the province of Guamachuco in Peru, from whence rises the river of Santa . 
|CALLE, a settlement of the province and corregimicnto of Paucartambo in Peru, annexed to the curacy of the capital. 
|CALLE,) ON, a settlement of the province and government of Buenos Ayres, situate at the mouth of the river Saladiilo, on the coast lying between the river La Plata and the straits of Magellan. 
|CALLENMARCA, a settlement of the pro vince and corregimitnto of Angaraes in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Lircas. 
|CALLIAQUA, a town and harbour at the s. w. end of St. Vincent, one of the Charibbce islands. The harbour is (he best in the island, and draws thither a great part of the trade, and the principal inhabitants of the island. 
|VOL. I. 
249 
|CALLIQUE, a settlement of the district and corregimiento of Colchagua in the kingdom of Chile, situate on the shore of the river Nilahu. 
|CALLIRI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Cochabamba in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Carasa. 
|CALLISECAS, a barbarous and savage nation dwelling n. of the mountains of Guanuco in Peru. They carry on a continual warfare with the nv tions of the Cepazos and Cocmonomas. 
|CALLO. a settlement of the province of Quito, in the district of the corregimiento of Las Cinco Leguas. 
|CALLO, a port of the coast of the S. sea, in the province and government of Guayaquil. 
|CALLUA, a small lake of the province and captains/n p general of Key in Brazil, in the Rincon dc Turotetama. 
|CALM Point, on the n. w. coast of N. Ame rica, lies within Bristol bay, on the n. side. 
|CALMETITLAN, a settlement of the head settlement of Zitlala, and alcaldia mayor of Chilapa, in Nueva Espaiia ; two leagues to the s. of its capital. 
|CALN, EAST and WF.ST, two townships in Chester county, Pennsylvania. 
|CALONGE, a small island of the large lake Titicaca, belonging to the province and correginiienlo of Omasuyos in Peru. 
|CALOS, a bay on the w. coast of the penin sula of E. Florida, where are excellent fishing banks and grounds. Not far from this is a con siderable town of Serninole Indians. The Spa niards from Cuba take great quantities of fish here, and barter with the Indians and traders for skins, furs, &c. and return with their cargoes to Cuba. 
|CALOTA, a city of the province and govern ment of Popayan, founded in the place called De la Qucbrada, on-the shore of the river Magdalena &gt; and near its source, by Juan Moreno, in the year 1543. It is of a warm and moist temperature, abounding in p-olcl mines, but very subject to tem pests, in which thunderbolts are observed to fall frequently and in great numbers. The Paces Indians, the inhabitants, in conjunction with the Pigaos, destroyed it, putting to death the curate, in the year 1641 ; and bring deeply incensed against the bell of the church, because it used to call them to mass, and to their instruction in re ligion, they endeavoured, by various means, to break it to pieces, which they were not able to effect till they rolled it down from the top of a mountain into a stony valley ; from which time, as fame will have it, this bell is heard to sound here whenever a tempest rises, and as often as it is & K 
250 
heard the tempest immediately subsides. Again, when it was resolved to rebuild the city at a small distance, they collected the pieces of this bell, and from some or them formed another bell, reserving the remaining pieces as a kind of precious relic or specific against tempests, keeping them shut up in a box to which there are two keys, one of which is kept by the curate, and the other by the bishop of Popayan, who distribute bits of this bell, in order that they may be wrought up in the tongues of otlver small bells ; and indeed, so much are they esteemed, and so common have they become, that there is not a house in the kingdom but has in it this relic, as a specific antidote against tempests. 
|CALPA, SAN ANDRKS DE, the head settle ment of the alcaldia mayor of Atrisco in Nueva Espana, situate in a spacious and pleasant v;illey, with a convent of the religious order of San Fran cisco. It contains 200 families of Indians, and 50 of Spaniards, Muslecs, and Mulattoes, who live in the manufacturing communities in its district, where are cultivated hemp and flax. These articles are used only in the making of rigging and coachharness. Four leagues and a half n. w. of its capital. 
|CAT,PA, another settlement of the province and corregimiento ofCaxatambo in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Cochamarca. 
|CALPANAPA, a small village or hamlet at tached to Cochoapa, of the alcaldia mayor of Talpa in Nueva Espana. It contains 47 families of Indians. 
|CALPI, a settlement of the province and cor regimiento of Kiobamba in the kingdom of Quito. In its district there is a large tract of country call ed Choquipoglio. 
|CALPOLALPAN, a mountain in New Mex ico, which abounds with quarries of jasper and marble of different colours. 
|CALPULALPA, SAN MATEO DE, the head settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Ixtepexi, of the province and bishopric of Oaxaca in Nueva Espana. It contains 430 families of Indians, with the people of its district, who employ themselves in the cultivation of cochineal and in the weaving of cotton. 
|CALPUTILAN, with the dedicatory title of San Mateo, in the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Guejozingo, of the same kingdom. It contains 20 families of Indians. 
|GALPUTITLAN, a settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Toluca in Nueva Espana. It contains 125 families of Indians, and lies at a little distance to the s. of its capital. 
|CALTA, Point of, on the coast of the province 
|CAM 
and captainship of Seara in Brazil, between the rivers Guamare and Scorgovivc. 
|CALTENGO, SAN JOSEPH DE, a settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor ofCuernavaca in Nueva Espana. 
|CALUALCHI, Point of, on the w. coast of the island of Puertorico, between that of San Fran cisco and the port of Anasco, in front of the island of Desecho. 
|CALUARIO, Mountain of, a settlement of the Capuchin missionaries in the province and govern ment of Guayana, of the kingdom of Tierra Firme, on the shore of the Orinoco. 
|CALUARIO, a river of the province and govern ment of Venezuela. It rises in the sierra of Carrizal, runs s. and enters the Orituco. 
|CALUMA, a river of the kingdom of Quito, which passes through the plains of Ojiba. From these plains it takes its name, which it afterwards changes into Caracol. It rises in the mountains of Chimbo, runs from s. w. to n. e. and afterwards turning from n. e. to s. w. takes a short turn from n. to s. and enters the Babahoyo, near the settle ment of this name. 
|CALUO, Port, a large bay of the province and captainship of Pcrnambuco in Brazil ; situate be tween the port of Las Piedras and the settlement of San Benito. 
|CALVERT, a county of the province and co lony of Maryland, one of the 10 which compose that province ; bounded by the county of Charles, and divided from the same by the river Paluscent, being also in the same manner divided from the county of Prince George. 
|CALVERTOWN, a city of the province and correginiitnto of Maryland, capital of the county of Calvert. 
|CALZON, Island of, one of those lying to the . of St. Domingo, between the s. point of Cacio Grande and Paiiuelo Quadrado. 
|CAM Island, one of the small Virgin islands in the West Indies; situate near St. John s, in the King s channel. 
|CAMAGANDI, a river of the province and go vernment of Choco. It rises in the mountains, and runs into the sea on the w. coast, emptying itself into the gulf of Tucumari or Darien. 
|CAMAMEU, a small river of the province and country of the Amazonas, in the part possessed by the Portuguese. It runs from n. to s. in a ser pentine course, and enters the Rio Negro, between the Jacuapiri and the Anavillana. 
|CAM AMU, a settlement of the province and captainship of Los liheos in Brazil ; situate on the shore of the river of its name. 
|CAM 
|CAM AMU, a river of the same province and kingdom, which rises in the sierra Chapada, runs to e. and empties itself into the sea, close by the sand-bank of its name. 
|CAMAMU, Sand-bank of, lying at the mouth of the river of the same name, where there is a fort or castle, called Nuestra Senora de Gracia, to defend the entrance of the river. 
|CAM AN A, a province and corregimiento of Peru ; bounded n. w. and n. by the province of lea, n. e. by that of Lucanas, e. by that of Parinacochas and Condesuios, s. e. by that of Collahuas, and w. by the S. sea. It extends in length 25 leagues, from the n. w. to the s. e. extremities, and in its widest part from e. to w. it is 14 leagues. It is composed of many valleys, which for the most part terminate on the coast, and are thus called, viz. Mages, Camana, Quilca, Ocona, Atico, Chaparra, Chala, Yauca, and Acari. To the s. and before the valley of Mages, there lies a valley of the name of Sihuas, which is 10 leagues in length. The five valleys towards the s. belong to the tem poral jurisdiction of (his province ; but inasmuch as relates to the ecclesiastical jurisdiction, appertain to the province of Collahuas. All these valleys abound in pimento, vines, of which they make wine and brandy ; with figs and seeds, particularly in Mages ; with these productions a large commerce is carried on with the neighbouring provinces. The temperature here is similar to that of Lima. Towards the sierra, rain is not unfrequent, and in that part are many mines of gold, which, however, owing to the hardness of the metals, the immense expences of working, and the great mixture of alloy, render but little profit. Here are also mines of copper, and upon a very lofty mountain called Huantiapa, are mines of crystal of various colours. All these valleys are irrigated by rivulets running down from the sierra; and many of these swell prodigiously in the rainy months, which are Ja nuary, February, and March. The rest of the year these valleys suffer much from drought, with the exception of those of Mages and Ocona, which are always well watered with streams abounding in king-fish, lisas, and prawns. In the former valley, in particular, is found an animal much re sembling a cat, which lives upon these king-fish. This province is poor, and its inhabitants are a wretched race, dispersed over many valleys, and living upon dried figs instead of bread. There are various creeks upon the coast, in which fish are caught in considerable quantities, and carried to be sotd in the sierra. There are also some small islands where they go to collect huanco, which is the dung of a certain bird, and used for manuring 
|CAM 
251 
the valleys. The reparlimiento in this province formerly amounted to 52,600 dollars, and it paid yearly 420 for alcavala. Its population is con tained in 14 settlements, which are, 
Quilca, Valle de Chaparra, 
Aplao, Tocotay, 
Huancarqui, Atiquipa, 
Ocona, Acari, 
Caraveli, Yucata, 
Valle de Atico, Yauca, 
Chala, Yaqui. 
|CAMANA, the capital of the above province, is situate two leagues from the sea, on a beautiful and delightful spot. It is watered by the Mages, just before this river enters the sea, where it takes its course round a most charming grove tenanted by a variety of birds. The population was for merly large, but at present its inhabitants scarcely amount to the number of 1500 souls, owing to the greater part of them having emigrated to Arequipa. There is a small bay on the coast, of the same name, where quantities of fish are caught. [Lat. 16 17 s.l 
|CAMANAN, a river of the province and co lony of Surinam, in that part of Guayana which is possessed by the Dutch. It rises at the end of the serranias of Rinocote, runs e. and enters into the Mazarroni. 
|CAMANESTIGOUIA, or TRES Rios, a fort belonging to the French in Canada, on the banks of the lake Superior, and at the mouth at which it runs into Christinaux. 
|CAMANICO, a settlement of the province and government of Venezuela ; situate on the shore of the river Aquirre, between the settlements of Araure and San Carlos, and to the e. of the latter. 
|CAMANTI, a settlement and asienlo of the mines of the province and corregimiento of Quispicanchi in Peru. 
|CAMANTI, a lofty peak or eminence of the above province, on the side of two lakes, being ex actly in the line which divides this province from Paucartambo, s. of the settlement of Marcapata. 
|CAMAPETA, a river of the province and cor regimiento of Pomabamba in Peru. It rises in the Cordillera of the Andes of Cuchoa, runs in a n. n. e. direction, and enters the rich stream of the Beni. 
|CAMAPOA, or CAMAPUA, a river of the ter ritory of Cuiaba in Brazil. See TAQUARI. 
|CAMARA, or CARAJAIS, a small settlement belonging to the Portuguese, in the province and by the river of the Amazonas ; situate on the shore of the large river Negro, somewhat above the city of Barcellos. 
|CAMARAGIBI, or CAMURIGI, a river of the a K 2 
232 CAM 
captainship of Pernambuco in Brazil. It rises near the coast, and runs into the sea between the An tonio Grande and the Totavimaucha. 
|CAMARATUBA, a small river of the captain ship of Paraiba in Brazil. It rises near the coast, runs e. and enters the sea between the settlements of Jorge Pinto and Gonzalo. 
|CAMARGO, a settlement of the proviqce and government of La Sierra Gorda, in the bay of Mexico and kingdom of Nueva Espana ; founded in the year 1750 by the Count of Sierra Gorda, Don Joseph de Escandon, colonel of the militia of Queretaro. 
|CAMARGOS, a settlement of the province and captainship of Espiritu Santo in Brazil. 
|CAMARl, a very lofty mountain of the pro vince and government of Guayana, or Nueva Andalucia, on the banks of the river Itari. 
|CAM A RON, a river of the province and co lony of Surinam, in the part of Guayana possessed by the Dutch. It rises at the end of the serrania, of Rinocote, runs towards the e. and enters the Mazarroni. 
|CAM A no v, a cape on the coast of the province and government of Honduras, between the river Urare and the Bayamo. 
C A MA RONES, Bay of, on the coast imme diately between the river La Plata and the straits* of Magellan. It lies 44 4V to s. between the bay of San Jorge and port Lcones. 
|CAMARONES, another port of the coast of the S.sea, in the province and corregimietito of Arica. Itisinlat. 19 16 . 
|CAM A RONES, a river of the same province and corregimiento. 
|CAMATA, a settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Tinguindin in Nueva Espana. It contains 200 families of Indians, in cluding those who live within the neighbourhood of its district, arid is the last of those settlements under the same jurisdiction. 
|CAMATA, a settlement of the province and for-" regiiniento of Larecaxa in Peru. 
V/AMA vOS, a barbarous nation of Indians; who live scattered among the woods and on the banks of the lakes formed by the river Ucayale to the e. and who carry on a continual warfare with their neighbours the Cunivos. Discovered in the year* 16S6. 
|CAMBAI, SAN MIGUEL r&gt;E, the head settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Kilotepec in Nueva Espana. It contains 665 families of Indians, and is three leagues to the e. n. e. of its capital. 
|CAMBARBALA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Coquimbo in the kingdom 
of Chile. In its district there is a parish church, also different mills for the manufacturing of me tals, and an apparatus for founding them. 
|CAMBAS, a barbarous nation of Indians dwell ing 5. of the river Ucayale, and n. of the Paucartarnbo. They live a wandering life in the woods, and are connected with the nation of the Piros. 
|CAMBOIA, a river of the province and coun try of the Amazonas, in the territory of the Encabellados Indians. It runs e. and afterwards turning to s. s. e. enters the Maraiion, opposite the town of Oravia. 
|CAMBRIDGE, the half-shire town of Middle sex county, Massachusetts, is situate upon the n. arm of the river Charles,, near Charlcstown, and seven miles tothe n.w. of Boston. Itcontaius some beautiful streets and buildings ; was formerly called New-town, and had its name changed to Cam bridge. Its university contained, previous to the reign of Queen Anne, more than 4000 choice books. The college consist* of a president, five collo&lt;ria&lt;rs, and one treasurer. There was likewise a college for the Indians ; but not being made use of for this purpose, it was converted into a print ing oflice. 
Cambridge is one of the largest and most respect able townships of the county. Its three parishes, Cambridge, Little Cambridge, and Menotomy, contain three Congregational meeting-houses, one for Baptists, and another for Episcopalians, a number of very pleasant seats, and 2 1 15 inhabi tants. The elegant bridge which connects this town with Boston has been described under the head of Boston. The compact part of the bridge is pleasantly situated 3| miles W. of Boston, on the n. bank of Charles river, over which is a bridge leading to Little Cambridge. It contains about 100 dwelling houses. Its public buildings, be sides the edifices which belong to Harvard univer sity, are the Episcopal and Congregational meeting houses, and a handsome court-house. The college buildings are four in number, and are of brick, named Harvard, llollis, and Massachusetts halls, and llolderi chapel. They stand on a beautiful green, which spreads to the n. w. and exhibit a pleasing view. This university, as to its library, philosophical apparatus, and professorships, is at present one of the first literary institutions on that continent. It takes its ddte from the year 1638, seven years after the first settlement in the town ship, then called New-town. Since its establish ment, to July 1794, 3399 students have received honorary degrees from its successive ofliccrs. It has generally from 140 to 200 students. The li brary contains upwards of 12,000 volumes. The 
|CAM 
cabinet of minerals in the museum contains the more useful productions of nature; and excepting what are called the precious stones, there are very few substances yet discovered in the mineral king dom, but what may be found here. The univer sity owes this noble collection of minerals, and several other natural curiosities, to the munificence of Dr. Lettsosn of London, and to that of the re public of France. 
|CAMBRIDGE, a post-town of Ninety-six dis trict, in the upper country of S. Carolina, where the circuit courts are held. It contains about 60 houses, a court-house, and a brick gaol. The col lege, by law instituted here, is no better than a grammar-school. (See SOUTH CAROLINA.) It is 80 miles n. n. w. of Columbia, 50 n. by w. of Au gusta in Georgia, 140 n. w. of Charlestown, and 762 s. w. of Philadelphia. Lat. 34 9 n.  
|CAMBRIDGE, the chief town of Dorchester county, Maryland, is situated on the s. side of Choptank river, about 13 miles e. s. e. from Cook s point at its mouth, nine w. s.w. from Newmarket, and 57 s. e. from Baltimore. Its situation is healthy, and it contains about 50 houses and a church. Lat. 38 34 w. 
|CAMBRIDGE, in Franklin county, Vermont, is situated on both sides of La Moille river, about 20 miles w. of lake Champlain, and has 359 inhabi tants. 
|CAMBRIDGE, a township in Grafton county, New Hampshire, e. of Androscoggin, and s. of Umbagog lake. 
|CAMBRIDGE, a township in Washington county, New York. By the census of 1790, it contained 4996 inhabitants, including 41 slaves. By the state census of 1796, it appears there are 623 electors. 
|CAMBU, a small river of the island of Joanes, or Mara jo, on the coast of Brazil. It runs e. and enters the sea at the mouth of the arm of the river of the Arnazonas. 
|CAMBUTO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Omasiccos in Peru ; situate on the e. shore of the lake Titicaca. 
|CAMDEN County, in Edcnton district, North Carolina, is on the n. e. corner of the state. It lias 4033 inhabitants, including 1038 slaves. Jonesborough is the chief town. 
|CAMDEN District, in the upper country of S. Carolina, has Cheraws district on the n.e. Georgetown district on the s. e. and the state of N. Carolina on the n. and is divided into the following counties, Fairfield, Richland, Claren don, Clareniont, Kershaw, Salem, and Lancaster. It is 82 miles from n. to s. and 60 from e. to w. 
|CAM 
and contains 38,265 inhabitants, including 8S65 slaves. This district is watered by the Wateree or Catabaw river, and its branches ; the upper part is variegated with hills, generally fertile and well irrigated. It produces Indian corn, wheat, rye, barley, tobacco, and cotton. The Catabaw Indians, the only tribe which reside in the state, live in the n. part of this district. See CA TABAW. 
|CAMDEN, a post-town, and chief of Camden district, S, Carolina, in Kershaw county, stands on the e. side of Wateree river, 35 miles n. e. of Columbia, 55 s. w. of Chcraw, 120 n. by w. of Charlestown, and 643 s. w. of Philadelphia. It is regularly laid out, and contains about 120 houses, an Episcopal church, a court-house, and gaol. The navigable river on which the town stands, enables the inhabitants to carry on a lively trade with the back country. Lat. 34 20 ti. Long. 80 42 w. This town, or near it, was the scene of two battles in the late war, on the 16th of August 1780, between Gen. Gates and Lord Cornwallis, in which the American general was defeated. The. other was a brisk action between Lord Rawdon and Gen. Greene, on the 25th April 1781. Lord Rawdon sallied out of the town with 800 men, and attacked the American camp, which was within a mile of the town. The Americans had 126 men killed, and 100 taken prisoners, and the British had about 100 killed. The town was evacuated the 9th of May, in the same year, after Lord Rawdon had burned the gaol, mills, many private houses, and part of his own baggage. 
|CAMDEN County, in the lower district of Geor gia, at the s. e. corner of the state, on St. Mary s river, contains 305 inhabitants, including 70 slaves. Chief town St. Patrick s. 
|CAMDEN, a small post-town on the w. side of Penobscot bay, district of Maine, and the s. east ernmost township of Lincoln county, having Thomas town on the s. w. 35 mfles n. n. e. from Pownalborough, and 228 miles n. e. from Bos ton. 
|CAMDFN, a village in Kent county, state of De laware ; about four miles s. w. from Dover, and five n. w. from Frederica. 
|CAMILLE, a mountain of Nova Scotia, or Acadia, on the bank of the river Si. Lawrence. 
|CAMILLUS, one of the military townships in New York, w. of Salt lake, and about 18 miles s. w. from fort Brewington. 
|CAMINA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Asangaro in Peru . 
|CAMINDEI, orJACHA, a small river of the province and captainship of Maraiian in Brazil. 
254 
|CAM 
It rises near the coast, runs n. between the Otatay and the Pergiucas, and enters the sea at an equal distance from each. 
|CAMINOS, Dos, a settlement of the jurisdic tion and akaldia mayor of Tixtlan in Nueva Espana ; situate on the coast called De Cajones. It contains 80 families of Indians, who, from their being at a considerable distance from the capital, endure many inconveniences and privations : but barren as the place is, they find means of subsist ence, from its being the direct road for all passen gers and carriers, who, either with goods belong ing to the king, or with private property, pass from Mexico to Acapulco, whenever the markets, owing to the arrival of the China fleet, are open at that port. 
|CAMISAS, a settlement of the province and captainship of Rey in Brazil, on the banks of the river Curucay. 
|CAMISETA, Torrent of, a strait of the river Orinoco, where this river passes in a precipitate course through two channels formed by tremen dous ridges of rock. 
|CAMITLIPE, a settlement of the capital of Xocotla, and akaldia mayor of Tlapa, in Nueva Espana. It contains 42 families of Indians, who are employed in the culture of maize, French beans, cochineal, and various indigenous fruits, in which consist their commerce. Two leagues n. e. of its capital. 
|CAMOA, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Cinaloa ; one of those which belonged to the missionaries of the abolished company of the Jesuits. 
|CAMOAES-MERI, a river of the province and captainship of Rey in Brazil. It is the same wnich, a little after its source, takes the name of Itapeba. 
|CAMOPI, a river of the province and govern ment of Cayenne in the kingdom of Tierra Fitme. It rises in the mountains, and enters the Yacopo just before this river runs into the sea. 
|CAMORIN, a small island of the coast of Brazil, in the province and captainship of Rey. It is close to that of Canamea. 
|CAMPANA, a river of the province and go vernment or Darien in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, which rises in the mountains of the n. coast, and enters the Bayano. 
|CAMPAVA, a mountain on the coast of Peru, in the province and corregimienlo of Truxillo, near the settlement of Manciche. 
|CAMPANARiO, a settlement of the province and government of Cumana, on the coast, near port Escondido. 
|CAM 
|CAMPANERO, SIERHA DEL, mountains of the province and captainship of Rey in Brazil. 
|CAMPBELL County, in Virginia, lies e. of Bedford county, on Staunton river. It is 45 miles long, and 30 broad, and contains 7685 inhabitants, including 2488 slaves. 
|CAMPBELL-TOW N, a village in Dauphin county, Pennsylvania, which stands near a water of Quitipihilla creek ; 13 miles e. of Harrisburgh, and 96 n. w. of Philadelphia. 
|CAMPBELL-TOWN, in N. Carolina, is a large and flourishing town on a branch of cape Fear river, 100 miles above Wilmington, having, according to Bartram, " above 100 houses, many wealthy merchants, respectable public buildings, a vast resort of inhabitants and travellers, and con tinual brisk commerce by waggons, from the back settlements, with large trading boats." 
|CAMPBELL S Fort, in the state of Tennessee, stands near the junction of Holston river with the Tennessee ; distant 135 miles from Abingdon in Washington county, Virginia, and 445 w. of Richmond in Virginia. 
|CAMPBELL S Salines, in North Holston, in the state of Tennessee, are the only ones that have yet been discovered on the upper branches of the Ten nessee, though great search has been made for them. Large bones, like those found at Big Bone lick, have been dug up here ; and other circumstances render the tract which contains the salines a great natural curiosity. Captain Charles Campbell, one of the first explorers of the w. country, made the discovery of this tract in 1745. In 1753 he obtained a patent for it from the governor of Vir ginia. His son, the late General William Camp bell, the same who behaved so gallantly in the years 1780 and 1781, became owner of it on his death. But it was not till the time of his death, when salt was very scarce and dear, that salt water was dis covered, and salt made by a poor man. Since that time it has been improved to a considerable ex tent, and many thousands of people are now sup plied from it with salt of a superior quality, and at a low price. The tract consists of about 300 acres of salt marsh land, of as rich a soil as can be imagined. In this flat, pits are sunk, in order to obtain the salt water. The best is found from 30 to 40 feet deep; after passing through the rich soil or mud, from six to 10 feet, you come to a very brittle lime-stone rock, with cracks or chasms, through which the salt-water issues into the pits, whence it is drawn by buckets and put into the boilers, which are placed in furnaces adjoining the pits. The hills that surround this flat are covered 
|CAM 
with fine timber ; and a coal mine has been disco vered not far from it. 
|CAMPECHE, SAN FRANCISCO DE, a town of the province and government of Yucatan in the kingdom of Guatemala, founded by the Captain Francisco de Montejo, in the year 1540. It was originally on the bank of a river, where at present stands the settlement of Tenozic. It was afterwards removed to the river Potonchan, more properly called Champoton ; and, lastly, it changed its situation to the banks of the river San Francisco, being notable for the convenience of its port, which is one of the most frequented , and receiving more merchandize than any other in the same gulf. The city is small, defended by three towers, called La Tucrza, San Roman, and San Francisco ; and these are well provided with artillery. It has, besides, a parish church, a convent of the order of San Francisco, another of San Juan de Dios, in which is the hospital bearing the title of Nuestra Senora de los Remedios ; and, outside of the city, another temple dedicated to St. Roman ; to whom particu lar devotions are paid, and who is a patron saint. In this temple there is held in reverence an image of our Saviour, with the same title of San Roman, which, according to a wonderful tradition, began, previous to its being placed here, to effect great miracles ; accordingly, it is said, that a certain merchant, named Juan Cano, being commissioned to buy it in Nueva Espana, in the year 1665, brought it to this place, having made the voyage from the port of Vera Cruz to the port of Campeche in 24: hours. The devotion and confidence manifested with regard to this effigy in this district is truly surprising. There are also two shrines out of the town, the one Nuestra Senora de Guadalupe, and the other El Santo Nombre de Jesus, which is the parish church of the Negroes. This town has carried on a considerable commerce in the dye ing woods of Campeche, which it used to ship, together with other articles, such as black wax and cotton ; but this has greatly fallen off, on ac count of the distressing invasions that it has ex perienced. The first of these was by the English, who took and sacked it in the year 1659; after wards by the pirate Lewis Scott, in 1678; and again by the Flibustiers, in 1685, when the prin cipal fort was burnt and destroyed. It afterwards became a wood inhabited by birds and animals. In the Maya language, cam signifies serpent, and peche the little insect (acarus), called by the Spaniards garapata, which penetrates the skin, and occasions a smart pain. Between Campeche and Merida are two very considerable Indian villages, called Xampolan and Equetchecan. The expor
255 
1 at ion of wax of Yucatan is one of the most lucra tive branches of trade. The habitual population of the town is 6000. Lat. 20. Long. 90 25 . 
|CAMPECHE, SONDA I&gt;E, a sand-bank of various soundings, which extends itself round the point of the province of Yucatin for many leagues ; in the navigation of which the greatest care is necessary, as many vessels have been shipwrecked on it. 
|CAMPIN, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Yucatan and Campeche in the king dom of Guatemala. 
|CAMPO BE r.i.o, along and narrow island, on the e. coast of Washington county, district of Maine, and the n. easternmost of all the islands of the district. It lies at the mouth of a large bay, into which Cobscook river empties, and has com munication with Passamaquoddy bay on the . by two channels ; the one between the w. side of Deer island and the continent, the other into the mouth of Passamaquoddy bay, between Deer island and thew. end of Campo Bello island, which lies in about lat. 45 n. The s. end is five miles n. w. from Grand Mannan island. 
|CAMPTON, a small township in Grafton county, New Hampshire, situated on the c. bank of Pemigewasset, the n. head water of Merrimack river ; 35 miles n. e. of Dartmouth college, and 61 n. w. of Portsmouth. It was incorporated in 1761, and contains 395 inhabitants. 
|CAMPUCHO, MORRO DE, a mountain of the province and corregimiento of Arica in Peru, on the sea-coast, near the island of Yquesque. 
|CAMS AN A, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Arica in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Tarrapaca. 
|CAMSEAU, or CANSEAU, a strait formed by the coast of Nova Scotia and the island of Cape Breton. 
|CAMSUARE, a populous province mentioned in the dictionaries of Cornelio and La Martiniere, which accord with the Count Pagani, in his de scription of the Amazonas ; but neither do the Fa thers Acuna, Tritz, and Maquin, or the celebrated La Condamine, who were intimately acquainted with that country, make any notice of it. 
|CAMU, a very abundant stream of the island of St. Domingo. It rises in the cordillera of the mountains which are to the w. of the city of La Vega, runs n. and passing through the neighbourhood of that city, turns e. and, after wards inclining to the s. s. e. enters the sea in the large bay of Samana, forming various islands at its mouth. 
|CAMUEIP, a small river, also called SAN FRANCISCO, in the province and captainship of 
256 
|CAN 
Seara in Brazil. It rnnsw. and enters the sea be tween the Guas.vpuino and the settlement of Nuestra 8enwa del Rot-ario. 
|CAMUI, a river of.the island of San Juan of Puertorico. It rises at the foot of a mountain near the n, coast, and enters the sea between the Arrecibo and the Guajayaca. 
|CAM U It, a small river of the province and go vernment of Guayana, or Nueva Andalucia. It rises w. of the city of Real Corona, and passing at no great distance to the n. of the same, enters the Ami. 
|CAMUTA, a settlement of the province and captainship of Para in Brazil ; situate near the strait leading to the navigation of the river of the Anrizonas, and at the mouth of the Tocantines, in which is the fort of Guru pa. It is the property of Antonio Alburquerquc, Coelo de Carvallo, in Por tugal. 
|CANA, SANTA CRUZ DE, a town and real of some gold mines of the province and government of Darien, in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, situate near the coast of the N. sea, and at the source of the river Tarena. It has been famous for the quan tities of gold extracted from it, the same having been uniformly carried to the royal treasury at Pa nama. For its defence it had a fort, with a de tachment of the guard of the above city, who have oftentimes put to the sword Indians in the act of attempting to close the mines. 
|CAN A, a river of the island of St. Domingo, which rises near the n. coast, runs n. n. w. and en ters the Jnque, or Santiago, between the Guarobin and the Guarabi. 
|CANA. Sec SAN ISIDHO. 
|CANAAN, a thriving township in Lincoln county, district of Maine, situate on Kennebeck river, about seven miles n. of Hancock, and 2j 3 n. by e. of Boston ; incorporated in 1788, and contains 454 inhabitants. A plantation in Han cock county is also thus named, having 132 in habitants. 
|CANAAN, a township in Grafton county, New Hampshire, 10 miles e. of Dartmouth college ; in corporated in 1761. In 1775 it contained 67, and in 1790, 483 inhabitants. 
|CANAAN, a township in Litchfield county, Connecticut, e. of Ilousatonic river, having Mas sachusetts on the w. Here is a forge and slittingmill, erected on anew construction ; and the iron used here is said to be excellent. In the mountains of Canaan are found valuable specimens of mine rals, particularly lead and iron. It lies 60 miles n. of Ncwhaven, and 40 n. w. from Hartford. 
|CANAAN, a township in Essex county, V
er
|CAN 
mont, is the n. easternmost town in the state. It stands at the foot of the Upper Great Monadnock, and has 19 inhabitants. 
|CANAAN, a township in Columbia county, New York, having Kinderhook on the w. ami Massachusetts e. It has 6692 inhabitants, includirg 35 slaves ; 663 of the free inhabitants are electors. 
|CAN A BE, a river of the province and govern ment of Paraguay. 
|CANABEKI, a river of the province and co lony of Nova Scotia, which runs s. w. find enters the San Juan just before this empties itself into the bay of Fundy. 
|CANADA, or NEW FRANCE, a province and colony of N. America, the limits of which are esteemed various, and have in fact been the occasion of many disputes and wars between the French and the English. Some maintain that it extends from Florida to the extremity of N. Ame rica, or from 33 to 65 n. lat. ; but the country properly called Canada is a small part of the above territory, situate s. and e . of the river St. Lawrence. Others assert that its limits are, on the n. the land of Labrador or New Britain, on the e. the N. sea and New England, on the s. Florida, and on the w. Nuevo Mexico; according; to which, it would extend itself from 25 to 53 n. lat. and from 76 to 93 w. long, but the utmost of its extent is commonly taken from s. w. to . e.. that is, from the province of Padoan in Nueva Espafia to cape Charles in the bay of St. Law rence, which computes to about 900 leagues. The Baron of lion! am allows its limits to reach only from 39 to 65 of lat. that is, from the s. part of lake Erie to the n. of Hudson s bay, and in length fro MI the river Mississippi to Race cape in Newfoundland. According to the late observa tions of Mr. Bel tin, the province of Louisiana ex tends many degrees farther to the w. of the above river. The climate of Canada is very various : The whole of the part inhabited by the French, to the shore of the river St. Lawrence, is excessively cold during the winter, although hot in summer; the other parts, as far as has at present been dis covered, contain immense forests, lakes, and rivers, and the cold is there very great. Nevertheless, fertile plains are not wanting, which produce all kinds of grain, fruits, and plants ; of the latter the tobacco plant is most abundant, and is particularly cultivated by the French. The foiests abound in deer, dantat, wild cuts, hulls, many kinds of goats, wolves, and other animals ; aiso in a variety of birds. The plains, which are well irrigated, alford. excellent pastures, in \\hich breed numerous herds 
|CANADA. 
257 
of cattle, both of the larger and smaller kind. On the mountains is found pit-coal, and some even assert that there are also mines of silver and other metals, though to the present day we have never heard of such mines having been worked. In the uncultivated wastes of an immense extent, are found beavers, and in the rivers and lakes every kind of fish. Its principal lakes are Erie, Michi gan, Huron, Superior, Frontenac or Ontario, Nipysing, Tomiscaning, and many other of less note ; but the largest of all is lake Superior, situ ate farther n. than the rest ; this is 100 leagues in length, and 70 in breadth, and in it are various islands, viz. lioyal island, Philip, Pont, Chartrain, Maurcpas, St. Anne, St. Ignace, Tison, and many smaller ones. All this extensive country is full of the largest rivers, the enumeration of which would be tedious : the two principal, however, are those of St. Lawrence and Mississippi: the former of these abounds in a profuse variety of excellent fish, and receives various other rivers in its course. The entrance of the bay of St. Lawrence is situate between the cape Retag of the island of Newfound land, and N. capeot Royal island, or Cape Breton. The Mississippi, which runs through the greatest part of the province of Louisiana from n, to s. is called by the French the river of St. Louis, and by the natives Misehispi, Mississippi or Meschagamisii, from its inundating vast tracts of land at the time of its flushes. The French established themselves in this province in the year 1535, under the command of Jacob Cartier. They also com menced a commerce with the Indians, taking of them hides in exchange for brandy, tobacco, pow der and shot, axes, and all kinds of iron tools ; and for the proper conducting of this mercantile sys tem, a body of men were established, called run ners of the mountain, \vho, traversing in their canoes the Avidest lakes and largest rivers, carry at the present day, with incredible industry and pa tience, effects to the most distant inland and un known parts. These people brought their hides to the fair of Montreal, which was held in June, when large feasts were made, and guards established under the directions and assistance of the governor, for the maintenance of order ; a precaution most necessary, when it is considered how many savage nations were assembled, some cons ing from a thou sand miles d Stance. A trade is also carried on by the canal, in as much as many stop with their mer chandize at Albany in New York, where they pro cure the desired effects with more convenience than at Montreal ; thus avoiding the labour of a journey of more than 200 miles, and the obligation, 
|VOL. I. 
of buying at second hand what they thus obtain at the first. The French likewise find it much more to their advantage to buy their effects of the Eng lish at New York, than to bring them from their colonies, encountering the troublesome navigation from the mouth of the river St. Lawrence to Mont real. The English, under the command of General Wolfe, conquered this province at the expence of much bloodshed, and with the loss of the general himself. They remained masters of it by the peace of the year 1763, establishing (in order to avoid occasions of dispute in future) its limits by a line drawn through the middle of the river Mississippi and the lakes Maurepas and Pontchartrain to the sea ; but it was delivered over to the French in the peace of 1783. Its capital is Quebec. 
|INDEX TO ADDITIONAL INFORMATION RE SPECTING CANADA. 
1. Situation and Divisions. 2. Climate. 3. Na tural curiosities.-- -4. Soil and productions. b. Religion. 6. Population. 1. Manners and cus toms. 8. Government. 9. The military. 10. Laws. 11. List of governors. -12. Roads and distances. 13. Expences of government. 14. Commerce.--- 5 Exports and Imports. 16. Fur trade. 17. General history. 1. Situation and Division. The British provinces of Upper and Lower Canada, constituted by act of parliament in 179 J, comprehend the territory here tofore called Canada. They lie between 61 and 81 w. long, from London, and between 42 D 30 and 52 n. lat. ; in length about 1400 miles, and in breadth 500. Bounded n. by New Britain and unknown countries ; e. by New Britain and the gulf of St Lawrence ; s. e. and s. by the province of New Brunswick, the district of Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, New York, and the lakes ; the w. boundary is undefined. The province of Upper Canada is the same as what has been commonly called the Upper Country. It liesw. of the great lakes, and is separated from New York by the river St. Lawrence, here called the Cataraqui, and the lakes Ontario and Erie. Lower Canada lies on both sides the river St. Lawrence between 61 and 71 zo. long, from London, and 45 and 52 n. lat. and is bpunded s. by New Brunswick, Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, and New York; and w. by Upper Canada. The line between Up per and Lower Canada commences at a stone boundary on the n. bank of lake St. Francis, in St. Lawrence river, at the cove w. of Point au Boudet, thence n. to Ottawas river, and to its source in lake Tomiscaning, thence due n. till it strikes the boundary of Hudson bay, or New Britain. 
253 
|CANADA. 
\ Upper Canada includes all the territory to the w. and s. of the said line, to the utmost extent of the country known by the name of Canada. 
2. Climate. Winter continues with such seve rity from December to April, as that the largest rivers are frozen over, and the snow lies commonly from four to six feet deep during the winter. But the air is so serene and clear, and the inhabitants so well defended against the cold, that this season is neither unhealthy nor unpleasant. The spring opens suddenly, and vegetation is surprisingly rapid. The summer is delightful, except that a part of it is extremely hot. The climate of Lower Ca nada is liable to violent extremes of heat and cold ; the thermometer is sometimes up to 103 of Fahren heit in summer, and in winter 36 below 0. These extremes do not, however, last above two or three days at a time. The average of sum mer heat is, in general, from 75 to 80, and the mean of the cold in winter about 0. It is the general opinion of the inhabitants that the winters are milder, and that less snow falls now than for merly ; that the summers are also hotter. This might be easily accounted for by the improved state of the country. The clearing of the woods, and cultivation of the lands, together with the in creased population, must naturally have a consi derable effect upon the climate. It has been ob served by some of the religious orders who have been in the practice of keeping meteorological journals, that the winters are as hard as they were formerly, though somewhat shorter, and the sum mers rather longer, but not hotter than they used to be. The winters sometimes differ so materially from each other, as well as the summers, that no accurate estimate can be formed, sufficient to as certain whether the changes that take place, are occasioned by any increase or diminution of the se verity of the climate. It is possible that a very hot summer, by heating the soil beyond the usual depth, can occasion the mildness of the subsequent winter. The Canadians feel the cold more than Europeans on their first arrival. The constant use of stoves renders them very little better than hot house plants during winter, and in summer they are exposed to a burning sun. These things do not affect the European constitution for the first two or three years, but afterwards it becomes as sensible to the heat and cold as that of the Canadians. It may astonish those who have heard such dreadful accounts of a Canadian winter, but the people of Great Britain suffer more from the cold than the people of Canada, or at least they are more exposed 
to it : for they seldom make any material alteration TifciP T i :i " f l y m nT? 7 w&lt;* TS=KH 
in their dress, either summer or winter ; and, wi(k their open fire-places, they are burning on one side, and freezing on the other. This, however, hardens the constitution of an Englishman, while the stoves and warm clothing of Canada, which often heat the body beyond what the climate requires, weaken and debilitate the frames of those who reside in that country. A proper attention, however, to heat and cold, is all that is requisite for an European to en joy the most perfect health in Lower Canada. The months of March and April are in general very hot, and the sun then begins to have great power, which is considerably heightened by the reflection of the snow and ice. The inhabitants are more tanned by the reflection of the snow in these months, than they are at any other season of the year by the sun. It is likewise so very hurtful to the eyes, that they are obliged to wear shades of green gauze fastened to their hats. The snow begins to melt early in April, and by the second or third week it is gene rally all gone ; during this period both walking in town, and travelling in the country, are very incon venient. The streets of Quebec are inundated with snow-water, and the kennels have the appearance and sound of so many little rapids. The ice in the river is seldom totally gone before the first week in May. The breaking up of the ice in the vicinity of Quebec is not attended with any remarkable noise or appearance ; but at Montreal, and the upper parts of the river, where it is frozen quite across, it has a grand appearance, and breaks up with loud reports. The lake ice comes down in prodigious quantities for several days, bringing with it the roots and branches of trees which it tears from the islands and shores in its progress. Until this lias passed, none of the river vessels can leave Quebec for Montreal. Vessels, however, sometimes arrive from Europe in the midst of it, as was the case in 1807. The first vessel that ar rived from Europe in 1808, came up to Quebec on the 19th of April, nine days earlier than the pre ceding year. The river, however was full of ice, which floated with the tide in large masses. The vessel was forced ashore on the island a few days before it got up to the town, and was near being lost. The progress of vegetation, as soon as the winter is over, is exceedingly rapid. The trees obtain their verdant foliage in less than three weeks; the fields, which the autumn before were apparently burnt up, are now adorned with the richest verdure. Spring can scarcely be said to exist before summer is at hand. The productions of the field and the garden are brought in quick succession to the markets ; and fregh meat,poultry,j 
|CANADA. 
and vegetables, DOW regale the inhabitants, who for so many months had been confined to their frozen provisions. The months of May and June are often wet, sometimes greatly to the detriment of husbandry. In the spring of 1807 the weather Was unusually wet, from the latter end of April until the 10th of June, when it cleared up, after a most violent thunder-storm which happened on the 9th. During May, scarcely a day passed without rain, and the weather was excessively changeable : Fahrenheit s thermometer was sometimes as high as 75, and at other times as low as 20, in the course of 24 hours. The farmers had not finished sow ing by the middle of June, though they in general get all their wheat into the ground by the 20th of May. Some people are of opinion, that sowing late answers best in Canada, as the ground has then time to imbibe the heat of the sun after the snow lias melted ; and that wheat sown in June is ripe as soon as that sown in May. The practice of the Canadian farmers is, however, contrary to this theory. Thunder and lighting do not very often visit Canada ; but when they do, their violence is great, and damage generally ensues. The follow ing is a tolerable correct stateof Fahrenheit stherrnometer in the shade during the summer of 1807: 
Lowest. Highest. 
May - - - 20 - - 75 continual rain. June - - - 50 - - 90 rain the first week, after wards dry and warm. July - - - 55 - - 96 dry and sultry. August - - 68 - - 90 fine warm weather with lit tle rain. September 46 - - 78 fine mild weather. 
The spring, summer, and autumn of Canada, are all comprised in these five months. The rest of the year may be said to consist wholly of winter. One of the greatest plagues to which the inhabitants of Canada are subject, are the common house-flies, which are extremely troublesome in the months of June, July, and August. The stoves keep them alive in winter, and the sun restores them to their full vigour and power of annoying in the summer. The sting of the musquito, an insect abounding in all moist or shady situations, is trifling at first, but the next day is extremely painful, and sometimes dangerous, if violently rubbed. The best remedy is to wash the part with some powerful acid, such as lemon-juice or vinegar. The brnlots or sandflies are so very small, as to be hardly perceptible in their attacks, and your forehead will be stream ing with blood before you are sensible of being amongst them. These are the only disagreeables that arc attached to a Canadian summer ; were it free from them, it would be equal to that of any 
other country in the world ; but as it, is a burning sun, house-flies, musquitos, and sand-ilics, certainly prevent the finest months of the year from being enjoyed in full perfection. The summer of 1808 was the hottcs- that has been knowa for several years in Canada. In the months of July and August, the thermometer was several times at 90 and 95, and one or two days it rose to 103 in the shade, at Montreal and the Three Rivers. At Quebec it was 101 or 102. The fall of the year is the most agreeable season in Canada. The sultry weather is then gone, and the night frosts have en tirely destroyed the venomous insects, or rendered them torpid. 
3. Natural curiosities. The face of Lower Ca nada is remarkably bold and striking. The noble river St. Lawrence, flowing more than 400 rniles between high lands and lofty mountains, sometimes divided into channels by large islands, and at other times intersected by clusters of small ones ; nu merous rapid streams, rolling from the neighbour ing mountains, breaking over steep precipices, and mingling their waters with the grand river; its bold and rugged shores, lofty eminences, and slop ing valleys, covered with the umbrageous fol age of immense forests, or interspersed with the cultivated settlements of the inhabitants, present altogether to the eye of the spectator a succession of the most sublime and picturesque objects that imagination can conceive. Beyond the rapids of Kichlieu, which are situate about 400 miles from the entrance of the St. Lawrence, the country assumes a more level aspect ; the mountains retire to the n. and s. as far as the eye can reach, leaving all that part of Canada, extending to the s. w. and n. e. an almost interminable flat. Frozen oceans, gulfs, ajul bays ; immense lakes and wildernesses, diversified at times by chains of enormous mountains, form the features of the remaining part of the British settlements in N. America, which extend from the coast of La brador to the sea of Kamtschatka and the Pacific ocean, and to the n beyond the Arctic circle. The mountain on which Quebec is built, and the high lands for several miles along the St. Lawrence, consist chiefly of black lime slate. A few moun tains in the neighbourhood are composed of grey rock stone ; but they, for the most part, stand on a bed of lime slate. About a yard from the surface this slate is quite compact, and without any cracks, so that one cannot perceive it is a slate, its particles being imperceptible. It lies in strata which vary from three or four to 20 inches thick, and upwards. In Quebec the strata lie in some part diagonally, in others almost perpendicular, but none horizon tally, and bear every mark of having been violently L, i, 2 
260 
|CANADA. 
agitated by some coavulsion of nature, which must nave shaken the mountain to its very foundation. Possibly it might have lost its horizontal direction by the earthquake of 1663. In the unpaved streets of Quebec this slaty stone strikes out in corners at the surface, and injures the shoes extremely. The narrow crevices between the shivers, which are very thin, are commonly filled with a fibrous white gypsum ; the larger cracks are in particular parts of the rock filled up with transparent quartz crys tals, the largest of which are about two inches in length, and three or four in circumference; but in general they are extremely small, and many resem ble well cut polished diamonds. A sort of black or grey spar is also frequently met with in the rock. Most of the old houses are built of the lime slate, but it shivers into thin pieces on the outside after being exposed to the air for some time; the ma sons, however, have a particular manner of placing the pieces of stone, which prevents them from cracking, except a little on the outside. The new public buildings, fortifications, and many of the private houses belonging to the gentry at Quebec, have of late years been built with the grey rock stone, which has a light and handsome appearance, and is of a more durable nature. The mountains and high lands in the vicinity of Quebec, and for many miles below, consist of different species of the lime slate, and of the grey rock or lime stone, more or less impregnated with grey and black glimmer and quartz, fibrous gypsum and pierre an calu met. The latter has received its name from the French, who, as well as the Indians, frequently use it for the heads of their calumets or tobacco pipes. It is a lime stone of rather a soft though compact texture, and m;iy be cut with a knife. Iron, cop per, and lead ore, are found in different parts of Lower Canada, though not to any very great ex tent. Iron is most abundant, and has been disco vered chiefly on the n. side of the St. Lawrence, about Batiscan and Three Rivers. It was formerly believed that a silver mine existed near St. Paul s bay, about 54 miles below Quebec, on the n. shore, several pieces of ore having been discovered, which resembled that metal : it has since been found to consist only of lead, which lies in veins in a moun tain of grey rock stone. No very important dis coveries have hitherto been made in the mineral world of Lower Canada ; though in that, as well as in every other branch of natural history, there is sufficient in that country to occupy the attention of the philosopher. Some mineral springs have been discovered in different parts of the province; one or two were found in the neighbourhood of Three Rivers, but are now either lost or remain unnoticed. 
Another was discovered in the suburb of St. John, just without the walls of Quebec ; this has been kept open for several years, and belongs to an old French woman, who has a small house adjoining it. Many of the gentry walk out to this house in the summer about six o clock in the morning, and drink the waters, which are reckoned extremely salubrious ; they arc tasteless, but it is necessary to hold your nose when yon drink them, for they have a very unpleasant sulphureous smell. Several excellent springs of fresh water gush out of various parts of the rock. The inhabitants, however, chiefly use the river water, though it is not reckoned very wholesome in winter. The water is conveyed in barrels from the river to all parts of the upper and lower towns by the carters, who charge six pence or eightpence per barrel according to the dis tance. In different parts of the country, and par ticularly the vicinity of Quebec, are to be found rock stones of various shapes and sizes, lying scat tered in the fields, meadows, and plains. Some of them measure nine or ten feet in circumference, and from three to four feet high ; and some even have been met with considerably larger. They are mostly of a grey colour, round-shaped, and of a very close and hard substance, impregnated with black, red, and white glimmer and spar. They lie upon the soil, having no connection with any rock or bed of stone ; and a person cannot view them without asking himself the question, how, and in what manner, such large masses of stone came there ? It was upon one of these stones that General Wolfe is said to have breathed his last. On the whole, few natural curiosities are to be found in Lower Canada, except rapids, cascades, and foils. A mongthe latter, those of Saguenay, Montmorency, and Chaudiere, are the chief; an account of which may be seen under their proper articles. There arc two smaller rapids near Montreal, one about a mile and a half below the city, and the other about five miles above: the latter is called Sault St. Louis, or the Fall of St. Louis ; but it is a mere rapid, similar to those of the Richlieu, except that the river at St. Louis is divided into channels by two or three small islands, which form, with the rapidity of the agitated stream, a very picturesque and beautiful view. The cascades, near the boun dary line between Upper and Lower Canada, are of a different description to the rapids of Richlieu, St. Louis, &c. and seem to present an almost in superable bar to the navigation of the river between the two provinces: this obstacle is however in some measure removed by the construction of locks and canals on the w. shore, through which the batteaux and small vessels pass. The cascades 
|CANADA. 
261 
are about two miles in length, and are as violently agitated in the calmest weather, as the ocean is in a gale of wind . The waters appear as if they rushed into an immense gulf, and were boiled up again by some subterranean fire. Rafts of timber, and large scows, laden with barrels of flour, pot-ash, and pro visions, pass through these tremendous rapids every year with safety ; but smaller vessels cannot attempt it without imminent danger. About three miles above the cascades, are the rapids of the Cedars ; they are less violent than the former, but arc infi nitely more dangerous than the Richlieu and St. Louis ; yet the Canadians and Indians are so very expert in the management of their canoes and batteaux, that an accident very rarely happens in passing any of the rapids. 
4. Soil and Productions. Though the climate be cold, and the winter long and tedious, the soil is in general very good, and in many parts both plea sant and fertile, producing wheat, barley, rye, with many other sorts of grain, fruits, and vegetables ; tobacco, in particular, thrives well, and is much cultivated. The isle of Orleans near Quebec, and the lands upon the river St. Lawrence, and other rivers, are remarkable for the richness of the soil. The meadow grounds in Canada, which are well watered, yield excellent grass, and feed great num bers of great and small cattle. Within the last 20 years, great quantities of wheat have been raised in Canada, and exported to Great Britain. The temporary scarcity experienced in England, at certain periods, increased the demand for that article, and encouraged the Canadians to cultivate it with more spirit than, till then, they had been ac customed to. The fruit of Canada is not remark able either for goodness or cheapness, except straw berries and raspberries, which are brought to market in great abundance during the season. They are gathered on the plains at the back of Quebec, and in the neighbouring woods, where they grow upon the ground, or among the shrubs, in wild luxuriance. The poor Canadians send their chil dren to gather them, and afterwards sell them to the inhabitants at a moderate price. It is an agreeable sight to view the fields covered with strawberries in blossom or ripe, and few per sons keep them in gardens. The raspberry bushes are intermingled with the underwood of the forests, and afford an agreeable treat to those who are fond of rambling in the woods. That pleasure is, how ever, more than counterbalanced by the musquitos and sand-flies, which never fail, for three or four months in the summer, to annoy those who ven ture to penetrate their abode. Apples and pears are procured from Montreal, where they grow in 
more abundance and in greater perfection than in any other part of Lower Canada. They are sold for much the same price as in England. The apple which is most prized is what they call the pomme gris, a small light-brown apple somewhat resembling the russetin in appearance. Many per sons say, that it is superior to any English apple. Bread is not cheap in Canada, and generally of very indifferent quality, though several Scotch bakers have emigrated to that country. They complain of the want of yeast at certain seasons : their bad bread is perhaps oftener occasioned by the indifferent flour which they purchase of the llabitans in the market-place at a low price, and which they mix with the better sort of flour sup plied from the mills of Colonel Caldwell, Messrs. Coltman, and others. The soil of Lower Canada is composed of great varieties, and is more or less fertile as it approaches to the n. or s. The high lands, with good management, would yield very tolerable crops, but the Canadians are miserable farmers. They seldom or never manure their laud, and plough so very slight and careless, that they continue year after year to turn over the same clods which lie at the surface, without penetrating an inch deeper into the soil. Hence their grounds become exhausted, overrun with weeds, and yield but very scanty crops. From Quebec, the capi tal, to Montreal, which is about J70 miles, in sail ing up the river St. Lawrence, the eye is enter tained with beautiful landscapes, the banks being in many places very bold and steep, and shaded with lofty trees. The farms lie pretty close all the way ; several gentlemen s houses, neatly built, shew themselves at intervals, and there is all the appear ance of a flourishing colony ; but there are few towns or villages. Many beautiful islands are in terspersed in the channel of the river, which have an agreeable effect upon the eye. For further account of the -productions of this country, see QUEBEC. 
5. Religion. When Canada surrendered to the English, the free exercise of the Roman Catholic religion was stipulated for, and granted. Its mi nisters were also to be protected and supported as they had formerly been ; the Jesuits and Recollets only excepted, whose orders were to remain as they then were, without receiving in future any augmentation of their numbers. While there ex isted an individual of their order, the revenues and property belonging to it were to be at tis disposal ; but at his death they reverted to the king, and the order became extinct. Of the three religious male orders at that time in existence, the priests alone were allowed to increase their num- 
262 
|CANADA. 
hers, and to officiate in every respect as they had been accustomed to under the French government. The female orders being charitable institutions, and beneficial to the colony, were also allowed to exist, and were permitted to fill up their vacancies and increase their establishments as they had for merly done. They were to be protected in their persons and property, upon the same footing as under the French government. As many as about nine-tenths of the inhabitants of these provinces are Roman Catholics, who enjoy, under the present government, the same provision, rights, and pri vileges, as were granted them in 1774, by the act of the 14th of George 111. The rest of the people are Episcopalians, Presbyterians, and a few of al most all the different sects of Christians. 
6. Population. The population of Canada has, in the course of the last 40 years, more than trebled itself. The first census after the English con quered the country, was made by General Mur ray in 1765. This estimate falls considerably short of the population of 1758, as mentioned by Mr. Heriot in his recent work. Mr. Heiiot states, that " the white inhabitants of Canada amounted in 1758 to 91,000, exclusive of the regular troops, who were augmented or diminished as the cir cumstances or exigencies of the country might re quire ; that the domiciliatcd Indians who were collected into villages in different situations in the colony were about 16,000, and the number of French and Canadians resident in Quebec was nearly 8000." If the Indians and inhabitants of Quebec are-not included in the first number, and \ve suppose the Indians are not, as Mr. Ileriot parti cularly mentions white inhabitants, the total popu lation, exclusive of regular troops, would then be 1 15,000. The province of Canada was not divided into Upper and Lower till the year 1792 ; the census , therefore, that were taken antecedent to that period, included the population of the whole colony. We are not acquainted with the source froim whence Mr. Heriot derived his information, but the census of General Murray, seven years subse quent to 1758, stated the entire population of the province to be, exclusive of the kind s troops, 76,275. This number included the Indians, who were stated to amount only to 7400. Here is a vast and surprising decrease of the inhabitants in the course of seven years ; and upon the supposi tion that the numbers in 1758 were 1 15,000, there 
is a loss of no less than 38,725 ; but taking it only at 91,000, still there is a decrease of 14,725 of the colonists and native inhabitants. We may easily suppose that a long war, and finally the subjuga* tion of the country, by a power totally opposite in national manners, character, and principjes, must have occasioned a considerable diminution of its population ; for besides those who were lost in battle, numbers no doubt emigrated to Old France or to other countries where they might find a- go vernment more congenial to their habits ami senti ments. If we look at the number of lndia"ni whom Mr. Heriot states to have been domiciJiatVxr in the province in 1758, and the number given. in s 
 the census of 1765, we shall there
 alone find "a logs of 8600. It is possible that the ravages of war might occasion this great loss
for in the course oT a cam paign, the Indians are oftener opposed to enemies of their own description than to the European ar mies, and their mode of fighting occasions a greater slaughter. We have no doubt, therefore, that this remarkable decrease of the population of Ca nada, in the course of so short a period, may be satisfactorily accounted for, when we consider the war that preceded the conquest, and the very un settled state of the country for a. considerable time after that event. The dissensions between the army and civil power of the British govern ment, and the disgust which the French noblesse, the clergy, and inhabitants, felt at being subjected to the will of a foreign people, must have strongly tended to emigration, and contributed, with the losses sustained by the war, to thin the population of the colony, which was far from being recruited by British settlers, who, in six years after the con quest, did not amount to more than 500 persons. In no other way, (if Mr. Heriot s statement be correct), can we account for the difference between the population of 1758 and the census of 1765. In J783 another census was taken by order of the Canadian government ; since then no other has been made, nor have we any data upon which we can rely, for the forming a correct estimate of the state of the country and its population at the pre sent day. But, by a comparison of the census of 1765 and 1783, we may be enabled to judge of the benefits which Canada has received from its new government, and perhaps form some notion of its progress for the last 20 years ; for this purpose we shaD present them in detail. 
|CENSUS* 
|CANADA. 
263 
/iM
isuo ur inu rivu virN
Ji ur UALNALJA. 
n, 
Date of the census. 
Number of inhabitants. 
Acres of land in cultivation. 
Bushels of grain sown yearly. 
Horses. 
Oxen, cows, and young horned cattle. 
Sheep. 
Swine. 
1765 
1783 
76,975 113,012 
764,604 1,569,818 
194,724{ 383,349| 
13,757 30,096 
50,329 98,591 
27,064 
84,666 
28,976 70,466 
Increase in 18 years. 
36,737 
805,214 
188,625 
16,339 
48,262 
57,602 ( 
41,490
 
These statistical accounts are highly satisfactory ; and exhibit, in a clear and convincing manner, the benefits that have resulted to the colony under the excellent constitution of Great Britain. No sooner was a regular form of government established, and the minds of the people tranquillized, than British subjects were induced to emigrate to Canada, and embark their property in agricultural or com mercial speculations. These enterprising settlers communicated their spirit, in a certain degree, to the old inhabitants ; and hence the surprising in crease of population, commerce, and agriculture, which took place in the short period of 18 years. Since the year 1783, the colony has been gradually advancing in improvement. Its commerce has at times fluctuated considerably ; but population and agriculture have rapidly augmented . The number of inhabitants in Lower Canada, at the present day, is computed by Mr. Heriot at 250,000 ; but we think this estimate is much exaggerated, for if we calculate the population agreeably to the ratio 
of its increase from 1765 to 1783, during which period of 18 years it augmented nearly one-half, we shall find that in 25 years, from 1783 to 1808, the total amount will not exceed 200,000 ; and thie number, we are of opinion, is nearest the truth. Upper Canada is stated by Mr. Heriet to hav 80,000 inhabitants : this number may possibly be correct ; but we prefer the authorities which compute, it at only 60,000 ; truth, however, may perhaps be found in the medium between the two. There is every reason to suppose that no diminution whatever has taken place in any part of those de tails ; but that the augmentation which occurred between 1765 and 1783 has continued, with little variation, in the same regular manner, for the last 25 years. Upon this hypothesis we shall ofler the following statistical statement for the year J808. In the absence of official documents, it may afford some idea of the resources of Lower Canada at the present day. 
1808. 
Population. 
Effective mili tia. 
Acres of land in cultivation. 
Bushels of grain sown yearly. 
Horses. 
Qxen, cows, and young horned cattle. 
Sheep. 
, 
Swine. 
200,000 
60,000 
3,760,000 
920,000 
79,000 
236,000 
286,000 
212,000 
Of the inhabitants of Lower Canada not more than one-tenth are British, or American settlers from the United States. In Upper Canada the population is almost entirely composed of the lat ter, and of British subjects who have emigrated from various parts of the united kingdom. Very few French people reside in that province ; and it is a remarkable circumstance, that among all the British residents in the two colonies, not 200 Englishmen perhaps can be found. \Ve are told that at Quebec there are not more than 12 or 14 of that country; the rest are either Irish 
or Scotch, though the former bear no proportion to the latter, who are distributed from one end of the Canadas to the other. The Irish emigrate more to the United States than to Canada, and no less than 30,000 are said to have emigrated thither in 1801. Being discontented with their own go vernment, they endeavour to seek relief under a fo reign one, whose virtues have been so greatly ex aggerated, and whose excellent properties have been extolled to the skies. A few months, how ever, convince them of their error, and those who are not sold to their American masters generally 
264 
|CANADA. 
find their way into Upper Canada. Of all the British emigrants the Scotch are the most in defatigable and persevering. In poverty they leave their native home ; yet seldom return to it without a handsome competency. Their pa tient diligence and submission in the pursuit of riches, together with their general knowledge and jrood sense, render them highly beneficial to the mother country ; while their natural partiality for their aneient soil secures their steady attachment and adherence to the British government. 
7. Manners and Customs. The houses of the Habitans are composed of logs slightly smoothed with the axe, laid upon each other, and dovet;iiled at the corners. Sometimes a frame-work is first constructed, and the logs laid upon each other between two grooves. The interstices are filled with clay or mud, and the sides of the building washed outside and in, with lime dissolved in water. This, they say, has the property of preserving the wood better than paint from the effects of the weather and vermine ; at all events, it has the property of being cheaper, which is a consideration of more im portance to them than weather or vermine. The chimney is built in the centre of the house ; and the room which contains the fire-place is the kitchen. The rest are bed-rooms, for it matters not how many apartments a house consists of; they are seldom without one or two beds in each, according to the size of the family. This indispensable piece of furniture, which is always placed in one corner of the room, is a sort of four-post bedstead without the pillars, and raised three or four feet from the ground. At the head there is generally a canopy or tester fixed against the wall, under which the bed stands ; upon the bedstead is placed a feather or straw bed, with the usual clothes, and covered with a patch work counterpane, or green stuff quilt. In winter, the men frequently lay themselves along the hearth, or by the stove, wrapped up in a buffalo robe. In the middle of the night they will get up, stir the fire, smoke their pipe, and lie down again till morn ing. The furniture is plain and simple, and most commonly of their own- workmanship. A lew wooden chairs, with twig or rush bottoms, and two or three deal tables, are placed in each room, and are seldom very ornamental ; they, however, suffice
 with a proper number of wooden bowls, trenchers, and spoons, for the use of the family at meals. A press and two or three large chesls con tain their wearing apparel, and other property. A buffet in one corner contains their small dis play of cups, saucers, glasses, and tea-pots, while a few broken sets may perhaps grace the mantlepiece. A large clock is often found in their best 
apartment, and the sides of the room are orna mented with little pictures, or waxen images of saints and crucifixes, of the holy virgin and her son. An iron stove is generally placed in the largest apartment, with a pipe passing through the others into the chimney. The kitchen dis plays very little more than kettles of soup, tureens of milk, a table, a dresser, and a few chairs. 
The children of the Ilabitans are generally pretty when young, but from sitting over the stoves in winter, and labouring in the fields in summer, their complexion becomes swarthy, and their features ordinary and coarse. The boys adopt the pernicious habit of smoking, almost as soon as they have strength to hold a pipe in their mouth : this must insensibly injure the constitu tion, though from the mildness of their tobacco, its effects must be less deleterious than that used in the United States or British West Indies. The girls, from manual labour, become strong-boned and masculine ; and after 30 years of age, have every appearance of early decrepitude; yet their constitutions frequently remain robust and healthy, and some few live to a considerable age. The women are prolific, and fat chubby children may be seen at every Habitan s door. We have never heard, however, that the St. Lawrence possesses such properties as are ascribed to the waters of the Mississippi, which arc said to facilitate procrea tion in the Louisianian females. It is even said r that women who, in other parts of the world could never breed, have become pregnant in a year after their arrival in Louisiana. The man ners of the Habitans are easy and polite. Their behaviour to strangers is never influenced by the cut of a coat or a fine perriwig. It is civil and respectful to all, without distinction of persons. They treat their superiors with that polite defe rence which neither debases the one, nor exalts the other. They are never rude to their inferiors because they are poor, for if they do not relieve poverty r they will not insult it. Their carriage and deportment are easy and unrestrained; and they have the air of men who have lived all their days in a town rather than in (he country. They live on good terms with each other ; parents and children to the third generation residing frequently in one house. The farm is divided as long as there is an acre to divide; and their desire of living together is a proof that they live happy, otherwise they would be anxious to part. They are ion d of celebrating their marriages with great pomp ; and those who live in the towns, and are married in the morning, often parade the streets with their friends in the afternoon. The carriages 
|CANADA 
265 
made use of in Canada, arc calashes for the sum mer, and carioles and berlins for the winter. The calash is in general use all over the country, and is used alike by the gentry and Habitans ; only that those belonging to the former are of a superior description. The calash is a sort of one-horsechaise, capable of holding two persons besides the driver, who sits in front upon a low seat, with his feet resting upon the shafts. The harness is sometimes very heavy, and studded with a great number of brass nails, but that is now nearly ex ploded, and has given place to a much lighter and simpler caparison. It is used as well for carts as for the calash, and is several pounds lighter than the cumbersome English collar and harness. Plated harness is used for the best calashes, though made in the same simple form, and requires merely a ring and a bolt, which, fastened to each shaft, secures the horse in the cart or calash, the sleigh or the cariole. The carioles nearly resemble the body of a one-horse-chaise, placed upon two runners, like the irons of a pair of skates. They are painted, varnished, and lined like the better sort of calashes. The driver generally stands up in front, though there is a seat for him similar to that in the calash. Between him and the horse, there is a high pannel, which reaches up to his breast, and prevents the splashes from being thrown into the cariole. The body of the vehicle is sometimes placed on high runners of iron, though in general the low wooden runners are pre ferred, as they are not so liable to be upset as the others. Seldom more than one horse is driven in the cariole, but the dashing youths in the army, the government service, or among the merchants, are fond of displaying their scientific management of the whip in the tandem style. There is hardly a Habitant in Canada who does not keep his horse and cart, calash, and berlin. Carters are also numerous in the towns, and calashes or carioles, &c. may be hired of them at a moderate price. They stand in the market-places, both winter and summer, looking out for employment. Their horses are generally in good condition, though their labour is hard, and their treatment severe. The French Canadians are remarkably civil to each other, and\bow and scrape as they pass along the streets. The carmen or peasants are used to meet cap in hand, with bodies bent to each other ; sometimes the men kiss each other on the cheek, but the practice is not in general use. They are extremely civil and polite to strangers, and take off their cap to every person, indifferently, whom they pass on the road. They seldom quarrel but when intoxicated ; at other times they are good VOL. T. 
humoured, peaceable, and friendly. They are fond of dancing and entertainments at particular seasons and festivals, on which occasions they eat, drink, and dance in constant succession. When their long fast in Lent is concluded, they have their " jours gras," or days of feasting. Then it is that every production of their farm is presented for the gratification of their appetites ; immense turkey-pies ; huge joints of pork, beef, and mutton ; spacious tureens of soup, or thickmilk ; besides fish, fowl, and a plentiful supply of fruit-pies, decorate the board. Perhaps 50 or 100 sit down to dinner ; rum is drank by the half pint, often without water ; the tables groan with their load, and the room resounds with jollity and merriment. No sooner, however, does the clash of the knives and forks cease, than the violin strikes up, and the dances commence. Minuets, and a sort of reels or jigs, rudely performed to the discordant scrapings of a couple of vile fiddlers, conclude the festival. See account of the inhabi tants of QUEBEC under that article. 
8. Government. The form of government in Canada is an epitome of the British constitution. In the Upper province it assimilates itself nearer to that of the parent country than in Lower Ca nada, the laws of which have unavoidably been obliged to admit of some local alterations, in order to adapt them to the majority of the people whom they govern, and who differ in so many respects from those ofv Upper Canada. The civil govern ment of the province consists of a governor, who is also a military man, and commander-in-chief of the forces; a lieutenant-governor, an executive and legislative council, and house of assembly. In the absence of the governor and lieutenant-go vernor, the president of the executive council succeeds to the head of affairs, as was exactly the case a few years since ; Mr. Dunn bdng then president of the province, in the absence of general Prescott, the governor, and Sir Robert Milnes, the lieutenant-governor. On such oc casions, the powers of the president are more cir cumscribed than those of the governor, and even the executive council is timorous, and reluctant to take any responsibility upon itself. The execu tive council, like the privy council of England, has the management of the executive part of the government, and is appointed by his Majesty. The legislative council, and house of assembly, form the provincial parliament. The governor, or person administering the government, repre sents the sovereign, and opens, prorogues, or dissolves the assembly ; gives or refuses his as sent to bills, or reserves them for his Majesty s 
M M 
266 
|CANADA. 
pleasure. The bills to which he asscnts, are put in force immediately, and true copies transmitted to the British government, for the approbation of the king in council. Certain acts of the provin cial parliament, which go lo repeal or vary the laws that were in existence at the time the present constitution was established, respecting tithes ; the appropriation of land for the support of the Protestant clergy ; the constituting and endowing of parsonages and rectories ; the right of presenta tion to the same ; the enjoyment and exercise of any mode of worship ; the imposing of any bur thens or disqualifications on account of the same ; the rights of the clergy to recover their accustom ed dues or emoluments to any ecclesiastics; the establishment and discipline of the church of England ; the king s prerogative concerning the granting of waste lands of the crown within the province ; are to be laid before the British parlia ment before they receive the royal assent. The acts of the provincial parliament are merely of a local nature, regulating the interior of the country, and creating a revenue for the maintenance of the government. The legislative council consists of 15 members, appointed for life by the governor, who is invested with powers for that purpose by his Majesty. No one can be a counsellor who is not 21 years of age, and a natural born subject, or naturalized according to act of parliament. The house of assembly consists of 50 members, x?ho are chosen for districts and counties by those who are possessed of freehold property of the clear yearly value of 40/. The members for cities and towns are chosen by voters, whose pro perty consists of a dwelling house and lot of ground, of the yearly value of five pounds ster ling, or who have resided in the town for 12 months previous to the writ of summons, and shall have paid one year s rent for a dwelling or lodg ing, at the rate of 101. sterling per annum. No person is eligible to a seat in the house of assembly who belongs to the legislative council, or that is a minister of religion, or not a natural born sub ject, or naturalized according to law or conquest ; nor any person that has been attainted of treason, or disqualified by any act of the provincial par liament. All religions are tolerated in Canada in the fullest extent, and no disqualification on that account exists for the purpose of preventing any person from a seat in the provincial parliament. Catholics, Jews, and Protestants, have all an equal right to sit, provided they are not disquali fied from any other cause. The assembly is not to last longer than four years, but may be dissolved sooner, and the governor is bound to call it at 
least once in each year. The oath of a mem ber taking his seat is comprised in a few words. He promises to bear true allegiance to the king, as lawful sovereign of Great Britain, and the province of Canada dependent upon it ; to defend him against all traitorous conspiracies and at tempts against his person, and to make known to him all such conspiracies and attempts which he may at anytime be acquainted with : all which he promises, without mental evasion, reservation, or equivocation, at the same time renouncing all par dons and dispensations from any person or power whatsoever. The provincial parliament is held in the old building called the Bishop s Palace, situate between the grand battery and Prescot gate, at the top of Mountain street. Theassembly remains sitting for about three months in the winter, and out of 50 members, seldom more than 20 attend ; one or other contrive to elude their duty by pleas of illness or unavoidable business. The French have a large majority in the house of assembly, their number being 36 to 14 British. The speeches are therefore mostly in French, for the English members all un derstand and speak that language, while very few of the French members have any knowledge of Eng lish. The debates, turning entirely upon questions of a mere local nature, are seldom interesting. 
Previous to the year 1774, the country was go verned by the ordinances of the governor alone; but the Quebec bill of that year extended Canada to its ancient limits ; and its original system of civil law, the " Custom of Paris," was restored. A new form of government was introduced, and the Roman Catholic clergy, except the monks and Jesuits, were secured in the legal enjoyment of their estates, and of their tithes, from all who were of the Romish religion. No person profess ing the Protestant religion was to be subject to the payment of tithes, their clergy being support ed by the government. The French laws were introduced in civil cases, and the English law, and trial by jury, in criminal cases. In 1791 a bill was passed, which repealed the Quebec bill of 1774, and divided Canada into two separate provinces, the one called Lower, and the other Upper Canada. By this bill, the present form of government was established ; and the Canadians now enjoy all the advantages of the British con stitution. In 1794 an act was passed for divid ing the province of Lower Canada into three districts, and for augmenting the number of judges. 
9. The military. The British government seems at present disposed to maintain its posses sions in
Cauada upon a respectable footing. Many 
|CANADA. 
267 
new appointments have taken place in that coun try, particularly in the military department. Six inspecting field-officers of militia are among the number ; but it is not yet known upon what plan the militia is to be organized, or whether it is to be organized at all. At present there are not 1000 either in Quebec, Three Rivers, or Montreal, that are armed ; and they have furnished themselves with clothing and accoutrements at their own expence, and are in every respect like our volun teers, except that the latter are superior to them in discipline. At the time that a Avar was expect ed, in 1807, between Great Britain and the United States, the Canadian people universally offered to embody themselves for the defence of the country. The services of only 5000 were ac cepted, and they were never armed, as the neces sity of the case was not very urgent. The alacrity and zeal with which the Canadians came forward, were however highly honourable to them, and afforded a strong proof of their good sense, in pro perly appreciating the happiness which they enjoy under a mild and liberal government. The British and French Canad ians are d i v ided into separate corps of militia, and officered by their own people ; a distinction which might as well be dispensed with, for it is calculated to prevent that union of interest and sentiment, which ought to prevail between all classes of his Majesty s subjects in the colony. 
10. Laws. The laws are now administered by two chief justices, and six puisne judges, who are divided equally between Quebec and Mont real. The chief justice of Quebec has however the largest salary, and the title of chief justice of the province. There is also a provincial judge for the district of Three Rivers, who resides there, and is assisted at the two superior terms by the chief justice of Quebec, and one of the puisne judges. The chief presides there only in crimi nal causes, There is also a judge of the court of vice-admiralty, who resides at Quebec ; and a provincial judge for the inferior district of Gaspe, who resides on that government. Besides the judges, there is an attorney-general, resident at Quebec, and a solicitor-general, resident at Mont real. Exclusive of the courts of king s bench and common pleas, there is a court of appeal, which sits the first Monday in every month, as long as business requires. This court is composed of the governor, or person administering the govern ment, and five or more members of the executive council, with those judges who have not pre viously heard or decided upon the causes which are appealed. A further appeal may be made to his Majesty in council. The courts of quarter 
sessions of the peace are held four times a year. The police of Quebec, Montreal, and Three Rivers, is in the hands of the justices of the peace : they also regulate the price of bread every month, and meet once a week to determine petty causes and offences under ten pounds. Counsel lors attend, and argue for their clients, who are put to great expence for summonses, fees, &c. The whole of the business has devolved into the hartds of the three magistrates, who erected the edifice for the butchers in the Upper Town mar ket-place ; and though there are upwards of 30 justices of the peace in Quebec, yet few, except the triumvirate, ever act as such. These magis trates decide causes with as much judgment as they design buildings. The laws of Lower Canada are, I. The " Coutume de Paris," or Custom of Paris, as it existed in France ii the year 1666, in which year the custom was reformed. II. The civil or Roman law in cases where the custom of Paris is silent. 111. The edicts, declarations, and ordinances of the French governors of Canada. IV. The acts of the British parliament made con cerning Canada. V. The English criminal law in tote, and the acts of the provincial parliament. This complication of French and English laws is rendered necessary by the two different com munities which exist in Canada, and may be di vided into four distinct parts, viz. The criminal, civil, commercial, and maritime laws. The cri minal law is wholly English, and in its adminis tration, all are universally subject to its operations without distinction of persons. The civil law, or compound of laws regarding property, is taken from the u Coutume of Paris," from the civil law of the Romans, or from such edicts, declarations, and ordinances concerning property, as have been made at any time by the French governors of Canada. To this civil jurisprudence, both the British and French Canadians, in certain cases, are subject. These laws embrace a variety of subjects, particularly the feudal tenures, seignio ries, fiefs, and estates held nobly or by villain age ; moveable or immoveable property, marriage dowers, and community of property between man and wife. The commercial laws relate to mer cantile transactions, and are regulated nearly in the same manner as in England ; except that in such cases there are no trials by jury, which are confined only to the criminal law. The maritime law, or court of vice-admiralty, is wholly Eng lish. Law proceedings are carried on both in English and French. At the first settling of the colony, extensive lots of land, called seigniories, many of them from one to five hundred square 
M M 2 
268 
|CANADA. 
miles in size, were granted to officers of the army and gentlemen-adventurers : These lots were situ ated on the borders of the river St. Lawrence, from Kamouraska to several leagues beyond Montreal, comprehending a distance of more than 300 miles. These great proprietors, who were generally men of moderate or small fortunes, and unskilled in agriculture, were unable to manage such vast estates : they were, therefore, under the necessity of making over their lands to soldiers or planters, on condition that they should receive a quit-rent and certain services for ever. This was introducing into America a species of tenure somewhat similar to that of the feudal government, which had so long been fatal to Europe. The superior ceded a portion of land to each of his vassals, of about three acres in breadth, and from 70 to 80 in depth, commencing from the banks of the river, and running back into the woods ; thus forming that immense chain of settlements which now exists along the shores of St. Lawrence. The vassal, on his part, engaged to work at certain periods in the seignior s mill, to pay him annu ally one or two sols per acre, and a bushel and half of corn, for the whole grant. This tax, though but a small one, maintained a considerable num ber of idle people, at the expence of the only class with which the colony ought to have been peo pled ; and the truly useful inhabitants, those engaged in laborious employments, found the bur den of maintaining a lazy noblesse increased by the additional exactions of the clergy. The tithes were imposed in 1667, and though this grievous tax upon industry was reduced to a 25th part of the produce of the soil, yet even that was an oppression in an infant colony, and a grievance in a country where the clergy had property allotted them sufficient for their maintenance. There are two kinds of tenure in Lower Canada, viz. the feudal tenure, and the tenure in free and common soccage. By the first all the French Canadians hold their lands, under certain distinctions. By free and common soccage arc held those lands which the British settlers have received from the crown, few of them holding lands under the feudal tenure. In order to give some idea of the feudal tenure in this country, it will be necessary to give a sketch of the principal chapters of the " Custom of Paris." The first and most difficult chapter treats of fiefs, the origin of which is uncertain. Before we come to the definition of the nature and different kinds of fiefs, it must be observed, that estates are divided into two kinds in the Cus tom of Paris : First, those held nobly ; and, s.econdly, those held by villainage. The estates held 
nobly, are the fiefs and Franc aJeu noble; and the estates held by villainage, are those held sub ject to ccns or censive, and Franc aleu villain. Fief is an estate held and possessed on condition of fealty and homage, and certain rights, payable generally by the new possessor to the lord of whom the fief is held ; these rights are quint and relief. The quint is the fifth part of the purchase money, and must be paid by the purchaser : this is somewhat similar to the fine of alienation, which, by the ancient English tenure, was paid to the lord upon every mutation of the tenant s property. Relief is the revenue of one year, due to the lord for certain mutations, as if a fief comes to a vassal by succession in the direct line, there is nothing due to the seignior but fealty and homage ; but if in the collateral line, then a fine or composition is paid to the lord upon taking up the estate, which was lapsed or fallen by the death of the last tenant. The feudal lord, within 40 days after the purchase of a fief has been made known to him, can take it to himself by paying to the purchaser the price which he gave for it, with all lawful charges. This privilege, enjoyed by the feudal lord, (and in Canada by the king), is for the purpose of preventing frauds in the disposal of fiefs ; for it has sometimes happened, that by an understanding between the buyer and seller, the quint or fifth has been paid upon only one half, or even a quarter, of the purchase money, instead of the whole. By the right, therefore, which the lord possesses of purchasing the property himself, whenever the nominal sum is not equal to the value of the fief, he immediately ascertains the actual amount of the purchase money, and either receives the whole of the fifth share, or takes the property into his own hands, at a price considerably below its real value. If the fine is paid immediately, only one-third of the quint can be demanded. The succession to fiefs is different from that of property held en roture, or by villainage. The eldest son takes by right the chateau or principal manor-house, and the yard adjoining to it ; also an acre of the garden joining to the manor-house. If there are any mills, ovens, or presses, within the seigniory, they belong to the eldest son ; but the profits arising from the mills, (whether com mon or not), and from the ovens and press, if com mon, must be equally divided among the heirs. When there are only two heirs coming to the succession, the eldest son takes, besides the manor-hoasc, &c. two thirds of the fief; and the youngest son takes the other third : but when there are more than two heirs, the elder son takes the one half, and the other heirs take the remain- 
|CANADA. 
269 
ing half. When there are only daughters com ing to the succession, the fief is equally divided among them, the eldest daughter having no birth right. In successions to fiefs in the collateral line, females do not succeed with males in the same degree. If the eldest son dies, the next does not succeed to his birth-right; but the estate must be equally divided among the heirs. Franc aleu is a freehold estate, held subject to no seigniorial rights or duties, acknowledging no lord but the king. Censiie is an estate held in the feudal manner, charged with a certain annual rent, which is paid by the possessor of it. It consists of money, fowls, or grain. It is thus that most of the Habitans hold their farms. The lodt el vcntes, or fines of alienation, are one twelfth part of the purchase money, and are paid by the purchaser on all mu tations of property en roture (or soccagc) to the seignior, in the same manner as the quint is paid upon mutations of fiefs. The seignior has also the same right of purchasing the property within 40 days, in case he suspects that there is any collusion between the parties to defraud him of his dues. The succession to estates held en roture is re gulated differently from the successions to fiefs, that is to say, that the heirs all succeed equally to estates en roture. The seignior, whenever he finds it neccessary, may cut down timber for the pur pose of building mills and making roads, which are considered of general benefit to his tenants. He is also allowed one-tenth of all the fish caught on his property, besides an exclusive right to the profits of his grist-mills, to which all his vassals are obliged to carry their corn, and pay a certain portion for the grinding it. Some of the rents paid by the Habitans to their seigniors, amount to 10 or J5 shillings per annum ; others pay no more than a sol, a capon, or a bushel of wheat. But from the lods et ventes, upon the sale of farms, the seigniors often derive from 50/. to 200/. or SOOL per annum ; even the barren seigniory of Grondines brought the seignior in one year upwards of 80/. Farms on good land will sell, according to their size, from 100/. to 500/. The Canadian go vernment paid upwards of 500/. for a farm which they purchased for a certain individual, though it only consisted of 60 acres clear, and 20 acres wood land. The same was situated on the seigniory of Becancour, in the district of Three Rivers. Mr. Hart, the seignior, received between 40/. and 50/. from the government, as his lods et ventes. It will be perceived, by the practice of dividing the seig niories, fiefs, and farms, among the children of their proprietors, how much the power of the seigniors must be reduced, and the people involved in litiga 
tion and disputes. Hence the noblesse are now nearly reduced to the common mass of the vulgar, and the Habitans make but little progress towards the acquisition of property and power. 
With respect to the division of property in ge neral, according to the civil law of Canada, it consists of moveable and immoveable property. Movcable property is any thing that can be moved without fraction. Immoveable property is any thing that cannot be moved, and is divided into h\o kinds, propres and acquits (acquisition.) Propre is an estate which is acquired by succes sion in the direct or collateral line ; and acquit is an estate or property that is acquired by any other means. Community of property is the partnership which huband and wife contract on marrying ; but they may stipulate in their mar riage-contract, that there shall be no community of property between them. The dot, or dowry, is all the property which the wife puts into the community, whether moveable or immoveable. But immoveable property falling to her in a direct or collateral line, is a propre or real estate to her, and does not fall into the community. The dower is a certain right given to the wife by law, or by particular agreement ; it is of two kinds, the cus tomary dower, and the stipulated dower. The former consists of half the property which the husband was possessed of at the time of their mar riage, and half of all property which may come to him in a direct line. The stipulated dower is a certain sum of money, or portion of property, which the husband gives instead of the customary dower. The widow has only the use of the cus tomary dower during her lifetime ; at her death it falls to the children, who did not accept the the succession of their father; but her heirs suc ceed to the stipulated dower. Hence, by the community which exists in marriage, no man can dispose of any part of his properiy without the consent of his wife ; and some compensation or present is generally made to the lady on those oc casions. A gentleman, it is well known, was once nearly prevented from purchasing a house, had not the fortunate interference of a quarter-cask of Madeira, and a piece of fine Russia sheeting, created a considerable change in the sentiments of his lady. 
The custom of allowing community of property in mariages has frequently proved injurious to the survivor. If the wife died without a will, the children, when of age, would demand their mother s share; and it has often happened that the father has been obliged to sell off all his property, in order to ascertain its value, and divide it amone: ! 
* , V-- tl 
270 
|CANADA. 
the claimants. The loss of a good business, or an estate, has sometimes been the consequence of this law. The parents now get wiser, and make wills which regulate the disposal of their property agree able to the wishes of the survivor. The law of dowers has also given rise frequently to fraud. Some of the Canadians have opened a store with goods purchased on credit, and made over, per haps, one-half to the wife as her dower ; they have then failed, and their creditors have lost their money. Some alterations and improvements have, however, been introduced of late, which render collusion, in such cases, less practicable. No pro perty in Lower Canada is secure to the purchaser, unless advertised and sold by the sheriff, which clears it from all incumbrances and after-claims. Sometimes a written agreement is entered into be tween the buyer and seller, in which the latter ex onerates the former from all claims upon the pro perty ; but this is far from being safe, and is rely ing wholly upon the honour of another ; for the buildings, lands, &c. may be seized by the credi tors of the estate, even though it might have passed through 20 private sales since the debts were con tracted. The sale of property advertised by the sheriff, may be delayed by an opposition put in for the wife s dower, or on account of an illegal seizure. The power of arrests in Canada is limited. If an affidavit is made, that a man is about to leave the province in debt, for a sum exceeding 10 /. sterling, the debtor may be arrested, and detained in prison until the debt is paid. But if he will swear that he is not worth 10 /. sterling, the court will order the creditor to pay him five shillings currency per week. 
From the foregoing sketch of Canadian juris prudence, it may be easily conceived how puz zling and intricate some parts of the civil law must prove, and how much the Habitans arc ex posed and laid open to oppression from their seigniors, under the feudal tenures. This sub ject was formerly canvassed in the provincial as sembly by some of the English members, who were for having proper bounds fixed to the power of the seigniors, and having all the fines and ser vices due from their vassals accurately ascertained, and made generally known. But the French members, who had a great majority in the house, strongly opposed it, and the subject was dropped. Instances of oppression on the part of the seigniors are, however, fortunately very rare, and the Ha bitans enjoy their property quiet and unmolested ; yet, in case of violent outrage, they can always come under the protecting power of the British laws, which will afford them that security of which 
their own are destitute. The Canadians have no reason to complain of the change of government. Before the conquest, they were often unacquainted with that protection which the laws now afford them. 
The lawyers who practise in Lower Canada are nearly all French ; not more than one-fifth at most are English. They are styled advocates, and in the double capacity of counsellor and at torney : formerly they included the profession of notary public ; but that is now separated from the rest, and forms a distinct profession. Law-suits are numerous, and are daily increasing, as may be ascertained by the duties upon them, for the pur pose of erecting the new court-house at Quebec. In 1800 this tax produced 500 /. per annum ; and in 1807 it had increased nearly to 1000/. per annum. The duty is now discontinued, as the object for which it was levied is accomplished. The building cost about 5000 /. currency. 11. List of Governors of Canada, from the conquest, with the date of their appointments. 
James Murray, 2lst November 1763. 
P. M. Irvine, president, 30th June 1766. 
Guy Carleton, lieutenant-governor and com mander in chief, 24th September 1766. 
Ditto, 26th October 1768. 
H. T. Cramahe, president, 9th August 1770. 
Guy Carleton, llth October 1774. 
F. Haldiman, 1778. 
H. Hamilton, lieutenant-governor and com mander in chief, 1784. 
H. Hope, lieutenant-governor and commander in chief, 1785. 
Lord Dorchester, governor-general, 1786. 
A. Clarke, lieutenant-governor and commander in chief, 1791. 
Lord Dorchester, 24th September 1793. 
Robert Prescott, 1796. 
Sir Robert Milnes, lieutenant-governor, 1799. 
Thomas Dunn, president, and superseded by Sir James Craig, governor and captain-general, 1807. 
Sir George Prevost, 1811. 
List of the Counties in Lower Canada, the num ber of Representatives in the Provincial Asssem
bly, and the number of Parishes. 
Parishes. Members. 
Gaspe 1 
Cornwallis - 11 2 
Devon 6 2 
Hertford - - 7 2 
Dorchester 4 2 
Carried forward 91 
|CANADA. 
271 
Brought forward 
Buckinghamshire . - 12 Kichelieu - 7 
And for the town of Sorel, in ditto Bedford Surrey Kent 
Huntingdon York 
Montreal - , . ". 
Effingham - ." 
Leinster - . V 
Warwick 
St. Maurice 
Hampshire Quebec 
Northumberland 
Orleans ... 
12. Roads and Distances in Canada. From Quebec to Halifax. 
From Quebec to point Levi, cross the river Thence to the portage at riviere du Cap Thence to Timiskuata Thence to the settlement of Maduaska Thence to the great falls in river St. John Thence to Frederick town Thence to St. John s Thence tp Halifax 
50 
Miles. \ 
36 
45 
45 180 
90 189| 
708 
From Quebec to Michillimakinak, at the entrance 
of lake Huron. 
To Montreal - - 184 
To Coteau du Lac To Cornwall 
To Matilda -, -j 
To Augusta - v * 
To Kingston To Niagara To fort Erie To Detroit To Michillimakinak 
4698 
From Quebec to New York, byway of Montreal. 
Miles. 
-&gt;. - 9 9 
:"J - * 15 
.M&gt; ? 30 
To cape Rouge To St. Augustin To Jacques Cartier To St. Anne s To Three Rivers 
To riviere du Loup *x. - 27 
ToBerthier . - - 22 
To Repentigne ~ - 32 
To Montreal - . - 18 
To Laprairie % - 9 
To St. John s ; ."* - 14 
To isle au Noix - 14 
To Windmill point 12 
To Savage s point : - - 6 
To Sandbar - 20 To Burlington, the first post-town in the States ** -" 
85 
99 
To Skenesborough To fort Anne To Dumont ferry ToWaterford To Albany city 
To Hudson city To Rhinebeck To Poughkeepsie To Peckskill To Kingsbridge To New York 
. 14 
78 12 24 24 12 
34 31 17 34 34 15 
89 
150 
165 
588 
The expencc of travelling post in Lower Canada is Is. currency per league. 
The American packets on lake Champlain charge from three to four dollars for the passage from St. John s to Skenesborough, a distance of neaily 160 miles. 
From Skenesborough the traveller proceeds to New York, in a waggon or stage, at the rate of 3d. sterling per mile. 
13. Expences of the Government. The expences of the civil government in Lower Canada, amounted in the year 1807 to 44,4 10/. 3s. l\d. sterling : about three-fourths of this sum are defrayed by the province, out of the king s do mains, and duties payable on the importation of certain articles into Lower Canada ; the re mainder is supplied by Great Britain, who also 
272 
|CANADA. 
supports the Protestant clergy, the military, and lowing statement of receipts and expcnces, upon 
Indian establishments. In order to afford a clear an average of three years, from the time the new 
idea of the expences of the government of Lower constitution took place in 1791 to 1803, since 
Canada, we shall present the reader with the fol- which the expences have augmented but little. 
Table of Receipts and Expences of the province of Lower Canada since the new constitution. 
Receipts from the king s domains. 
1794 
1798 
1803. 
. s. d. 
. s. d. 
j. s. d. 
King s posts - Let 
400 
400 
400 
Forges of St. Maurice, at Three Rivers, do. 
20 16 8 
850 
King s quay at Quebec do. 
 
300 
Droit de quint, or fifth on fiefs 4c ,.. *. f-4 
3828 13 11 
263 
Cens et rentes - - - V,. 
__ 
__ 
Lodsetventes . - * . , . . 
4667 7 9 
Imposts and Duties. 
Duty on sugar, foreign wine, coffee, molasses, and 
pepper, 6 Geo. II. and 4 and 6 Geo. III. 
14 3 51 
23 5 11 
Ditto on brandy, rum, and licences to retailers of 
strong liquors, 14 Geo. III. j \*\&gt;.\ 
4385 18 10 
6608 2 6 
8476 3 1 
Duties imposed by the provincial parliament. 
On wines, act passed 1793 - - - i 
1842 16 6 
2084 18 4 
1781 18 
On rum, molasses, sugars, tobacco, coffee, cards, 
salt, licences to publicans and hawkers 
9220 11 5 
12,518 5 4 
Dn manufactured tobacco - - 
_ 
__. 
638 8 9 
3n billiards 
__ 
87 10 
On pilotage, for improving the navigation of the 
river ...---
260 14 4 
580 6 8 
On warrants, law, &c. for replacing the 5000/. ad 
vanced for building the court-house, taken off 
in 1807 - - - - t 
558 14 
7 ines, penalties, &c. - 
25 12 1 
342 8 9 
95 12 
Total receipts 
5854 7 5 
22,780 9 41 
31,241 4 10i 
Expences of the Government. 
Amount of warrants granted for the payment of the 
civil expences, salaries, pensions, and incidental 
expences ....._ 
22,206 5 8 
26,682 2 lij 
41,120 19 5| 
Expences of the legislative council and house of as 
sembly * - ;...-
1517 15 2| 
2099 4 4| 
Total expences 
22,06 5 8 
28,199 J8 2 
43,220 3 10| 
Among the nrticles upon which duties have been gallon, and might yet bear an additional duty that 
laid, both by ilie provincial and imperial parlia- -would make up the deficiency in the revenue, for 
ments, rum is the most productive ; and in the the support of the civil government, which is at 
course of eight years, the duty has more than present supplied by Great Britain, 
doubled itself. It is frequently retailed at 5$. per Salaries 
|CANADA. 
273 
Salaries of the different officers belonging to the Government of Lower Canada, in sterling money. 
 
Governor-general, if absent, 2000/. resident 4000 Lieutenant-governor, ditto, 2QOO/. ditto 4000 Lieutenant-governor of Gaspe - - 400 
The members of the executive council, each 100 Chief justice of Quebec and the province 1500 Chief justice of Montreal -1100 
Seven puisne judges, including their sala ries as counsellors, each - - 850 Provincial judge of Three Rivers - 500 Provincial judge of Gaspe - - 200 Attorney-general, salary 3001. Government 
practice ... 000 
Solicitor-general, salary 200/. Ditto - 1500 
Judge of the vice-admiralty court - 200 
Protestant bishop of Canada - - 3500 
Twelve Protestant clergymen, each from 300 to 500 Provincial secretary - - 400 
Secretary to the governor, clerk to the crown in chancery, and clerk to the executive council ; whicli three places arc held by one person ... 800 
Assistant secretary - - 200 
Clerk in the chateau -office - - 120 
French translator to the government - 200 
Provincial aide-de-camp - - 200 
Adjutant-general of the militia - - 200 
Receiver-general ... 400 
Superintendant-general of the Indian depart ment - - 1000 Storekeeper-general of the Indian depart ment - - - 350 Inspectors and cultivators of hemp, each - 200 Inspector-general of accounts - - 360 Surveyor-general - - - 300 Deputy surveyor-general - - 150 Grand voyer of the province - - 500 Grand voyer of Quebec, and superintendant 
of post-houses - - 250 
Grand voyer of Montreal, I50/. Three Ri vers, 90/. Gaspe - - 50 Inspector-general of forests, and inspector 
of police at Quebec - - SOO 
Inspector of police at Montreal - -100 
Inspector of chimneys at Quebec, 607. 
Montreal, 60/. Three Rivers - J5 
Naval officer at Quebec - 100 
Harbour-master of Quebec - - 100 
Interpreters to the Indians, each - 100 
Sheriffs at Quebec and Montreal, 1007. each, 
perquisites ... J500 
Sheriff at Three Rivers 50/. perquisites - 500 VOL. i. 
w 
Sheriff at Gaspe 40/. perquisites 200 
Coroners at Quebec and Montreal, each - 50 Pensions to various persons, about - 3000 
Exclusive of the expences for the civil establish ment of Lower Canada, which are chiefly de frayed by the province, the British government is at considerable expence for the maintenance of the English clergy, the distribution of presents to the Indians, and the military force and fortifica tions requisite for the security of the colony. The actual sum expended by Great Britain annu ally, on account of the two provinces, may be esti mated at about 500,000/. sterling. It must, how ever, be observed, that the expences of the colony are always in a fluctuating state, in consequence of the increase or diminution of the military force, and the extraordinary repairs of fortifications. The expences of the civil government in Upper Canada are defrayed by direct taxes; by duties upon articles imported from the United States ; and a sum granted by the Lower province out of certain duties. In Upper Canada, lands, houses, and mills ; horses, cows, pigs, and o her property, are valued, and taxed at the rate of Id. in the pound. Wood-lands are valued at Is. per acre, and culti vated lands at 50s. per acre. A house with only one chimney pays no tax, but with two it is charged at the rate of 40/. per annum, though it may be but a mere hovel. The inhabitants of Lower Ca nada pay no direct taxes, except for the repair of roads, highways, paving streets, &c. and then they have the choice of working themselves, or sending one of their labourers with a horse and cart, &c. The revenue is raised, as stated hi the table of receipts and expences. The French Ca nadians are very averse to taxation in a direct way, and much opposition is always experienced from the French members of the house of assembly, whenever any proposition, however beneficial, may be offered whicli involves a direct cess. The uti lity of turnpikes has often been agitated in the provincial parliament, and though the countrr would be greatly improved by the opening of new roads and communications with distant settlements, yet the measure has always been violently opposed by the French party. The communication be tween Canada and the United States, by the waj of lakeChamplain, is extremely difficult ; the roads are execrable, and will never be improved until turnpikes are established upon them. A very con siderable trade is carried on between the two coun tries, and would increase with the facility of com munication. The ignorance and obstinacy, how- 
N X 
274 
|CANADA. 
ever, of several of the French members, have hitherto baffled the more enlarged and liberal views of the British merchants, who are ever desirous of affording the utmost facility to trade and com merce. 
14. Co nmerce. The commerce of Canada, pre vious to the conquest of the country by the English, was trifl inland unimportant, and the balance of trade considerably agninst the colony. It is only within the last o O years that it has become of sufficient magnitude to claim the attention of enterprising in dividuals, and to be of political importance to the mother-country. It was, perhaps, an unfortunate circumstance for Canada that it was colonized by the French, who are a people little qualified for agriculture, and less for commerce. Their flighty and volatile imaginations having been checked by the disappointment of not discovering gold or silver mines, by which they had promised them selves the immediate possession of imme ise riches, they could ill brook a residence in snch a dreary country, where the ground was covered one-half the year with snow. Agriculture with them was a matter of necessity rather than of choice, and it is possible that they were very ignorant of that art. The first settlers being composed chiefly of soldiers, and men of a roving and adventurous spirit, very steady or regular habits could not be expected from them. The chase, therefore, offered greater charms than the slow and tedious process of agri culture ; and few conld be found who did not prefer the gun to the plough. The produce of the chase not only supplied them with provisions, but also with clothing; and in a short time the peltry which they procured in their excursions, came to be estimated :it its proper value, and af forded them a very profitable article for exporta tion to the mother-country. The forests, inde pendent of their animal productions, abounded with inexhaustible quantities of valuable timber ; and the seas, rivers, and lakes, were equally abun dant in every species and variety of fish. These articles, with a few other natural productions, formed the only source of trade in the colony for nearly a century and a half, and they were far from being equivalent to the demands of the colo nists, who imported from France more than double the amount of their exports, by which means their expences greatly exceeded their incomes, and re duced the credit of the colony to a very low ebb. A variety of expedients were proposed and adopted to remedy this defect ; among the rest was the issuing of paper-money, which in a few years accumulated so rapidly, that scarcely any coin was to be found in the country. French 
sols, consisting of brass and a very small mixture of silver, which passed for rather less than Id. were all that was circulated. The paper-cur rency having no stability in itself, in consequence of its payment being protracted from year to year, fell at length into disrepute, arid at the period of the conquest, more than 200, OOO/. were due to the colony by the French nation, on account of bills of exchange and paper cur rency. This sum was afterwards liquidated by France, through the interference of Great Bri tain ; but the colonists sustained a very consider able loss. An extensive trade is now carried on between Canada and the United States across lake Champlain. The importations into Lower Canada consist of various articles of merchan dise, oak and pine timber, staves, &c. and pearl ashes, provisions, &c. ; and amounted in 1807 to upwards of 160,000/. sterling. The exports from Lower Canada to the United States do not amount to half the value of the imports. They consist chiefly of peltry and salt : the other articles are of a trifling nature. The balance is therefore greatly in favour of the States, which receive the difference in specie. When the first embargo law took place, it did not affect those states bordering on Canada ; Iwt in order to put all the states upon a level, the American govern ment passed several supplementary acts, strictly prohibiting all trade and commerce with foreign places. The impolicy of such a measure, and the detriment likely to accrue to the newly-settled states on the confines of Canada, were ably set forth by the inhabitants of the town of Burlington in Vermont, in their memorial to congress, pray ing a repeal of that part of the law which related to their state. 
Several Americans have of late years settled in Montreal, and carry on a lucrative trade through out the country ; nor do the merchants of that place eye the exertions of the new-comers with jealousy : on the contrary, the latter have experi enced a very hospitable and kind reception from them. One great cause of the want of spirit and enterprise among the Habitans, or Canadian land holders, who, generally speaking, are possessed of considerable property, is occasioned by the re strictions of their priests, who will not permit them to put their money out to interest. They have no other mode of turning their money to account, but by increasing their landed property, or, if in trade, by increasing their stock. Hence whatever profits and gains they are able to lay up must be put into a strong box, if they wish to secure it. 
|CANADA. 
375 
The merchants of Canada are almost wholly Bri tish : they derive their resources from England, and in general have established themselves upon small capitals and large credits. This may perhaps, in some measure, account for the numerous failures that have taken place amongst them ; and it is posi tively asserted as a fact, that since the country has been in our possession not more than five in 100 have paid their debts. A variety of causes, no doubt, have contributed to this extraordinary defalcation : a tedious winter of six months, during which no business can be carried on with Eu rope, while interest upon their European debts is charged after a certain period, and continues winter as well as summer, is certainly a great drawback in mercantile concerns ; the long credit also which the Canadian merchants are obliged to give the country storekeepers, tends very con siderably to impede their remittances in due season, unless the utmost regularity is main tained. The timber and staves, which are brought into Canada from the states, are cut down in winter or spring, and collected into large rafts on lake Champlain, from whence they are floated down the river Richlieu into the St. Lawrence, and de posited along the shores of Silleri and Wolfe s cove, for an extent of more than five miles. There they are sorted for the merchants, and then taken into the ships which lie off the cove, or at the wharfs at Quebec. Standard-staves of 5| feet long, 1| inch thick, and 5 inches broad, sell in Canada usually from 40/. to 501. the 1200. The freight is about the same amount. The rafts when coming down the river exhibit a cu rious scene : they have several little sheds or huts erected with boards for the accommodation of the rowers, whose number on large rafts fre quently consists of upwards of 100 or 150. The men employed in this business are chiefly Ameri cans from the state of Vermont : they live upon the rafts until they are separated for sale, when they remove their huts to the shore, where they re side during the remainder of the season ; at the end of which they return home. Several rafts of timber, and scows laden with staves, flour, pork, and pot-ash, arrive annually from Upper Canada at Montreal and Quebec. The trade between the Upper and Lower provinces has been important only within a very few years. The rapid in crease of population and agriculture in the new settlements of Upper Canada, has produced a large surplus of those articles for exportation, and the demand for them has risen in proportion. 
The following is a return of the productions that passed the rapids from Chateauguay to Mont
Bushels Barrels Ditto Packs 
1,460 
127 
48 
8 
277,010 Feet 
4,300 Ditto 
691,200 - 72,440 - 985 - 6,300 
real between the 27th of April, and tin; 28t!i of November, 1807, the only period in which the St. Lawrence is navigable during the year. 19,893 Barrels "Flour 
Wheat 
Pot-ash /* in 39 scows. 
Pork 
Furs 
Oak timber 
Pine ditto 
Staves 
 in 340 rafts. 
Boards and planks 
Masts. 
Cords of fire-wood, in 701 cribs. This statement affords an agreeable presage of the future prosperity and opulence of the Upper province. Some persons consider Upper Canada as the garden of America, subjected neither to the tedious freezing winters of Lower Canada, nor the scorching summers of the more southern parts of the continent of N. America. The principal incon veniences to which the Upper province is subject, are the falls and rapids which impede the naviga tion of the St. Lawrence between Kingston and Montreal, and its distance from any commercial or shipping town from whence its productions may be exported to Europe. These are, however, in some measure removed, and a considerable abundance of the surplus produce of that province is now for warded to Montreal and Quebec. If good roads were "made between the two provinces, regular waggons might be established as in England, and goods conveyed up the country with more security and expedition than they can at present by water : a more regular communication would be then opened between the two seals of government, which would be the means of expediting the public busi ness, and facilitating the commerce of both coun tries. The manufactures of Lower Canada arc carried on chiefly by individuals for their own do mestic use. A manufactory of iron was established by the French at Three Rivers, soon after the settlement of the country. That government, how ever, was never able to make it pay the expences attending the work, and it fell into the hands of individuals, who succeeded very little better. The iron ore was at one time supposed to be nearly ex hausted, but fresh veins having been discovered in the vicinity of the forges, the works are now in a flourishing condition. Another manufactory of iron has been established o( late in the seigniory of Batiscan, about half-way between Quebec and Three Rivers, on the n. shore. Large sums of money have been expended in endeavour ing to bring these works to perfection ; but very little 
N N 2 
216 
|CANADA. 
success has hitherto attended the exertions of the proprietors, several of whom are considerable losers. The articles manufactured here consist of cast-iron stove-plates, pots, kettles, and other domestic uten sils. Within the last twenty years, ship-building has been carried on at Quebec and Montreal to a \ery profitable extent every year. There are four builders at the former place, and one at the latter ; from six to eight vessels are launched annually : they range between 200 and 500 tons, and are con tracted for upon an average at 10/. per ton. The greatest advantage of this business is, that the men can work at it both winter and summer. The cord age and rigging are obtained from England, but the iron-work is mostly of Canadian manufacture ; nearly 20,000/. is annually circulated in the country for ship-building. Upon a review of the preceding account of the commerce of Canada it appears, that a very sensible improvement has taken place within the last twenty years ; and that the balance of trade, upon the whole, is now much in favour of the colony. It may be also worthy of remark, that the imports from Great Britain and her colonies, instead of increasing, have considerably diminished. For several years past, the E. India and British manufactured goods imported into Canada annually from Great Britain, have been estimated at about 330,000/. sterling ; but during the year 1807, they did not amount to more than 200,000/. : this sur prising diminution, while the demands of the co lony were increasing with its population, must na turally create astonishment, until it is known that the deficiency is supplied by the United States, partly by a regular trade, but much more by con traband. The articles now furnished chiefly by the Americans, and which were formerly procured solely from England, are tea, tobacco, and E. India manufactured goods. By the table of imports re ceived at the custom-house at St. John s, on lake Champlain, it appears that in 1807, 42,000 Ibs. of tea, 187,887 Ibs. of tobacco, and merchandise con sisting of British and E. India goods to the amount of S0,000/. were imported from the United States through the regular channel; while the quantity of tea received from England was only 4200 Ibs. and tobacco 150,000 Ib* : that exclusive of timber, pot-ash, and provisions, the total amount was cal culated at 100,000/. equal to one half the merchan dise received that year from Great Britain. Reckon ing even upon this estimate, the deficiency of im ports from Great Britain appears to be accounted for ; but then no allowance is made for the increa sing wants of the people, whose number must have greatly increased within the last twenty years ; this, however, is to be found in the great latitude that is 
iven to the introduction of goods from the United tates, without passing through the custom-house at St. John s. The means of conveying them into Canada, across the extensive boundary line, which divides the two countries, are so easy, and require so little exertion to avoid the Argus eyes of a cus tom-house officer, that every temptation is offered to introduce articles which are either prohibited, or pay any considerable duty. The facilities afforded to smuggling between Canada and the United States, have been sufficiently exemplified since the promulgation of the embargo act ; for, in spite of the armed militia and custom-house officers stationed along the American side of the line to enforce the laws, the timber, pot-ash, provisions, and almost every other article brought into the province in 1808, has more than doubled the quantity received from thence in 1807. A variety of curious ex pedients were resorted to by the Americans in smuggling their produce over the line; buildings were erected exactly upon the boundary line, one half in Canada, the other half in the States ; the goods were put in at, night, and before morning were safe in Canada. Additional laws, however, put a stop to this proceeding, and the officers were empowered to seize all property which they sus pected was intended to be run into Canada ; but the ingenuity of the Vermontese still evaded even these rigorous mandates. They constructed a great number of timber rafts, fastened them together, and formed immense bodies of floating wood ; one of them even covered ten acres, and from its size, and in ridicule of Mr. Jefferson, was called the Mam moth raft. These were manned wholly by French Canadians collected for that purpose, and were rowed within a short distance of the line ; when the custom-house officers, aided by a detachment of themilitia, immediately took possession, and obliged the people on board to cast anchor ; this was ac cordingly complied with, and for a few days the rafts remained quietly moored. There were im mense quantities of provisions, pot-ash, and staves on board ; and tiie people were conveniently lodged in their wooden huts, which, with the great num ber of men employed to row them, formed a very extraordinary spectacle. It was not long, however, before the whole were soon in action again ; for a violent gale of wind coming on one night, blew the unweildly rafts, with all their civil and military heroes on board, completely over the line. The American officers and militia no sooner found them selves in Canada, than they hastily took to their boats and rowed buck tothe States, sorely chagrined at losing so many valuable prizes. Strong remon strances were made by the commanding officers on 
|CANADA. 
these expeditions, and information was sent to Mr. President Jefferson, who at length was pleased to issue a proclamation declaring the inhabitants of Vermont to be in a state of rebellion and insurrec tion ; and ordered outre-inforcementsofthc militia to quell the disturbances. The Vermontese Mere much enraged at the idea of being considered and denounced as rebels, in consequence of a few frays between the custom-house officers and smugglers. A great and serious inconvenience was felt at this period by the British settlers in Mis
isqui bay, the entrance from which into lake Cluimplain is cut by the boundary line, and several rafts were thus pre vented from passing down the Richlieu river into the St. Lawrence ; they having no outlet but by way of the States. The lucrative trade, which is carried on between Canada and the adjoining States, Las rendered the Americans very averse to a war between the two countries, as the prosperity of their respective States almost entirely depend upon that opening for the disposal of their surplus produce. Greater facility and advantages are afforded by the exportation to Canada than to any of the maritime towns in New England ; nothing, therefore, but absolute necessity would drive them into a war with the British settlements. They also lay a duty of nearly 15 per cent, on goods from Canada, while their productions sent into that country pay but a mere trifle. The Canadians are more inclined to encourage the importation of goods from the States than from Great Britain, because they are obtained at a much cheaper rate, though generally of an in ferior quality. The intrinsic worth of an article is, however, of less consideration to the inhabitants of Canada than the price ; the best kind are seldom or never to be procured in that country: the mer chants find their own advantage in the vending of inferior commodities, upon which they obtain much larger profits than they could procure upon the better sort ; and the people are now so accus tomed to the use of these goods, that they scarcely .know how to appreciate those of a superior quality. Much diversity of opinion has existed of late in Canada, upon the propriety of establishing a bank in that country : the British merchants of comse are eager for the creation of such an establishment, having before their eyes the example of Great Britain and the United States, where the banking system is carried on with so much success and ad vantage. The subject was discussed in 1808, in the house of assembly, and Mr. Richardson of Mont real, one of the members, answered the several ob jections that were urged against the establishment of a bank in Lower Canada. A bill was then brought into the houe ; the following are its prin 
cipal features : The stock is not to exceed 250,000/. currency, unless the government of the province see fit to take an interest therein, in which case it may be 50,000/. more. This stock is to consist of shares of 25/. each. There are to be 21 directors, who are to choose out of their number a president and vice-president, whereof half are to be tor Quebec, and half for Montreal, at which cities the two superior branches of the bank are to be held, with a power of erecting offices of deposit and discount in other parts of the Canadas, when found advisable. If government take an interest, they are to appoint two directors. The dividends are to be payable half-yearly. A deposit of 10 per cent, is to be paid down for each share on subscribing, which will be forefeited if the first instalment there after of 10 per cent, be not paid in due season. The shares are put at a low rate, that they may be more generally diffused over the province. Fo reigners may hold shares, but cannot be directors ; they may, however, vote at general meetings by proxy, if the proxy be one of his Majesty s subjects. The votes are endeavoured to be established on such a scale of proportion as shall exclude an over bearing preponderance in those who shall hold a large interest in the concern, and yet assure to pro perty therein that influence which it ought to pos sess in every well regulated institution. It is pro posed that there shall be no other corporate bank in Canada during the continuance of the contem plated one ; but there is a power of revocation thereof, under certain limitations and formalities, if found to be hurtful in practice. The stock of the bank may be increased when requisite, and its notes are proposed to be receivable in payment of duties imposed on, or to be imposed by the provincial legislature. It is doubtful whether the French party in the house of assembly will coincide with the ideas of the British merchants; the old French paper currency is not yet forgotten, and will na turally prejudice a great many of them against the introduction of a similar medium. The numerous gangs of forgers who infest the boundary line, and counterfeit immense quantities of the United States paper-money, and the innumerable paltry notes for a few cents or half-dollars, which are in circu lation all over the Northern States, are certainly no great inducements to create a similar establishment in Canada, which would most likely give rise to the same evils. In short, it involves considerations of a very serious nature ; what may suit Great Britain and the United States, may not answer in Canada, and the mischievous effects of a paper me dium have already been felt in that province ; though it must be allowed that the colony is at prc- 
878 
|CANADA. 
sent in a better condition for the establishing of a For a secure place of deposit for the people * bank than at any former period ; the balance of money, which is now locked up in their chests, it trade upon the aggregate being greatly in its favour, would also be of considerable utility. 
15. General view of the Exports and Imports of Canada from 1754 to 1808, in sterling money. 
Yrs. 
No. of 
Vessels 
linpts. or Exports. 
Where from and to. 
Articles. 
Separate Amount. 
General Amount. 
1754 
1769 1786 
1797 
53 52 
34 93 
Imports Exports. 
Exports Imports 
Exports Imports 
Exports Imports 
France From W. Indies 
To France Ditto 
Louisburgh, &c. 
From Quebec From England 
From Quebec From England 
From Quebec From England 
Merchandise . Wine, rum, brandy, &c. . , 
157,646 5 59,123 7 6 
216,769 12 6 75,550 7 8 
64,570 2 6 7,083 6 3,906" 19 2 
Oil, ginseng, capillaire, timber, &c. Fish, oil, iron, vegetables, &c. Balance against the colony 1769. 
Furs and sundries .1 . Oil, fish, &c. from Labrador . 
Manud. goods and West India produce Balance in favour of the colony. 1786. 
Furs, and other colonial produce Fish, lumber, and oils, from Labra- \ dor and Gaspe . ,,,.) / 
Manufactured goods and West India ) produce . . * ) 
Balance in, favour of the colony 1797. 
Furs and other colonial produce Wheat, biscuit, and flour Oak and pine timber, planks and stares Pot and pearl ashes Fish, lumber, oil, &c. from Labra- \ dor and Gaspe J 
Manufactured goods and West In- "I dia produce . J 
Balance in favour of the colony 
345,000 10,000 B 
141,209 5 4 
355,000 273,400 
445,116 45,000 
81,600 
490,116 343,263 
295,063 15 45,445 14 32,144 6 29,866 
88,900 
146,853 
105 
491,419 15 
338,214 
153,205 15 
|CANADA. 
279 
Yrs. 
No. of Vessels 
Impts. oi&lt; Exports. 
Where from and to. 
Articles. 
Separate Amount. 
General Amount. 
1807 1808 
270 334 
Exports 
Exports. Imports Imports 
Exports 
Exports Exports 
Imports Imports 
From Quebec 
To Un. States-
 per way of lake &gt; Cbamplain. s 
From England From Un. States 
From Quebec 
FromLabradorl and Gaspe J To Un. States T per way of lake V Champlain J 
From England From Un. States 
Furs and other colonial produce * Wheat, biscuit, and flour . . Oak and pine timber, planks and staves Pot and pearl ashes . . . Fish, lumber, andoilfromLabrador,&c. 
Furs and sundries J-
-i,
 t J~--r
._ 
Manuf. goods, &c. 200,000 West India produce 106,670 14 
240,000 149, r .58 18 8 134,344 10 104,329 15 ? 115,555 11 1 
70,112 3 
813.900 15 4 467,294- 13 
306,670 14 160,623 19 9 
Merchandise , ,," 29,200 17 9 Oak and pine timO ber, staves, &c. / 3y&gt;U( Pot and pearl ashes 29,099 2 Tea, tobacco, lea-T f ther, &c. / 
Balance in favour of the colony 1808. 
Furs and other colonial produce Wheat, biscuit, and flour ,}. Oak and pine timber, staves, masts, &c. Pot and pearl ashes - i l f . y 3Siy j New ships-- -3750 tons...lO/. per ton 
Fish, lumber, oil, &c. . J . Sundries, about o:ifc&gt;3~ | . 
Manufactured goodi 200,000 West India produce 130,000 
350,600 171,200 157,360 290,000 37,500 
120,000 30,OCO 
346.606 1 7 
1,156,060 610jOOO 
330,000 280,000 
Merchandise, tea, "I provisions, tobtc- 1 100,000 
CO, &C. J 
Oak, pine timber, j Q Q masts, &c. / Pot and pearl ashes 1 10,000 
Balance in favour of the colony 
546,060 
Tonnage of Shipping trading to Canada for three years. 
1806 . -, . 
 . 33,996 
1807 . "V: ." . 42,293 
1808 V* fi*! 70,275 
"280 
|CANADA. 
In .1769, and for several years subsequent, the principal articles of export consisted of peltry, lumber, oil, and fish, with a small quantity of gin seng and capillaire : these were shipped from Que bec, Labrador, and Gaspe. Within the last twenty years new staples have arisen, which have been exported to very large amounts, and promise to enrich the country equally with the fur trade. These articles are wheat, biscuit, and flour, pot and pearl ashes ; which in 1807 amounted to onehalf the total exports of 1797. It must be allowed, however, that considerable quantities of pot and pearl ash are brought into Canada by the Americans from the United States ; yet the clearing of the lands in Upper Canada, and the back settlements of the Lower Province, produce annually a much greater quantity than what is obtained from the States. The French Canadians, within these two or three years, have begun to make ashes ; they have seen the facility with which their brethren of the United States clear their lands and pay their expenccs ; and though late, yet are willing to pro fit by the example. Their poverty or parsimony had prevented them from paying 20/. for a pot-ash kettle, though they might, like the Americans, have made the salts in smaller quantities, and with little trouble or expence. But it requires a scries of years to effect a change in the sentiments or actions of the French Ilabitans. The great demand for wheat which prevailed in Great Britain, and ge nerally throughout Europe, in 1793-4 and 5, gave a sudden stimulus to the exertions of the Canadians, who during those years exported considerable quantities of wheat, as well as flour and biscuit. The increased price given for those articles tempted the inhabitants to continue as large a cultivation of grain in the subsequent years ; but the demand de clining, they experienced a sensible reduction in their exports, and a consequent curtailment of their incomes. The following statement will exhibit the fluctuating demand for wheat, biscuit, and flour, from 1796 to 180S. 
I7i&gt;6 
3106 4352 388. 
17 yy 
laOii 
1U97 
108 
Wheat Bushels Flour Barrels Biscuit Cwt. 
128,870 14,475 20,535 
1,010,03J 
28,301 2-2,051 
!234,543 20.421 28,047 
186,708 42,46-2 32,587 
The unsettled state of the market for the above articles renders it necessary to establish some other, of a more permanent nature, which might also be derived from agriculture, and would be the means of enriching the mother country as vv ell as the colony. The only article which could effec tually supply this want is hemp, and that alone, 
if cultivated to a sufficient extent, would be more than adequate to meet the whole expence of the imports. The quantity of wheat exported in 1802 was unusually great, being 1,010,033 bushels; but in 1807 it had fallen to less than a fourth of that quantity, and in 1808 to less than a fifth: yet the general aggregate of the exports has aug mented, as well as the number of ships and seamen. The exportation of almost every other article in 1808 greatly exceeded that of the preceding year, in consequence of the embargo in the United States. The number of shipping that cleared out from Quebec in 1808 amounted to 334, and were laden principally with timber, pot-ash, pitch, tar, and turpentine ; wheat, flax-seeds, staves, &c. The tonnage was 70,275, and the number of seamen 3330. The greatest part of these vessels were sent by government, the usual supplies from the Baltic being in a great measure cut off by the war with Russia and Denmark, and the importations from the United States being totally stopped by the embargo. The advantage, therefore, of Great Britain deriving her supplies of hemp, as well as every other description of naval stores, from Ca nada, cannot for a moment be doubted. Even in time of peace, they would encourage and en rich the British colonists, and the competition in the market with the productions of the United States, and the n. parts of Europe, would inevi tably tend to lessen the expcnces of our navy and commercial marine. The account of the ex ports and imports of Canada for the year 1810, will doubtlessly afford the highest gratification to our readers, to see the great increase of the trade of that colony. Amongst a variety of articles too numerous to be here inserted, we have selected the following : 
Exports 1810. 170,860 bushels of wheat; 12,519 barrels of flour ; 16,467 quintals of biscuit, 1 121bs.; 18,928 bushels of pease; 866 ditto of oats ; 8384: ditto of flax-seed; 33,798 pieces of oak timber, about 24,000 loads; 69,271 ditto of pine, about 50,000 loads; 137 ditto of walnut, maple, &c. ; 6977 masts and hand-masts; 678 bowsprits; 3354 spars, principally red pine ; 3,887,306 staves and heading, 3,000,000 standard ; 47,515 stave-ends ; 312,423 pine boards and planks ; 13,623 hand spikes ; 30,301 oars ; 167,398 pieces of lath wood ; 130,516 West India hoops; 80,000 shingles; 55 butt, 5197 pipe, 1301 half ditto, and 771 onequarter ditto, Madeira packs ; 228 tierce packs ; 28,407 barrels of pot and pearl ashes, weight 106,581 cwt. ; 30 bales of cotton, 8181 Ibs.; 4628 barrels and 2 tierces of pork ; 2979 ditto of beef ; 29 puncheons and 1 tierce of hams, 17,0001bs. ; 
|CANADA. 
1070 boxes of soap ; 1181 ditto of candles ; 422 firkins and kegs of butter ; 147 barrels, &c. of hog s lard; 7 puncheons and 3 casks of genscng, 2344 Ibs. Value of exports from Quebec, 
(sterling) .942,324 9 3 
Ditto of furs, skins, &c. from 
ditto, (ditto) 120,503 9 7 
Total exports in 1810, (sterling) 1 ,062,827 18 10 
Disbursements for provisions and ships stores for 661 vessels, at Quebec, in 1810, average about 350/. sterling each . . . 231,350 
Freights of these vessels, averag ing about 216 tons each, or about 230 load each ship, at 71. sterling per load 1,064,210 
Total, (sterling) ,, .... . .2,358,387 18 10 
In the preceding account, the exports from Ca nada to the United States, via St. John s, and the exports from the departments of Gaspe, and the bay of Chaleurs, are not included. 
Imports, 1810. Among the articles included underthis head, we observe the increasing importations direct from Spain and Portugal, and other parts of Europe south of cape Finisterre to Canada. We trust this new branch of the British North Ame rican trade will soon be put under such judicious regulations as will give the colonies the benefit in tended by the legislature in this deviation from the colonial system. We are, however, sorry to ob serve, that every facility which might be afforded to the export trade of Canada has not yet been granted. We understand a committee has been appointed by congress, to ascertain whether the produce of the countries on the borders of rivers and lakes which have their outlet to the sea by the river St. Lawrence, and which are extremely fertile, can be brought down any of the rivers with in the United States to their Atlantic ports, for shipment in American vessels. A mount of imports into Quebec, in 
1810, of articles liable to duty, 
about (sterling) .... .372,837 Ditto of ditto not liable to duty, 
estimated at (sterling) . . . 600,000 
Total imports in 1810, (sterling) 972,837 Shipping. The number of ships, principally belonging to the leading out-ports in Great Britain, which have entered into the Quebec trade, exceeds the most sanguine expectations which were formed by persons well and long acquainted with the re
|VOL. I. 
sources of that province ; and the ships which have been engaged in the trade to Nova Scotia and New Brunswick, and their dependencies, have increased in nearly the same proportion. It may be remark ed, that in the furtherance of this trade, no sjwcie is sent out of the country, the returns being nearly all made in British produce and manufactures, and the difference either left here with the correspond ents of the colonists, or invested in the public funds. The employment which is thus afforded to British ships and British seamen, and the advan tages which must result to the traders and manu facturers of the country, and to the various useful classes connected with ship-building, from such employment of our own shipping, cannot fail to excite astonisment in the minds of the most indif ferent and inattentive observers, that these colo nies should have been so long considered posses sions of little value or importance, and that we at last resorted to them from necessity. Indeed, we have to thank the northern powers of Europe, and the government of the United States, for ha ving opened our eyes, and directed our attention to these invaluable appendages of the British empire. 
Skips. Tons. Vessels cleared out, which entered 
Quebec in 1810 635 138,057 
Ditto, new built there . . , . 26 5,836 
Average, 216 tons each Total 661 143,893 
The unusual demand for the natural productions of Canada during 1808 enhanced the price of every article in proportion ; and in spite of the embargo laws, abundance of timber and staves, x&gt;t and pearl ashes, and provisions of every descrip tion, found their way across the boundary line into Canada, and were shipped off to Europe, or the West Indies. The Canadian merchants rejoiced at the embargo, which enriched them while it made their neighbours poor indeed. The arrival of Sir James Craig diffused new life and activity through the province : the imbecility and irresolution which before characterised the government, in stantly vanished ; large sums of money were cir culated by the troops, and the construction of newworks, with the repairs of the old, gave full em ployment to the labouring part of the community ; the price of provisions became proportionately en hanced, chiefly at Quebec, where an unusual num ber of seamen and soldiers had taken up their resi dence : hence the country people were enriched, and encouraged to greater exertions. The price of every thing has been nearly trebled within ths last 60 years ; but the colony has risen into import ance : agriculture and commerce continue to im- o o 
282 
|CANADA. 
prove and augment ; many of its inhabitants pos sess handsome fortunes, and nearly all of them a moderate independence or income from trade. 
16. Fur Trade. The fur trade has been the principal source of all the wealth which has for many years been accumulated in the province. This branch of commerce, which fell into the hands of the English after the conquest, was car ried on for several years by individuals, on their own separate account ; but about 27 years ago, the enterprising and active spirit of a Mr. M Tavish laid the foundation of that association at present known under the title of the North-west Company, for the purpose of extending that trade to its utmost limits. This was more likely to be accomplished by the joint stock of a company than the small properties of individual merchants, and the result has justified the expectations of its au thor. Much jealousy and competition was, how ever, excited by those north-west traders who did not associate with Mr. M Tavish and his friends, and for several years the greatest animosity sub sisted between them. This opposition naturally gave rise to a second company, consisting of the individuals opposed to Mr. M Tavish. Among the most conspicuous of the second association was Mr. M Kenzie, now Sir Alexander. The enter prising spirit of this gentleman is well known, since the publication of his Travels across the North-west Continent to the Pacific Ocean. The concerns of his company were, we find, managed with as much ability as the other, which made their opponents seriously wish to combine the t\vo associations in one ; but the high spirit of Mr. M Tavish would not allow it : he resolutely with, stood all attempts at an accommodation, and spared neither expence nor trouble to crush the exertions of his rivals. Death, however, which too often annihilates the fairest hopes of sublunary bliss, put an end to the contest ; Mr. M Tavish died, Ihe companies immediately joined their stocks, and commenced partnership, in which state they re main at this day; the business being conducted under the firm of M Gillivray, Roderick M Ken zie, and Co. though the number of persons who have shares in the company amount, it is said, to more than forty. The clerks, voyageurs, and Indians, employed by the north-west company, amount to upwards of 3000. The clerks are all adventurous young Scotchmen, who emigrate, from penury, in the islands of the Hebrides, to certain hardships and dubious affluence in the dreary wilds of the north-west. They engage for a term of five or seven years, after which they have a certain yearly allowance, or become part 
ners in the company. The hardships and fatigue which they undergo, frequently tend to the ener vation of their frame, and the destruction of their health ; so that at the period of fifteen or twenty years, it is not uncommon for them to retire from the company, with a fortune of 20,000/. and a broken constitution. Of late years, the profits of the company have been considerably diminished by the restrictions on our commerce on the con tinent of Europe, where the chief demand for furs exists. Considerable quantities are, however, sent to the United States, from whence they are ex ported to Europe under their neutral flag ; an opening is thus created for the company s peltry, which would otherwise have been very much con tracted during the war. The number of skins ex ported to England in J807 was 460,000, and to the United States 286,703 ; but the embargo in 808 must have much lessened the demand from that quarter. Upwards of 20,000/. is annually paid in England for the duties on furs from Canada. The capital employed by the north-west company must "be very extensive, as the returns arc extremey slow. The trade is now pushed to the very extre mity of the continent, from the coast of Labrador to the Pacific ocean, extending to the northward beyond the arctic circle. The goods sent up an nually from Montreal, for the barter of furs from the Indians, are upwards of four years before they produce a return. The dangers and difficulties at tending the transportation of these articles so many thousand miles across rivers, lakes, arid portages, have been well described by Sir Alexander M Ken zie in his History of the Fur-trade. The same wellinformed writer observes, that the articles necessary for this trade " are, coarse woollen cloths of dif ferent kinds ; milled blankets of different sizes ; arms and ammunition ; twist and carrot tobacco ; Manchester goods ; linens and coarse sheetings ; thread, lines, and twine; common hardware; cut lery and ironmongery of several descriptions ; ket tles of brass and copper, and sheet iron ; silk and cotton handkerchiefs ; hats, shoes, and hose ; cali coes and printed cottons, &c. &c. &c. Spirituous liquors and provisions are purchased in Canada. These, and the expence of transport to and from the Indian territory, including wages to clerks, in terpreters, guides, and canoe- men, with the expence of making up goods for the market, form about half the animal amount against the adven ture." The necessary number of canoes being purchased at about 300 livrcs each, the goods formed into packages, and the lakes and rivers being free of ice, (which they usually are in the beginning of May), they are then dispatched from 
|CAN 
La Chine, eight miles above Montreal, with eight or ten men in each canoe, their baggage, and 65 packages of goods, six cwt. of biscuit, two cwt. of pork, three bushels of pease, for the men s provi sion, two oil-cloths to cover the goods, a sail, &c. an axe, a towing-line, a kettle, and a sponge to bail out the .water, with a quantity of gum, bark, and watape, to repair the vessel. The voyagers are frequently obliged to unload their canoes, arid carry their goods upon their backs, or rather sus pended in slings from their heads; and this they call a decharge. In the same case each man s load is two packages, though some carry three, and the canoe is towed by a strong line. There are some places where the ground will not admit of their carrying the whole : they then make two trips ; that is, leave half their lading, and go and land it at the distance required, and then return for that which was left. In some places both goods and canoes are transported, and this is denominated a portage. But there is another association establish ed within these few years, called the South-west or Michillimakinak Company ; some of the part ners in this association have also shares in the north-west company, but the general concern is to tally separate. The south-west merchants pursue their trade across the lakes Ontario and Erie, and down the rivers Illinois, Ohio, and Mississippi, in the territory of the United States. In conse quence of the embargo which has lately taken place in the United States, and which it was ap prehended would affect the concerns of this com pany, one of the partners, Mr. Gillespie, went to Washington, to procure from the government a safe conduct for their people and property em ployed in the trade. He was assured by Mr. Maddison, that no interruption whatever should take place in the prosecution of their trade with the Indians in the United States territory ; and a clause was inserted to that effect in the supplementary embargo act. Upon the return of Mr. Gillespie to Montreal, the people with the boats, laden with the property for trade belonging to the company, were accordingly sent off on their usual voyage. On the 2 1st of May, the first five boats arrived within the American limits on lake Ontario : they were hailed from the shore by order of the commandant of Niagara ; but having no business at that place, the boats continued their route, when they were immediately fired upon by the Americans. Three of the advanced boats pulled up and escaped ; the other two were brought to, and taken by the Ame ricans, who, finding there were several more astern, embarked in an armed boat, went in search of them, and captured five more, which they car
283 
ried to Niagara. They then sailed after tl.e re mainder ; but information being given by a gentle man, who immediately armed a boat, and went, to inform them of their danger, the brigade put about for Kingston, where they arrived in safety, having been chased for two days by the American armed boats. 
17. General History. This country was discovered by the English as early as about 1497, and settled by the French in 1608, who kept possession of it till 1760, when it was taken by the British arms ; and at the treaty of Paris in 1763, was ceded by France to the crown of England, to whom it has ever since belonged. One of the most remarkable accidents which history records of this country
 is the earthquake in the year 1663, which over whelmed a chain of mountains of free-stone more than 300 miles long, and changed the immense tract into a plain. See BRITISH AMHRICA, and BRITAIN, NEW, for further particulars concerning this country. 
|CANADA, a settlement of the English in the province of Hampshire, one of the four composing New England; situate on the .shore, and at the source of the river Sowhegan, in the limits which divide this province from Massachusets. 
|CANADA, SANTA Cuuz DK LA, a small settle ment of the kingdom of Nuevo Mexico. 
|CANADA, SANTA CRUZ WE LA, another settle ment of the same kingdom, with the additional title of Conception. 
|CANADA, with the surname of Largo, in the province and government of Buenos Ayres; situ ate to the ;/. of the lakes of the mountain Estancia. 
|CANADA, a bay on the e. side of Newfoundland island, between White and Hare bays, which last lies n. of it. 
|CANADA Creeks. There are three creeks which bear this name : one a water of Wood creek, which it meets four or five miles n. n. IG. of fort Stanwix, or New fort Schuyler. The other two are n. branches of Mohawk river ; the upper one mingles its waters with the Mohawk in the township of Hcrkemer, on the German flats, 16 miles below Old fort Schuyler ; over the mouth of it is a sightly and ingeniously constructed bridge. The other emp ties into the Mohawk 13 miles below. Both these are long, rapid, and unnavigable streams, and bring a considerable accession of water to the Mo hawk. The lands on these creeks are exceedingly rich and valuable, and fast settling. 
|CANADA SAGA, or SBNKCA Lake, a hand some piece of water from 35 to 40 miles long, and about two miles broad, in New York. At the n. &. corner of the lake stands the town of Geneva ; and 
284 
|CAN 
on the e. side, between it and Cayuga, are the towns of Romulus, Ovid, Hector, and Ulysses, in Onondago county, New York. Its outlet is Scayace river, which also receives the waters of Cayuga lake, nine miles &gt;?. c. from the mouth of Canada Sagn, 18 miles below Geneva. Qn the same side of the lake stands the Friends settlement, founded by Jemima Wilkinson ; there arc 80 families in it, each has a fine farm, and are quiet, industrious people. 
|CANADIENES, islands of the river Mississippi, at the distance of 170 miles from its mouth. 
|CANAHOGUE, a country of Canada, on the banks of the lake Erie ; between this lake and the salt marshes, so famous for having been the theatre of war Ijetween the English and the French, and for the fairs for the sale of hides ; as likewise for the hunting of beavers, which is practised by the Six Nations of the Ohio. 
|CANAJOIIARY, a post-town in Montgomery county, New York, situated on the s. side of Mo hawk river, comprehending a very large district of fine country, 40 miles w. of Schenectady, and 56 miles from Albany. In the state census of 1796, 730 of the inhabitants appear to be electors. A creek named Canajohary enters the Mohawk in this town. In this township, on the bank of the Mohawk, about 50 miles from Schenectady, is In dian castle, so called, the seat of old King Hendrick, who was killed in Sept. 1755, at lake George, fighting for the British and Americans against the French. Here are now the remains of a British fort, built during that war, about 60 paces square. A gold coin, of the value of about seven dollars, was found in these ruins in 1793. About a mile and a half u). of this fort stands a church, which is called Brandt s church, which the noted chief of that name is said to have left with great reluctance. This was the principal seat of the Mohawk nation of Indians, and abounds with apple-trees of their planting, from which is made cider of an excellent quality. 
|CANANCA, a settlement and real of the mines of the province and government of Sonora in New Spain. 
|CANANEA, a small island of the N. sea, near the coast of Brazil, in the province and captain ship of San Vincente : it extends in the form of a half-moon in front of the small bay which forms the mouth of the river Ararapiza ; on the s. shore of which is situate the town of the same name, and which serves as a defence for its entrance. Its po pulation is very small, and its commerce hardly any : it is 37 leagues distant from San Vincente, and is in Lat. 25 s. Long. 47 58 w. 
|CAN 
|CANANDAQUA,apost-town, lake, and creek, in Ontario county, New York. It is the shire town of the county, situated on the n. end of the lake of the same name, at its outlet into Canandaqua creek. The lake is about 20 miles long, and three broad, and sends its waters in aw. e. and e. course 35 miles to Seneca river. This is the site of an an cient Indian town of the same name, and stands on the road from Albany to Niagara, 22 miles e. from Hartford in Gcnessee river; 16 miles w. of Geneva, and 235 miles w. w. from New York city, measuring in a straight line, and 340 by Albany road. This settlement was begun by Messrs. Gorham and Phelps, and is now in a flourishing state. There are about 30 or 40 houses, situated on a pleasant slope from the lake ; and the adjoining farms are under good cultivation, By the state census of 1796, it appears there are 291 electors in this town ship. 
|CANAPOTE, CIENEGA DE, a settlement of the province and government of Cartagena in the kingdom of Tierra Firme : it takes the name of Cienega from being situate near a quagmire : it abounds with fish, with which it provides the ca pital : in the time of the Indians its population and commerce were very considerable. It was disco vered by the Governor Don Pedro de Heredia in the year 1535, and conquered after a very long and severe struggle ; it is now reduced to a very mi serable village. 
|CANAR ATAN, or GREAT CANAR, a village dependent on the city of Cuenca, under the juris diction of the province of Quito in Peru. It is re markable for the riches contained in the adjacent mountains. 
|CANARDS, or PATOS, a river of Georgia or Florida : it runs to the s. and enters with a very abundant stream into the sea, first joining the river Apalachicola, and then running into the bay of San Marcos. The Spaniards call it De Patos, and by this name it is known to our geographers. 
|CANARDS, a town of Nova Scotia, situate by the pool of the Mines, in the bay of Fundy. 
|CANARDS, some islands, also bearing the name of Duck, situate in lake Ontario, Upper Canada, between Wolf island and point Traverse. 
|CANARDS, another island near the coast of Main, North America. Lat. 44 9 n. Long. 68 8 w. 
|CAN ARIA, a small settlement of Peru, in the province and corregimiento of Guamanga, cele brated for the famous mines of silver which it has on the mountain called Chumbilla, three leagues distant from the town. 
|CANARIS, a province of the kingdom of Qui to, situate to the s. of the jurisdiction of Cuenca. 
C A"N 
These Indians are the finest of any in the kingdom, being robust, well made, laborious, courteous, and docile. The country is delightful, fertile, and watered by many rivulets : it abounds in mines of gold, silver, copper, mercury, lead, and other me tals, but they are scarcely ever worked. It was conquered and united to the empire of Peru by the Inca Tupac Yupanqui. Here are to be seen the ruins of a palace which belonged to the Incas, which some have falsely asserted to have been the temple of the sun. The principal town is Atuncanar. See CANNARES. 
|CANAS, or TINTA, a jurisdiction in Peru, S. America. See CANES and CANCHES. 
|CANAS, a river of the province and government of Buenos Ayres. It runs e. and enters the Rio Negro. 
|CANAS, a settlement of the province and govern ment of Valparaiso in the kingdom of Chile, situate on the n. of the town of Melipilla. 
|CANAS, a river of the province and government of Tucuman, and jurisdiction of Salta. It runs e. and enters the passage between the Yetasco and the Palata. 
|CANAS, a small river of the island of St. Do mingo ; it rises in the valley of San Juan, runs n. afterwards e. and joins the Vallejuelo to enter the Artibonito. 
|CANASERAGA Creek runs n. zo. into Genessee river at Williamsburg, in New York state. 
|CANATLAN, a settlement belonging to the missionaries of the religious order of San Francisco, in the province of Nueva Vizcaya. 
|CANAWISQLJE, a &. branch of Tioga river, rises in Pennsylvania. 
|CAN AXE, a river of the province and colony of Berbice ; the banks of which are covered with sugar-cane, cultivated by the Dutch, who make here large quantities of sr.gar. 
|CANAZAS, a river of the province and go vernment of Panama in the kingdom of Tierra Firme : it rises in the mountains of Darien, and empties itself into the S. sea, in the bay and gulf of Panama. 
|GANGES are a very numerous Indian nation of N. America, consisting of a great many different tribes, occupying different parts of the country from the bay of St. Bernard, in the gulf of Mexico, across the Rio Grande del Norte, and towards La Vera Cruz. They are not friendly to the Spa niards, and generally kill them when they have an opportunity. They are attached to the French, are good hunters, principally using the bow. They are very particular in their dress, which is made of neatly dressed leather ; the women wear a 
|CAN 
285 
long loose robe, resembling that of a Franciscan friar ; nothing but their heads and feet are to be seen. The dress of the men consists of straight leather leg gings resembling pantaloons, and a leather hunting shirt or frock. No estimate can be made of their number. Thirty or forty years ago, the Spaniards used to make slaves of them when they coulu take them ; a considerable number of the n were brought to Nachitoches, and sold to the French inhabitants at 40 or 50 dollars a head, and a number of them are still living here, but are now free. About 20 years ago, an order came from the king of Spain that no more Indians should be made slaves, and those that Mere enslaved should be emancipated ; after which, some of the women who had been ser vants in good families, and taught spinning, sew ing, &c. as well as managing household affairs, married natives of the country, and became re spectable, well-behaved women, and have now growing up, decent families of children ; have a language peculiar to themselves, and are under stood, by signs, by all others. They are in amity with all other Indians except the Hietans. 
|CANCHES. See CANES. 
|CANCON, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Quillota in the kingdom of Chile, situate at the mouth of the river of the same name. 
|CANDELARIA, CAPILLA DE LA, a settlement of the province and corregimienlo of Itata in the kingdom of Chile ; in the vicinity of whic 1 ?. and to the ty. lie the territories of Tomenclu, Lcsiiircs, Padineo, Baloas, and Catho ; and on the other side of the river Guanutil, those of Jt siis and Monte Blanco. 
|CANDELARIA, a port of the coast of the straits of Magellan, also called De Cuavilca, at the entrance of the S. sea, discovered by Pedro Sarmiento de Gamboa, by whom it was taken for the eighth time, and made subject to the crown of Castilla. 
|CANDELARIA, a settlement of Indians of the province and government of Paraguay, situate on the Parana, in Lat. 27 26 46". Long. 55 47 35" ro. 
|CANDIA, a township in Rockingham county, New Hampshire, n. of Chester, about 36 miles w. of Portsmouth. The soil is but indifferent. It was incorporated in 1767, and contains 1040 inhabitants. 
|CANDLEMAS Shoals are about two degrees of latitude due n. of port Praslin, discovered, nam ed, and passed, by Mendans, in 1569. 
|CANL. See COLORADO. 
|CANE, a small river of Louisiana. It runs to the s. e. and enters the sea in the bay of San Btr
2S6 
|CAN 
nardo. On the shore at its mouth the French, under Robert la Sale, made their first establish ment in the year 1683. 
|CANELON, a town of the province and go vernment of" Buenos Ayres, situate on a branch of the river of the same name, about seven leagues 
Lat. 34 35 23" s. Lon 
n. of Monte Video 56 15 a&gt;. 1 
|CANELON ES, River of the, in the province and government of Buenos Ayres. It runs to the s. and euters the sea on the coast of the Rio de la Plata, on the side of Monte Video. 
|GANELOS, a large province of the kingdom of Quito, discovered by Gon/alo Pizarro in the year 1540, who gave it this name on account of the quantity of cinnamon trees found in it, which grow very strong, shedding an odour something like camphor, and very pungent. This cinnamon, which is called raspado, is carried to Quito, and sold at six reals a pound, being made use of in stead of the fine cinnamon. A small viper is fre quently met with in it of the same colour as the cinnamon, and extremely venomous. This pro vince is uncultivated, full of impenetrable forests and rivers, and contains only one settlement of the same name, on the n. shore of the river Bobonaza, in which is the port ofCanoas, and the residence ofca religious Dominican, who is the curate of those few miserable Indians. In lat. 1 32 20" s. 
|CANES AND CANCHES, a province and rorregimiento of Peru, bounded on the e. by Carabaya, towards the town of Mauclani, on the s. e. by Lampa in the cordillera of Villacanota, on the s. by Cailloma, s. e. by a part of the province of Condesuios of Arequipa, w. by Chumbivilca, being divided by the river Apurimac, and n. w. by Quispicanchi. It is in length from n. to s. 30 leagues, and 15 in width : Its climate is, for the greater part, extremely cold, on account of its being nearly covered with mountains of snow ; nevertheless they cultivate here barley, maize, potatoes, cavi, and quinoa ; and in the warm parts, which consist of uneven and broken grounds near the rivers, some kinds of fruit, though in no abun dance. Here also are great quantities of animals which breed upon the mountains from the luxu riance of the pastures ; and of these are the vigog nes, huanacos, and viscachas, which latter are a species of hare or rabbit ; deer also, and par tridges, abound here. In the rivers are found bagres a foot in length. The principal rivers which water this province, are the Vilcamayo, which runs from the province of Quispicanchi, into which runs another flowing down from the siowy sierras on the e. part called Combapata. 
|CAN 
This river has a stone bridge, and descends from the heights of Cailloma. This province has many lakes, which are filled with water-fowl, such as ducks, widgeons, and others ; these birds are found more particularly in lake Lanchug, which is three leagues long and one and a half broad, and in it there is also found the load-stone. Linen cloth is fabricated here. In the district of San Pedro de Cacha, in a place called Rache, there is an ancient and grand edifice with nine gates, half of the walls of which, as high as the first stories, are made of carved stone; the rest of the edifice being of earth upon five galleries of stone, forming as it were so many other walls. This building is said to have served as a temple in Viracocha in the time of the gentilism of the Indians. At a small distance there is an artificial lake with aqueducts which keep it always at a proper height ; this lake is situate upon a black mountain, which may be about two leagues in circumference : also in the same vicinity are vestiges of a considerable population, and here is found a mineral earth from which they fabricate jars, large pitchers, and other vessels, which are carried to be sold in the neighbouring provinces. In this province are many mines of silver, but they are not worked, on account of their jbeing some of them filled with water, and some of them broken in, with the ex ception, however, of those of Condoroma, which, although they have experienced the former ca lamity, do not fail to render yearly many marks of gold, a pretty good testimony of their riches. Great indeed have been the labour and expence in the attempts to empty them of the water, but in this they have not as yet succeeded. Here are also four good sugar-mills ; and in the jurisdiction of the town of Yauri, are two mines of copper, which are worked : Some gold mines also are not wanting, although they be of little note. In the establish ment of Condoroma it is not unusual to expe rience, in the tempests of thunder and lightning, a sort of prickly sensation on the hands and feet and other parts of the body, which they call tnoscas, or flies, without, however, being able to discover any of these insects ; and it should seem that the effect is to be attributed to the state of the atmosphere, since the heads of canes, buckles, and silver or gold galloons, though during such times highly affected by the electric matter, cease to be so on the cessation of the tempest. The in habitants of this province amount to 18,000 souls, dwelling in 24 settlements, which are, 
Sicuani, Tunganuca, 
San Pablo, Yanacoa, 
Chacuyupi, Layo, 
|CAN 
|CAN 
287 
Santuario de la Virgen de Huancani, 
San Pedro de Cacba, 
Combapata, 
Pueblo Nuevo, 
Santuario de " Taugascucal, 
Quehue, 
Coporaque, 
Candclaria. 
Pichihua, 
Yaura, 
Marangani, 
Tinta, 
Pitumanca, 
Suriinana, 
Langui, 
Checa, 
Asiento de Con
doroma 3 
Its repartimiento amounted to 1 12,500 dollars, and it paid 900 dollars yearly for alcavala. The capital is Tinta. 
|CANETE, a province and corregimiento of Peru. Its jurisdiction begins six leagues s. of Lima, and extends as far as 35, following the coast of the Pacific ocean. It is bounded on the n. e. by the province of Huarochiri, on the e. by Yauros, on the s. by Yea, on the s. e. by Castro Vireyna, and on the o\ by the sea. It is 31 leagues in length from n. to s. and from eight to nine in width, from c. to a?. It is watered by some streams, of which the most considerable are the Mala on the n. which rises from the lake Huasca-cocha, in the province of Yauyos, and the Canete. On its coast are many small ports and bays, though very insecure and of unequal bottom. It abounds in wheat, maize, sugar-cane, and all sorts of fruit. The lands of this province belong for the most part to noble families at Lima, with which capital it carries on a considerable trade in fish, (brought from the coast), in fruit and vegetables, salt procured from the salt grounds of Chielca, and in nitre brought from the town of Mala. Its corregidor used to have a repartindento of 124,000 dollars, and it paid 992 yearly for alcavula. The settlements of this province are, 
Cafiete, San Pedro de Mala, 
Chilca, Pacaran, 
Calango, Almagro, 
Chincha, Lunaguana, 
Tanqui, Zuuiga. 
Coillo, 
|CANETE, a river of the same province, which rises from the lake Ticll-cocha in Yauyos. It runs to the IK. and enters the sea near the Herbae. At its entrance are to be seen the remains of a fort which belonged to the Incas of Peru. 
|CANETE, some islands near the coast of the same province. 
|CANETE, a port in the same province, fre quented by small vessels. It is very confined and insecure. 
|CANGREJILLOS, a settlement of the pro vince and government of Tucuman, and juris 
diction of Jujuy, situate on the shore of the river Laquiaca. 
|CANGREJO, a large settlement of the same province and government as the former, and of the same jurisdiction, situate likewise on the shore of that river. 
|CANGREJOS, Island of the, lies at the entrance of the river Orinoco, in its principal mouth., called Navios, on the n. side. Mr. Bellin calls it Cangray. It is small, and inhabited by Caribee Indians. 
|CANI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Huanuco in Peru, annexed to the cu racy of Santa Maria del Valle. . 
|CANIADERAGO, a lake in Otsego county, New York, nearly as large as Otsego lake, and six miles w. of it. A stream called Oaks creek issues from it, and falls into Susquehannah river, about five miles below Otsego. The best cheese in the state is said to be made on this creek. 
|CANIBALES, or CARIBLS, a barbarous na tion of Indians, who are, according to their name, cannibals, inhabiting the islands of the Antilles before they were taken and conquered by the Spa nish, English, and French. There are few of these Indians at the present day inhabiting those islands ; the greater part are to be found in Domi nica, which is entirely possessed by them : they adore a man who they affirm was uncreated, and the first of all men, who descended from heaven, and was called Longuo, from whose navel were born other men, and some also from his legs, which he himself cleft open with a hatchet. With the Manicheans, they believe in the two original causes of good and evil, and in the immortality of the soul ; and whenever any one dies they bury with him his slaves and servants, thinking they may be of use to him in the other v, orld. They are polygamists, very cruel, but dexterous in the use of the bow and arrow; they are to be found also mother parts of the continent. [See CARIBES. 
|CANICODEO Creek, a 5. w. head water of Tioga river in New York, which interlocks with the head waters of Genessee river, and joins Conesteo creek 26 miles w. n. ts). from the Painted post. 
|CANICUARIS, a barbarous nation of Indians, who live scattered in the woods of II to Negro to the n. of Maranon. It is but little known. 
|CANIN, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Chancay in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Canchas. 
|CAN IS, a settlement of the province and corregimienlo of Caxatambo in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Tillos. 
288 
|CAN 
|CANISSEX, a small river of the district of Maine. 
|CAJNIOUIS, a race of Indians of the province and government of Louisiana, inhabiting the shores of the river Akansas. 
|CANNARES, Indians of the province of Quito in Peru. They are very well made, and very active ; they wear their hair long, which they weave and bind about their heads in form of a crown. Their clothes are made of wool or cot ton, and they wear fine fashioned boots. Their women are handsome and fond of the Spaniards ; they generally till and manure the ground, whilst their husbands at home card, spin, and weave wool and cotton. Their country had many rich gold mines, now drained by the Spaniards. The land bears good wheat and barley, and has fine vineyards. The magnificent palace of Theomabamba was in the country of the Cannares. See C ANA HIS. 
|CANNAVERAL Cape, the extreme point of rocks on the e. side of the peninsula of E. Florida. It has Mosquitos inlet n. by w. and a large shoal 5. by e. This was the bounds of Carolina by charter from Charles II. Lat. 28 17 n. Long. 80 20 w.l 
|CANNAYAH, a village on the n. side of Washington island, on the n. w. coast of N. Ame rica. 
|CANNES, Island of the, on the s. coast of Nova Scotia, between the islands La Cruz and La Verde. 
|CANNESIS, a settlement of the province and government of Louisiana, situate at the source of the river Rouge, or Colorado, with a fort built by the French. 
|CANO, a settlement of the province and corrcgimiento of Huanta in Peru, annexed to the curacy of its capital. 
|CANO A, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Esmeraldas in the kingdom of Quito. CANO A, a bay in one of the islands of the Caicos, directly to the w. of that of Caico Grande, looking immediately in that direction, and near the point of Mongon. 
|CANOCOTA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Collahuas in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Chibay. 
|CANOE, Islands of, in the river Mississippi, just opposite to where the river Roche runs into it. 
|CANOE Ridge, a rugged mountain about 200 miles w. of Philadelphia, forming the e. boundary of Bald Eagle valley. 
|CANOGANDI, a river of the province and 
|CAN 
government of Choco in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. It rises in the sierras of Abide, runs to the w. and enters the Paganagandi. 
|CANOMA, or GUARIHUMA, a river of the province and country of the Amazonas, in the part possessed by the Portuguese. It rises in the territory of the Andirases Indians, and enters a kind of lake formed by different branches of the river Madera. 
|CANONA, a lake of the province and country of the Amazonas, in the territory of the Portuguese, and in one of those numerous islands which form the arms of the river Madera, on the side of the island of Topinambas. 
|CANONNICUT Island, in Newport county, Rhode island, lies about three miles w. of New port, the s. end of which, (called Beaver Tail, on which stands the light-house), extends about as far s. as the s. end of Rhode island. It extends . about seven miles, its average breadth being about one mile ; the e. shore forming the w. part of NeAYport harbour, and the w. shore being about three miles from the Narraganset shore. On this point is Jamestown. It was purchased of the Indians in 1657, and in 1678 was incorporated by the name of Jamestown. The soil is luxuriant, producing grain and grass in abundance. James town contains 507 inhabitants, including 16 slaves. 
|CANONSBURGH, a town in Washington county, Pennsylvania, on the n. side of the w. branch of Chartier s creek, which runs n. by e. into Ohio river, about five miles below Pittsburg. In its environs arc several valuable mills. Here are about 50 houses and an academy, seven miles n.e. by e. of Washington, and 15 s. w. of Pittsburg. 1 
|CANOS, BLANCOS, a small river of the pro vince and government of Paraguay, which runs n. and enters the Nanduygazti. 
|CANOT, a small river of Louisiana ; it runs s. w. between the rivers Ailes and Oviscousin, and enters the Mississippi. 
|CANOT, another river of N. Carolina. It runs to the w. w. and enters the Cherokees. 
|CANOTS, or CANOAS, a river of the kingdom of Brazil, in the province and captainship ot San Pablo. It rises near the coast opposite the island of Santa Catalina, runs to the w. in a serpentine course, and serves as the source of the large river Uruguay. 
|CANSACOTO, a settlement of the kingdom of Quito, in the corregimiento of the district called De las Cinco Leguas dc su Capital. CANSEAU, an island of Nova Scotia in N. 
OAtf 
America, having -an excellent port, three leagues in length, and in which there are many other small islands. On the adjoining mainland there is a river called De Salmones, (salmon), on ac count of its abounding \vith these fish, of which indeed great quantities are taken, as they are es teemed the finest species of fish of any in that part of the world. 
|CANSEAU, a small settlement of the same island, which was burnt by the French in the war of J 744. 
|CANSEAU, a cape of the same island, at the en trance of the straits, and also a sand-bank at the mouth of them. 
|CANTA, a province and government of Peru, bounded on the n. e. and e. by Tarm?, on the w. by Chancay, partly by the corregimienlo of Cercado, and on the s. by Huarochiri. It is 24 Jeagues in length ??. to s. and 35 in width e. to w. Its territory is generally uneven, being in the rordilltra. It has some deep pits or canals, on the sides of which, and in small spots, they sow and cultivate vegetables, fruits, and potatoes. The breed of cattle is by no means inconsiderable here, and there are to be found most of the wild anniuds which are natives of the sierra, namely, vicunas, (wild goats), and sheep peculiar to these countries, and differing from those of Europe. In this pro vince as well as in nearly all those of the sierra, there is scarcely any wood for the purposes of cooking, and this want is supplied by the use of turf, which makes a lively fire, but which is very apt to srnoke. Those parts which are Called queuradaS) or rugged and uneven, are very sickly, and are subject to two species of maladies com mon to other cold climates in this country ; the one is that of warts, which not budding in due time, often become exceedingly troublesome, and even dangerous ; the other of corrosive sores, shewing themselves particularly upon the face, and are diiucult to be cured, and which are attri buted to the sting of an insect called itta. Some mines of silver were formerly worked here, which were .so abundant, that they used to render 200 marks each c/o/. , (an excavation of 20 feet square, more or iess), but these, from not being regularly worked, are filled with water. Here are also two hills of loadstone, as also some minerals ofulum, copper, and red lead. The following rivers take their rise in this province : The Carabaya from the lakes Tacaimbaba and Lorococha, which empty themselves into the sea on the n. of Lima ; and the Pasamayo, which runs to the s. of Chancay, first receiving the waters of some hot medicinal springs. Its corregidor used to receive a repar
|VOL. I. 
|CAN 
289 
titmcnto of 125.000 dollars, and it paid yearly 1000 frr alcamla. 
The capital is a town of the same name, in lat. 11 10 s. and its jurisdiction comprehends 62 others, which are, 
Carhua, Arahuay, 
Obrajillo, Anaica, 
, Parsamaria, Quiby, 
Chaqui, Pirca, 
Pamacocha, Cotoc, 
Carhuacayan, Chaupic, 
Yanta, Pampas, 
Paii, Marco, 
. Uchayucarpa, Rauma, 
Iluaillas, Buncos, 
Huasichao, Biscas, 
Pacaraos, Yazu, 
Uschaicocha, Yanga, 
Santa Cruz, Baiios, 
Santa Catarina, Carae, 
Chauca, San Agustin, 
Rivira, Huamantanga, 
Chupasj Sumbirca, 
Culli, San Buenaventura, 
Vircay, Huaros, 
Atabillos Altos, San Lorenzo, 
Pasa, Mayo, 
Chisque, Alpamarca, 
Huauoquin, Atabillos Baxos, 
Cormo, Huaicoi, 
Lampian, Puruchucu, 
Pallas, Ama, 
San Juan, San Joseph, 
Quipan, Culluay, 
Guandaro, Pampacocha, 
San Miguel, Quizu. 
|CANTANABALO, a river ofthe province and government of San Juan de los Llanos in the new kingdom of Granada. It rises between the Caviusari and the Sinaruco, and running nearly parallel with them, enters into the Orinoco. 
|CANTERBURY, a fort of the province of Hampshire, one of the four composing the colony of New England. It is built on the shore of the river Pen :iy cook, and at the mouth of the water course formed by the lake Winnipisiokee. 
|CAKTKHBURY, a township in Windham county, Connecticut, on the w. side of Quinnabaug river, which separates it from Plainfield. It is seven miles f. by s. of Windham, and about 10 or 12 w. of Norwich. 
|CAN TLA, a small settlement of the head settlement and akaldia mayor of Cuquio in Nueva Espana, situate on the n. of its capital. 
|CANTON, a new township in Norfolk county, Massachusetts, incorporated in 1797, It being formerly the w. part ot Stoughton. 
|CANUARI, a small river of the province and government of Buenos Ayres. It runs to the n. and enters the Rio Grande of the Portuguese, be tween the Mbouqtii and the Pobatini. 
|CANUEIRAS, a point of the n. extremity of the island of Santa Catalina, on the coast of Brazil. 
|CANUERAI&lt;ES, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Cuyo in the kingdom of Chile, situate near the river Diamante. 
|CANUTO, a river of the province and govern ment of Venezuela. It rises in the mountain Tacazuruma, runs nearly s. and enters the river of La Portuguesa. 
|CANXA, a small settlement of the head settle ment of Orizava, and alcaldia mayor of Yxmiquilpan, in Nueva Espaiia. 
|CANY Fork, in the state of Tennessee, is a short navigable river, and runs n. w. into Cum berland river, w. of the Salt lick, and opposite Salt Lick creek, 50 miles in a straight line from Nashville. 
|CANZE, a river of the colony and govern ment of Surinam, in the part of Guayana possessed by the Dutch. It rises between the Berbice and the Corentin, and after a very round-about course, enters the former, close to its mouth, or where it runs into the sea. 
|CAO, SANTA MARIA MAGDALENA DE, a fertile moot of the province and corregimiento of Truxillo U Peru, situate in the valley of Chicama. It was the capital fn the time of the Indians, and the number of these 200 years ago was 3000 ; but DOW it is reduced to a wretched state, and occu pies a small spot on the other side of the river, being nine leagues distant from its capital. 
|CAO, with the dedicatory title of Santiago, to distinguish it from another settlement of the same province and corregimiento , although they are both equally poor and reduced. Its inhabitants maintain themselves by the cultivation of maize, wheat, rice, and vegetables, which they carry for sale to the other provinces, so that they are for the most part a race of carriers, and indeed possess no inconsiderable droves of mules. It is six leagues from its capital, just by the sea. 
|CAOBAS, River of the, in the island of St. Domingo, in that part possessed by the French. It rises in the valley of San Juan, runs to the w. and afterwards changing its course to the n. w. en ters the Artibonito. 
|CAORA, a river which runs down from the mountains of Guayana to the s. of the lake Cassipa, into which it enters ; and afterwards running out at the n. side of this lake, it finds its way through a subterraneous passage, until it empties itself into the Orinoco, on its s. shore. The borders of this river are inhabited by a nation of barbarous Indians, who wander con tinually through the forests without any fixed abode. They are cannibals as well as the other Indian tribes around them, and with whom they keep up a continual warfare. 
|CAPAQA, a settlement of the province of Culiacan in Nueva Espana ; situate near the head settlement. 
|CAPACHICA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Paucarcolla in Peru ; situate on the a?, shore of the lake Titicaca. 
|CAPACHICA, a narrow strip of land formed by the great lake Titicaca. Of these strips there are three, and this appears, for the distance of a league, to be completely divided from any main land. 
|CAPACHO, a village under the jurisdiction of the town of San Christoval, in the new kingdom of Granada ; of a warm temperature ; abounding in sugar-cane, from which much sugar is manufac tured, and in cacao; but it is much infested by the barbarian Indians, called the Motilones (shorthaired), who destroy the plantations. It contains 200 house-keepers, and is 24 leagues n. e. of Pamplona, in the road which leads to Merida and La Grita, and eight leagues from the city of San Christoval. 
|CAPACMARCO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Clmmbivilcas in Peru. 
|CAPAIA, a settlement of the province and eorrcgimicnto of Aimaraez in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Soraica. 
|CAPAIA, another settlement in the province of Barcelona, and government of Cumana ; situate on the coast, on the banks of a river of the same name. 
|CAPAIA, a river of the same province and go vernment, which rises in the serrania, and after making many turnings runs into the sea, near the cape Codera towards the c. 
|CAPAIAN, a settlement of the province and government of Tucuman, in the jurisdiction of the city of Rioja. 
|CAPAIRE, a settlement of the province of Ve nezuela, and government of Maracaibo ; situate very near the coast, at the point Colorada, on the shore of the river Gaepe. 
|CAPALITA, a large town of North America, and in the province of Oaxaca. The countrj round abounds with sheep, cattle, and excellent fruit. 
|CAPANA, a river of the province and country of the Amazonas, in the part belonging to the Por tuguese. It rises in the territory of the Ynveis Indians, between the rivers Cuchivara and the Madera ; runs to the s. and turning to the s.s.e. enters iuto one of the lakes which forms the latter river. 
|CAPANATOIAQUE, a small settlement of the Lead settlement of Acante pec, and akaldia mayor of Tlapa, in Nueva Espafia. Its temperature is warm, and it contains 90 families of Mexican Indians, who employ themselves in the cultivating and dressing of cotton. 
CA-PANEMA, a settlement of the province and captainship of Todos Santos in Brazil ; situate on the shore of the river of its name, near the bay. 
|CAPA&gt;NEMA, a river of the same province, which rises near the coast, runs e. and enters the sea in the bay. 
|CAPANEREALTE, a river of the province and alcaldia mayor of Soconusco, in the king dom of Guatemala. It runs into the S. sea be tween the rivers Colate and Gueguetlan. 
|CAPARE, an island of (he river Orinoco, in the province and government of Guayana ; situate at the entrance, and one of those forming the mouths, of that river. 
|CAPARRAPI, a small settlement of the ju risdiction of the city of Pal&lt;na, and corregimicnto of Tunja, in the new kingdom of Granada. Its temperature is warm ; the number of its inhabi tants is much reduced ; they may, however, still amount to 40 housekeepers : its only productions are some maize, cotton, yucas
 and plantains. 
|CAPATARIDA r a settlement of the province and government of Maracaibo ; situate on the coast, at the mouth of the river so called. 
|CAPATAUIDA, the river which rises near the coast, runs n. and enters the sea. 
|CAPATI. Within a very few years has been discovered .in the gold mine of this place, on the jffcmntains of Copiapo, a nuw iinmalleable sort of suetalj of a kind unknown to the miners ; but Mo lina imagined it to be no other than platina.j 
|CAPAITLQUE, a settlement of the province . and corregimiento of Yamparaes, and archbishopric of Cli areas, rn Peru. 
|CAPE ST. ANDREW S, on the coast of Para guay, or La Plata, S.America. Lat. SS J 18 s. lon&gt;. 58 ; 2 u&gt;. 
ST. ANTONIO, or ANTHOMO, is the .point of laud on the s. side of La Plata river in S. America, which, with cape St. Mary on the n. 
rms 
Long. 
of tbat rivcr - Lat " 
 
|CAP 
|CAPE ST. AUGUSTINE, on the coast of Brazil, S.America, lies s. of Pernambuco. Lat. & 39 s. Long. 35 8 a&gt;. 
|CAPE BLOW-M!&gt;I&gt;OWN, which is the*, side of the entrance from ifie bay of Fundy into the basin of Minas, is the easternmost termination of a range of mountains, extending about 80 or 90 miles to the gut of Annapolis ; bounded n. by the shores of the bay of Fundy, and s. by the shores of Anna polis river. 
|CAPE COD, anciently called Mallebarre by the French, is the s. e. point of the bay of Mas sachusetts, opposite cape Ann. Lat. 42 4 / -Jz. Long. 70 14 OJ. from Greenwich. See BARNSTAPLE County and PROVINCE Town. 
|CAPE ELIZABETH, a head-land and township in Cumberland county, district of Maine. The cape lies in n. lat. 43 S3 e. by s. from the centre of the town nine miles, about 20 s. ro t of Cape Small point, and 12 n. e. from the mouth of Saco river. The town has Portland on the n.e. and Scarborough s. u,\ and contains 1355 inhabitants. It was incor porated in 1765, and lies 126 miles n. e.- of Boston. 
|CAPE FEAR is the s. point of Smith s island, which forms the mouth of Cape Fear river into two channels, on the coast of N. Carolina, s.w. of capo Look-out, and remarkable for a dangerous shoal called the Frying-pan, from its-form. Near this cape is Johnson s fort, in Brunswick county, and district of Wilmington. Lat. 33 57 . Long. 77 56 a?. 
|CAPE!* EAR River, more properly CLARENDON , affords the best navigation in N. Carolina. It opens to the Atlantic ocean by two channels. The s. ?i . and largest channel, between the s. &&amp;gt;. end of Smith s island, at Bald head, where *he light-house stands, and the e. end of Oakcs island s. &lt;. from fort Johnston. The new inlet is be tween the sea-coast arid the n. e. end of Smith s island. It will admit vessels drawing 10 or 11 feet, and is about three miles wide at its entrance, having 18 feet water at full tides over the bar. It continues its breadth to the flats, and is navi gable for lar
e vessels 21 miles from its mouth, and 14 from \Vilt:. inirton ; to which town vessels draw ing 10 or 12 feet can reach without any risk. As you ascend this river you leave Brunswick on the left and Wilmilgton on the right. A little above Wilmington the river divides into n. f. and n. a?. branches. The former is broader than the latter, but is neither so deep nor so long. The n. w. branch rises within a few miles of the Virginia line, and is formed by the junction of Haw and Deep rivers. Its general course is s. e. Sea ves~ pp 2 
sels can go 25 miles above Wilmington, and large boats 90 miles, to Fayetteville. The n. e. branch joins the n. w. branch a little above Wilmington, and is navigable by sea vessels 20 miles above that town, and by large boats to S. Washington, 40 miles further, and by rafts to Sarecto, which is nearly 70 miles. The whole length of Cape Fear river is about 200 miles. 
|CAPE Gnoss or GREAT, the point or extremity of the e. coast of lake Superior in Canada, where this begins to run out, in order to empty itself into lake Hifron. 
|CAPE GROSS or GREAT, another point of the island of St. Christopher, one of the Antilles, in the s. e. extremity, facing the s. w. and is one of the two which form the Grand Ance, or Great bay. 
|CAPE MAY is the s. westernmost point of the state of New Jersey, and of the county to which it gives name. Lat. 38 59 n. Long. 74 55 w. It lies 20 miles n. e. from cape Henlopen, which forms the s. w. point of the mouth of Delaware bay, as cape May does the n. e.~\ 
|CAPE MAY County spreads n. around the cape of its name, is a healthy sandy tract of country, of sufficient fertility to give support to 2571 industri ous and peaceable inhabitants. The county is divided into Upper, Middle, and Lower pre cincts. 
|CAPERIVACA, a large river in Guayana, S. America. 
|CAPEKU, a river of the province and govern ment of Guayana, which enters theApurc, accord ing to Mr. Bellin. 
|CAPETI, a river of the province and govern ment of Darien, in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. It rises in the mountains in the interior of this pro vince, runs from e. to w. and enters the large river of Tuira. 
|CAP!, a settlement of the province and corregimienio of Chilques and Masques in Peru. 
|CAPI, a small river of the country of the A mazonas, in the territory of the Portuguese. It runs fro n e. to w. and enters the Maranon opposite the city of Para. Don Juan de la Cruz, in his map of S. America, calls it Cupiu. 
|CAPI ATA, a small settlement of the province and government of Paraguay ; situate on the shore of the river of its name, three leagues e. of the city of Asuncion. [Lat. 25 21 45". Long. 57 31 48" a?J 
|CAPIGUI, a river of the province and captain ship of St. Vincent, in Brazil. It runs to the s. s. w. and enters the Mboapiari. 
|CAPILLA, a settlement of the province and government of Tucuman, in the jurisdiction of 
|CAP 
Santiago del Estero, on the bank of the river Clioromoros. 
|CAPILLA NURVA, a parish of the province and government of Buenos Ay res, mentioned only by D. Cosme Bueno. [It is situate on the river Negro. Lat. 33 12 30" s. Long
 67 57 40" w.~ 
|CAPILLAS, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Castro- Vireyna in Peru, an nexed to the curacy of Iluasitara. 
|CAPILLUCA8, a settlement of the regular order of the Jesuits, now abolished, in the province and government of Mainas of the kingdom of Quito ; situate on the shores of the river of the Amazonas. 
|CAPILLUCAS, a lake of the same province and government ; formed from an overflow or channel of the river Napo, and at no great distance from the banks of this river. 
|CAPILLUCAS, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Yauyos in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Tauripampa. 
|CAPINANS, a settlement of Louisiana ; situate on the banks of the river Panzacola. . : v . ( " 
|CAPINATA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Sicasica in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Cabari. 
|CAPINOTA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Cochambaba in Peru, and of the archbishopric of Charcas ; in which there is, inde pendent of the parish-church, a convent of the order of San Agustin. 
|CAPI HA, a settlement of the jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor of Nata, in the kingdom of Tierra Firme ; situate on the skirts of a mountain, at a little distance from the coast of the S. sea. 
|CAPIRATO, a settlement of the province and government of Cinaloa in Nueva Espana ; situate on the sea-coast. 
|CAPITAINE, Omc DU, or BARRANCO DEL CAPITAN, a small river of Virginia. It runs to the .?. e. and enters the Ohio. 
|CAPITANA, Point of the, on the coast of the island Guaricura; one of those islands which He in the river of the Amazonas : it looks to the n. 
|CAPITANEJO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Tunja in the new kingdom of Granada; situate on the bank of the river Sogamoso, in the territory called Cabuya de Chieamocha, which is the direct road from Tunja to Santa Fe. It is of a very hot temperature, abound ing in sugar-cane, and other productions of a warm climate. The natives are very subject to an epi demic disorder of lumps or swellings under the chin, its population consists of 100 housekeepers. 
|CAP 
It is distant SO leagues to the . of Tunja, and eight from the town of Suata. 
"CAPITUTU, BAN ADO DE, a river of the pro vince and government of Paraguay. It runs to the w. and enters the same place. 
|CAPIUARI, a small river of the province and captainship of San Vincente in Brazil. It rises in the mountains near the coast, runs almost di rectly from e. to w. and enters the Harihambu or Tiete, between the Piraciacaba and J undiaya. 
|CAPIUARI, another river of the province and go vernment of the Chiquitos Indians, and in the king dom of Peru ; it rises to the s. e. of the settlement of San Rafael, runs to the n. and enters the Ytenes with a slight inclination to the n. w. 
|CAPIUARI, another, in the province and govern ment of Paraguay, which enters the Parana, near the settlement of La Mision de Jesus. 
|CAPIUARI, another, in the province and captain ship of Rey in Brazil. It rises from a lake near the coast, runs to the w. and enters the large river of Los Patos. 
|CAPLIRA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Arica in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Tacna. 
|CAPLITOILGUA, an island of the N. sea, in the straits De Magellan, one of those which form the *. coast, at the mouth of the canal of St. Isidro. 
|CAPLITOILGUA, a bay in the former island. 
|CAPOCUI, a large lake of the province of Quito, to the n. of the river Napo, emptying itself through a canal into the river Napo. Lat. 57 s. 
|CAPOLITA, a river of the province and akaldia mayor of Tecoantepec in Nueva Espana ; it runs to the e. and enters the S. sea between the Aguatulco and the Sirnatlan. 
|CAPON, a river of the province and govern ment of Gnayana ; one of those which enter the Cuium on the n. side. 
|CAPOT, a small river of the island of Mar tinique ; it runs to the n. e. and enters the sea be tween the Falaise and the Grand Ance. 
|CAPOT, a bay on the coast of the same island, on its n. w. side, between the town of Carbet and the bay of Giraumont. 
|CAPOTERA, River of, in the kingdom of Bra zil ; it rises in the sierra grande, runs to the n. n. e. and enters the Tocantines, between the Santa Lucia and the Araguaya. 
|CAPO TILLO, River of, in the island of St. Domingo ; it rises near the n. coast, runs w. and turning to the n. n.w. enters the sea at port Delfin. 
|CAPOTIQUI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento o( Caxamarquilla in Peru. 
|CAPUCINS, MORNE DES, or MOURO on LOS 
2 
|CAP 
293 
|CAPUCHINTOS, a mountain of the island of Mar. tinique, at the back of the city of Fort Royal. 
|CAPUCUI, a settlement of the missionaries of the regular order of the Jesuits, now abolished. 
|CAPUE, ALTO, a town belonging to the French, in the part which they possess in the island of St. Domingo ; it was taken and burnt by the Spaniards in the year 1691 , after a victory gained by them. 
|CAPUE, with the addition of BAXO(!OW), to dis tinguish it ; another settlement of the same island and dominion as the former. 
|CAPUI, a settlement of the province of Guayana and government of Cumana ; one of those which is formed by the missions there established by the Catalanians. 
|CAPUI, a small river of the province and government of Paraguay ; it runs to the w. and enters the Parana between the Cartiguampu and the Quendi. 
|CAPUIO, a small settlement of the head settle ment of Etuquaro, and alcaldia mayor of Valladolid, in the province and bishopric of Mechoacan ; in which district there are some cultivated lands, and in these, as well as in the settlement, reside some Spanish familiesj and some of the Muslees and Indians, who gain their livelihood in tilling the ground, in making lime, tind cutting wood. Four leagues w. of its capital. 
|CAPULA, a village of a small settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Zultepec in Nueva Espana ; situate in the cleft or hollow part of a mountain covered with trees ; its inhabitants, who consist of 63 Indian families, make charcoal and timber, these being the articles of their com merce. 
|CAPLJLALPA, SAX SIMON DE, a small settle ment of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Tezcoco in Nueva Espana, situate on the top of a hill ; it has a very good convent of Franciscans, and contains 75 families of Spaniards, Mulattoes, and Mustees, and 196 of Indians : its territory is very fertile, and the most luxuriant of any in the same jurisdiction ; notwithstanding there is alack of moisture, there being no running streams. They are used to gather most abundant crops of wheat, maize, barley, vetches, beans, and French beans ; they have large breeds of hogs, both in the village and in the farms and neighbouring fattening stalls, which they carry for sale to Mexico, to La Puebla, and other parts. One league n. of its capital. 
|CAPULUAC, SAN BARTOLOME ni;, a head settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Melepec in Nueva Espana; it contains 524 Indian families, including those who inhabit the wards of its dis trict, and it is two leagues to the s. e. of its capital. 
|CAPURE, an arm of the river Orinoco, one of 
294 C A Q 
those which form its different mouths : also the island of its name, inhabited by the Guaranos Indians. 
|CAPUXA, a small settlement of the jurisdiction and alcahlia mayor of I.vmiquilpan, and of the ca pital of Orizava, in Js T ueva L spana. 
|CAQUETA, a very large and abundant river rising in the province of Sucumbios in the kingdom of Quito, in the mountains of Mocoa, this name being also given to it : it runs from w. to e. On the 5. it gathers the waters of the San Pedro, Santa Cruz, and Arevalo, and on the n. those of the Lucia, Pato, Tango, Tabaquero, Cascabeles, Iscanze, and others of an inferior description. It divides itself into two arms, the one of which takes the name ofYupura, and which, running nearly to the same point as the Maranon, separates itself into other branches, which enter into this latter river in 4 of lat. and immediately become as large and considerable as if they were (he main stream : the other arm is also divided into two, the one taking a n. e. course, and entering the Orinoco, and the oOier running s. e. and bearing the name of the Rio Negro ; by means of which, in the year 1744, some Portuguese came from Maranon to Orinoco, and proved the communication of these rivers, which before was doubted : also by one of the arms of the Yupura, Gonzalo Ximenes de Quesada found his way to the new kingdom of Granada when he undertook its conquest. Some maintain that this river was the Orinoco, and thus has Don Pedro Maldonado represented it in his map published in the year J7jO; but that of the Father Bernndo Rosclla, missionary of the abolished society of the Jesuits in Orinoco, made after the notes and in structions of the Father Manuel Roman, attributes with some confidence another origin to the Orinoco, and speaks of the Caqueta a* one of the rivers which enter it on the tr. side. The Spanish geographer Cm/, in his General Chart of \nteiiea, makes no distinction between the Yupura and the Caqueta, and only speaks of one stream, which runs con tinually to the.?, s.r. through the territory of the Cavauris Indian*, before it enters the Maranon. Jle delineates the same as throwing out four branches to the tc. and three to the e. all which join the latter river ; and he further states, that before it becomes thus divided, it forms on its )i. side two large lakes called Ynabavu and Cumapi ; from the whole of which may be easily inferred how great is the abundance of its waters. 
C.\ QL T I */A , a settlement of the cotrcgimicnto of Uba&lt;&lt; . &gt; in the r.ew kingdom of Granada, situate in a warm but pleasant and agreeable soil, although much infested by venomous snukcs called tayas : 
|CAR 
it abounds in the productions of a warm climate, contains more than 200 housekeepers, and is nine leagues to the s. w. of Santa Fe, in the road which leads from San Juan de los Llanos to this capital. 
|CAQUIAUf RI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Pacages in Peru. 
|CAQUINGORA, a settlement of the province and corregimieto of Pacages in Peru. 
|CARA, an ancient province of the kingdom of Quito towards the w. It extends itself along the coast of the Pacific sea from the point of Pajonal to the bay of Quaquez, for the space of 19 or 20 leagues ; is watered by the rivers Tasagua and Chouos to the s. and by the Jama t the n. The whole of the lands lie low, and are uncultivated and full of wood ; the climate is hot and moist. It is at present united to the province of Esmeraldas. 
|CARA, the capital, which is now destroyed, was founded by Francisco de Ribas in the year 1562. It was situate in the bay of Cara, which is formed by the mouths of the two rivers Tasagua and Chones : its ruins are still to be seen, and from these was built the settlement of Canoa, at six leagues 1 distance, which was the residence of the lieutenant governor. This settlement was in 
1 $. lat. 
|CAKA, with the addition of BELLA, a small settlement of the Portuguese in the province and cap" fainship of Puerto Seguro in Brazil ; situate at the source of the river Pricto, and in the territory 6rcountry of the Pories Indians. 
|CARABAIA, a province and corregimiento of Pern, bounded on the e. by Larecaja, w. by Qnispicanchi, n. ID. and n. by the territories of the infidel Indians, called Carangues, Sumach tianes. and others, who are separated by the famous river Inambary; s. w. by the province of (Janes and Candies or Tinta, and s. by Lampa and AsangarOj and in part by Puno or Paucarcolla. According to the nice measurements which were made with fe gard to this province as well as of the others, it is said to be 40 leagues from n. to .&lt;?. and 50 at the most from e. to w. Its furthercst limits are only 14 leagues distant from Cuzco, although oh horseback
 it is necessary to go around ofo O leagues. Its climate is various, according to the more or tes
 1 elevated situation of the country; so that it is irt some parts very cold, and in others more temperate." The pastures are good, consequently there is no want of cattle, and in the neighbourhood of the Andes they gather three or four crops of r ocfl ifi* the year. In this province is included that called Sari Guban, which was united to it; many .seltte
 ments having been nt the same time added to the provinces of Larecaja, Lampa and Asangaro. It has abounded more in gold than any other province 
|CAR 
in America, and they reckon the gold it has pro duced at 33 millions of dollars, without counting that which has been concealed ; but at present they scarce procure from it 200 pound weight a year, on account of the increased charges of labour, and the want of energy in the inhabitants. Many lumps of gold have been found here, among which there is still remembered to have been one of the figure of a horse, which weighed 100 weight and some odd pounds, and which was carried to the Emperor Charles V. ; and likewise another lump which was sent to Philip II. bearing a resemblance to the head of a man, which, however, was lost together with much other riches in the channel of Bahama. This latter lump was found in the washing place of Ynahuaya. Nearly the whole of the territory of this province is interspered with gold. The most cele brated washing places that it had were called San Juan del Oro, Paulo Coya, Ananea, and that which was superior to all, Aporoma. In the year 1713, a lump of silver also was discovered in the mountain of Ucuntaya, being of a very solid piece of metal, and of prodigious value ; in its rivers are found sands of gold, to which at certain times of the year, the Indians have recourse, in order to pay their tri butes. There are also other mines of silver and copper in various parts, and springs of hot water. It is very liable to earthquakes, and according to the tradition of the Indians, there was one which took place before the conquest, so large as to over turn mountains, and that, opening the earth, it swallowed up in an abyss many towns with their inhabitants. They likewise assert, that in the year 1747, another earthquake, throwing out of the ground a dirty and muddy water, thereby infected the rivers to such a degree as to cause a dreadful and general mortality. It has some large rivers as well as small ; all of which empty themselves into the Ynambari, thus rendering this river ex tremely abundant : towards the n. and n. e. which, as we have observed, is bounded by the infidel Indians, there are large tracts of ground covered with coca and rice, with an abundance of mountain fruits. In the aforesaid river they arc accustomed to take shad and large dories by shooting them with muskets, or by piercing them with arrows or darts. There are also some lakes, which, although without fish, abound in ducks, snipes, and other aquatic fowl. The infidel Indians have made va rious irruptions into this province : its capital is Sandia, and its natives, who amount to 28,000, are divided into 26 settlements, as follows : The rcpartimiento received by the corregidor used to amount to 82,800 dollars, and it paid 662 yearly for alcatala. 
|CAR 
Sandia, 
Cuiocnio. 
Laqueique, 
Yiiacoreque, 
Queneque, 
Patambuco, 
S. Juan del Oro, 
Quiaca, 
Sina, 
Para, 
Limbanij 
Chejani, 
Aporoma, 
ibiil // $zoi 
Coaza, 
Cruzero, 
Ajoiani, f.yj 
Usicaios, 
Esquena, 
Cuntuquita, 
Ynambari, 
Ayapata, 
\ tuata, 
Macusani, 
Ollachea, 
Azaroma, 
Corani. 
|CARABAILLO, a river of the province and corregimiento of Cercado in Peru. It rises in the province of Canta from three lakes to the n. of the capital, and continues its course until it join the sea close to the point of Marques. 
|CARABAILLO, a settlement of this province and correffimiettto. 
|CARABANA, a river of the province and go vernment of Guayana, which runs to the s. and enters the Orinoco between the Corquina and the Arrewow. According to Bellin, in his map of the course of part of the Orinoco, it is distant from the other rirer called Corobana, which also enters the Orinoco on the opposite side. 
|CARABATANG, a river of the province and captainship of Rio Grande in Brazil. It rises in the sierra of the Tiguares Indians, near the coast, runs s. 5. e. and enters the sea between the Cong and the Goyana. 
C ARAB EL AS, River of the, in the province and captainship of Puerto Seguro in Brazil. It rises in the cold sierra of the Pories Indians, runs s. e. and according to Cruz, e. and enters the sea opposite the bank of the Escollos (hidden rocks). 
|CARABCLAS, Gn ANDES, a port of the island of Cuba, on the n. part. 
|CAKABELAS, CHICAS, a bay in the same island, and on the same coast, between the settlement of Guanajo and the Puerto del Poniente (w. port.) 
|CARABERES. See article GUARAYOS. 
|CARABUCO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Omasuyos in Peru ; in the vici nity of which are the ruins of a chapel, which was dedicated to St. Bartholomew ; and the Indians have a tradition that the above-mentioned saint ap peared here and preached the gospel to them : thus, in the principal altar of the church, they rererence a large cross of very strong wood, and which is celebrated for having wrought many mi racles ; splinters of it being anxiously sought after by the faithful, wherefrom to form small crosses; 
296 
|CARACAS. 
and it is, indeed, pretty generally believed that this cross was left here by the above apostle. 
|CARAC, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Canta in Peru ; annexed to the cu racy of Lampian. 
|CARAC AH A, an ancient and small province of Charcas in Peru, to the s. of Cuzco, and the last of those conquered by the sixth Emperor or Lica. 
|CARAC ARES, a large lake of the province and government of Paraguay. It is 26 leagues in length, and has many fertile islands, inhabited by barbarian Indians, and empties itself through a canal into the river Parana on the e. side. It is in 30 4:1 s. lat. 
|CARACAS, SANTIAGO DE LEON DE, a capital city of the province of Venezuela, founded by Diego Losada in the year 1566, in a beautiful and extensive valley of more than four leagues in length. It is of a very mild temperature, being neither troubled with excessive heat or cold. It is watered by four rivers, which fertilize its territory, and make it abound as well in delicate waters as in exquisite fruits and flowers: the streets are wide and straight, the buildings elegant and convenient, and it is ornamented by four marts. It is the seat of the bishopric, erected in the city of Coro in 1532, and translated to this spot in 1636. It has a beautiful cathedral church, besides some parish chapels, which are Nuestra Scfiora de Alta Gracia ; San Pablo, which is also an hospital, and Nuestra Senora de la Candelaria, out of the walls of the city. There is also an hospital De la Caridad (of charity) for women : a convent of the re ligious order of Santo Domingo, in which is held in high respect the wonderful image of the Virgin of the Rosary, presented by Philip II. There is another convent of San Francisco, in which is preserved a piece of the wood of the cross left by the Governor Don Martin de Robles Villafanate ; another of our Lady of La Merced; a monastery of religious women of La Concepcion ; another of the Carmelites Descalzas (barefooted) ; a college and seminary for the education of youth, with five ca thedrals ; four hermitages dedicated to San Mauricio, Santa Rosalia de Palermo, La Divina Pastora, and La Santisima Trinidad. Charles II. granted to this city the privilege of allowing its alcaldes to govern the province in the vacancy of a governor; and Philip V. permitted a commer cial company of Biscayans to be established, who reaped considerable affluence, especially in the artiles of cacoa and sugar, the chief source of its re venues ; but this company was abolished in the reign of Charles III. in the year 1778 ; which cir cumstance WHS considered by the city and the pro 
vince as a most considerable privilege. The num ber of inhabitants amounts to about &lt;000, besides an infinity of people of colour by whom it is in habited. The natives have shown themselves to be of an ingenuous disposition, clever, affable, and courteous. Its arms are a grey lion rampant in a field of silver, having between his arms a scollopshell of gold, with the cross of Santiago ; and the crest is a crown with five points of gold. It was sacked in 15Gt&gt; by Sir Francis Drake, who came thither in an English cruiser ; also by the French in 1679. It is three leagues distant from the port of Guaira. Long. 67 w. Lat. 10 30 n, The bishops who have presided in this city. 
1. Don Rodrigo Bastidas, dean of the holy church of St. Domingo, the chief of the visitation of the bishopric of Puertonco; elected on the 27th October 1535, and who died in 1542. 
2. Don Miguel Gerouimo -iallesteros, dean of the church of Cartagena of the Indies elected in 1543. 
3. Don Fr. Pedro de Agreda, of the order of St. Domingo, collegiate of San Gregorio of Valr ladolid ; presented to this bishopric in 1358, and taking possession of it 1560. In his time the city was sacked by the English : he died in J58Q. 
4. Don Fr. Juan de Manzanillo, of the order of St. Domingo ; presented in the ye r 1582 : he rer built the church, and died in 1593. 
5. Don Fr. Diego Salinas, of the order of St. Domingo, native of Medina del Canapo, colle giate of San Gregorio de Vallaclolid, prior in dif ferent convents, procurator-general in the court) and elected bishop in the year 1600: in the fol lowing year he died. 
6. Don Fr. Pedro Martin Palomino, .of the order of St. Domingo ; elected in 1601 : he died the same year. 
7. Don Fr. Pedro de Ofia, native of Burgos, of the order of our Lady of La Merced ; he was even ing lecturer in the university of Santiago, elected bishop in 1601, canonized in the convent of Valladolid, and before he came to his church, was promoted to the bishopric of Gaeta, in the king dom of Naples, in J604. 
8. Don Fr. Antonio de Alcega, of the order of St. Francis ; he was formerly married, and held the office of accountant to the royal estates in Yu catan, when he became a widower, and giving all he possessed as alms to the poor, he took to a re ligious life, and Philip I II. being charmed with his virtues presented him to this bishopric in 1664; he celebrated the synod in Caracas the year following, and died in 1609. 
9. Don Fr. Juan de Bohorques, native of Mex
|CARACAS. 
297 
ico, of the religious order of St. Dominic ; elected bishop in 1610, and was from thence translated to the bishopric of Oaxaca. 
10. Don FT. Gonzalo de Angulo, of the order of St. Francis, native of Valladolid ; he was su perior of the convent of Segovia, difinidor of the province of Castilla, qualificator of the inquisi tion ; elected bishop in 1617, visited his bishopric, where he spent more than three years, confirmed 3000 persons, and founded many grammar-schools : he died in 1633. 
11. Don Juan Lopez Agurto de la Mata, na tive of the island of Tenerife, canon of the church of the Puebla de los Angeles, prebendary of that of Mexico, rector of the college of Los Santos, and lecturer in its university ; he was elected bishop of Puertorico in 1630, and promoted to this in 1634 ; in which time the cathedral was removed for the sake of security : in 1637 he died. 
12. Don Fr. Mauro de Tobar, of the order of St. Benedict, native of Villacastin, prior and ab bot of the monastery of Valladolid, and afterwards of Monforte, preacher to Philip IV. ; elected to this bishopric in 1639 : immediately upon his tak ing possession of it a great earthquake happened, and destroyed the cathedral, which he was rebuild ing, when he was translated to the bishopric of Chiapa in 1655. 
13. Don Fr. Alonso Briceno, of the order of La Merced, of the province and kingdom of Chile ; he entered Caracas in the year 1659, and died in 1667. 
14. Don Fr. Antonio Gonzales de Acufia, of the order of St. Dominic, postulador in the court of Rome ; he was elected bishop in 1676, and died in 1682. 
15. The Doctor Don Diego dc Banos and Sotomayor, native of Santa Fe of Bogota, head colle giate of the college of the Rosario in this city, honorary chaplain to Charles II. and canon of Cuenca ; he was promoted to the mitre of Santa Marta in 1684 ; he founded the Tridentine col lege, having endowed the same with professorships and revenues ; and being removed to the arch bishopric of Santa Fe, lie died in the year 1706. 
16. Don Fr. Francisco del Rincon, of the reli gious order of the Minims of St. Francis de Paula, native of Valladolid ; he was promoted to the archbishopric of Domingo in 1711, and from thence to that of Santa Fe in 1717. 
17. Don Juan Joseph de Escalona y Calatayud, was born at Rioja, became doctor of theology at Salamanca, canon of Calahorra, and first chap lain in the court of Madrid ; he was elected bishop 
|VOL. I. 
of Caracas, for his charity to the poor, in the year 1719, and thence translated to the bishopric of Mechoacan in 1728. 
18. Don Joseph Feliz Valverde, native of Gra nada ; he passed his youth at Mexico, where he was collegiate of the college of San lldefonso, doc tor of theology, and of both laws, magistrate and dean of the church of Oaxnca ; elected bishop in 173 f, and promoted to the church of Mechoacan ; which last appointment he declined : he died in 1741. 
19. Don Juan Garcia Padiano ; who took pos session in 1742, and died in 1746. 
20. Don Manuel Breton, doctoral canon of the church of Badajos ; he died in going over to be consecrated at Cordova in 1749. 
21. Don Manuel Machado y Luna, honorary chaplain to his Majesty, and administrator of the college of Santa Isabel, native of Estremadura : he studied at Salamanca, obtained the title of pri mate of canons ; reputed for one of the wisest in ecclesiastical discipline; was made bishop of Ca racas in 1750, and died in 1752. 
22. Don Francisco Julian Antolino, native of Zamora, an eminent theologist, penitentiary ca non of Badajoz, and bishop of Caracas in 1753 : he died in 1755. 
23. Don Miguel Argiielles, principal theologist, and curate in the archbishopric of Toledo ; elected bishop in 1756, and immediately after auxiliary bishop of Madrid. 
24. Don Diego Antonio Diaz Madronero, native of Talarrubias in Estremadura, vicar of the city of Alcala ; he entered upon his functions in 1757, and died in 1769. 
25. Don Mariano Marti, of the principality of Cataluna, ecclesiastical judge and vicar-general of the archbishopric of Tarragona, doctor in the universit} of Cervera ; he was promoted to the bishopric of Puertorico in 1770. 
Governors and Captains-General of the province of Caracas, or Venezuela. 
1. Ambrosio de Alfinge ; nominated first gover nor, and elected by the Weltzers : he drew up the articles of stipulation with the Emperor in the con quest of Venezuela ; was founder of the city of Coro ; took possession of the government in 1528, and retained it till 1531, when he was killed by the Indians in satisfaction of the cruelties he had com mitted. 
2. Juan Aleman, related to the Welzers ; he, by way of precaution, assumed the title of governor while the place was vacant, and held it until the arrival of the proper person. 
Q Q 
298 
|CARACAS. 
3. George of Spira, a German knight, nomi nated by the Weltzers in 1533 : he died in 1540, leaving the title of provisional governor to, 
4. Captain Juan de Villegas, a title which was enjoyed but a few days, inasmuch as the audience of St. Domingo, immediately upon their hearing of the death of Spira, appointed, 
5. Don Rodrigo de Bastidas, bishop of that holy church ; he governed till the year 1541, and being promoted to the bishopric of Puertorico, the government in the mean time devolved upon, 
6. Diego Boica, a Portuguese gentleman, a knight of the order of Christ ; he was confirmed in the government by the audience of St. Domingo ; but in a very few days after he was superseded by, 
7. Enrique Rembolt, a German ; who also go verned a very short time, inasmuch as the excesses that he committed, and the clamours of the inha bitants of Toro, obliged the above tribunal to send out, 
8. The Licentiate Frias, fiscal of that royal audience; he entered upon his functions in 1642, until the royal nomination of, 
9. The Licentiate Juan Perez de Tolosa, native of Segovia ; a very learned and prudent man : he was chosen by the Emperor to settle the distur bances which had arisen from the administration of the Weltzers; for which reason he deprived them of it : he entered Coro in 1546 ; and although he had not fulfilled the three years of his appointment, he was, on account of his tried abilities, confirmed in his office for another three years, and died in 1548. 
10. Juan de Villegas, nominated as intermediate governor by his antecedent, until the arrival of the proprietor, 
11. The Licentiate Villacinda, nominated by the Princess Dona Juana, who, in the absence of her father, the Emperor, held the reins of govern ment in Castilla ; this governor took the reins in 1554, and died in 1557, leaving the government in charge of the alcaldes. 
12. 6utierrez de la Pena, nominated provision ally by the audience of St. Domingo ; he entered upon his functions in 1557, until the year 1559, when arrived, 
13. The Licentiate Pablo Collado, who governed until the year 1562, when, on account of the ap peals made against him to the audience of St. Do mingo, this court sent out an inquisitorial judge, who might call him to account, and order him kack to Spain : this was the Licentiate Bernaldes, whom they called " Ojo de Plata," (Eye of Silver), he having the defect of one of his eyes supplied by 
this artificial means. He having, therefore, dis placed the former governor, took the management of affairs upon himself, until the arrival of the proper person, who was nominated by the king in 1563. 
14. Don Alonzo de Manzanedo, who governed a very short time since ; being of a very advanced age, he soon fell sick, and died in 1564. 
15. The Licentiate Bernaldes; who having gained a certain reputation for the strictness, affa bility, and justice, with which he conducted him self in his provisional government, was nominated a second time by the audience of St. Domingo, with the general acclamation of the province ; he governed until the year following, 1565, when arrived, 
16. Don Pedro Ponce de Leon, a branch of the illustrious house of the Dukes of Arcos ; he had been alcalde of Conil, came to the government in the aforesaid year, and died in 1569. 
17. Don Juan de Chaves, a native of Truxillo in Estremadura ; who was living as a citizen at St. Domingo at the time that he was appointed as provisional governor by the audience, as soon as the death of the former was known to them : he entered upon the government the same year, and held it until the year 1572. 
18. Diego Mazariego ; who entered Coro in the above year, and governed until 1576, when his successor arrived, who was, 
19. Don Juan Pimentel, a branch of the house of the Counts of Bcnavente, knight of the order of Santiago ; also the first governor who established his residence in the city of Santiago. He was called from thence to take the charge of the go vernment, which he exercised until the year 1582, when his successor arrived. 
fcO. Don Luis de Roxas, native of Madrid ; he entered Caracas in 1583, reigned until 1587, whea he was succeeded by, 
2 1 . Don Domingo de Osorio, commander of the galleys, and chief officer of the customs of the island of St. Domingo ; at which place he was residing when he received advices relative to his succeed ing the former governor : he filled his office with much diligence, and obtained considerable renown, and in the year 1597 was promoted to the presi dency of St. Domingo. 
22. Gonzalo de Pina Liduena, who governed until 1600, when he died of an apoplectic fit ; and in the interval the audience of St. Domingo ap pointed, 
23. Alonzo Arias Baca, citizen of Coro, and son of the renowned Dr. Bernaldes, who had governed 
|CARACAS. 
twice with so much credit ; he entered upon the government in the same year. 
24. Sancho de Alquiza, a captain of infantry ; who began to govern in the year 1601, and con tinued until the year 1610, when he was succeeded 
b y 
25. Don Martin de Robles Villafanate, who go verned the province with great credit and prudence until his death. 
26. Don Francisco de la Hoz Berrio, native of Santa Fe. He entered upon the government in 1616, and governed until the year 1622. He was drowned returning to Spain in the fleet which was lost in the falls of Metacumbe, close to the Havannah. 
27. Don Francisco Nunez Melian, who suc ceeded the former, and governed until the year 1632. 
28. Don Rui Fernandez de Fuenmayor, from the last-mentioned year to 1638. 
29. Don Marcos Gelder de Calatayud, a knight of the order of Calatrava ; he was promoted here from the government of Santa Marta in 1639, and governed until the year 1644, when he died. 
30. Don 
31. Don 
32. Don Pedro de Porras y Toledo, who began to govern in 1660, and remained in office until the year 1665. 
33. Don 
34. Don 
35. Don 
36. Don 
37. Don Joseph Francisco de Canas, colonel of infantry, and knight of the order of St. Jago ; he came over to Caracas under a particular commis sion in 1716, and became provisional successor on account of the death of the proper governor. 
38. Don Francisco dc Portales. 
39. Don Lope Carrillo. 
40. Don Sebastian Garcia dc la Torre, colonel of infantry ; from the year 1730 to 1733. 
41. Don Martin de Lardizabal, alcalde del crimen of the royal audience of Aragon; who was sent out with a commission to consider the griev ances of the province preferred against the com pany of Guipuzcoana. 
42. The Brigadier-general Don Gabriel de Zuloaga, Count of Torre-alta, captain of the grena diers of the regiment of the royal Spanish guards ; he governed from 1737 to 1742. 
43. The Brigadier-general Don Luis de Castellanos, also captain of the regiment of guards ; to 1749. 
44. Don Fray Julian de Arriaga y Rigera Bai
lio, of the order of St. Juan ; vice-admiral of th c royal armada : he governed to 1752, when he was promoted to the office of president of trade. 
45. Don Felipe Ricardos, lieutenant-general of the royal armies. 
46. Don Felipe Ramirez de Estefioz, a briga dier-general. 
47. Don Joseph Solano y Bote, captain in the royal armada ; to the year 1771, when lie was pro moted to the presidency of St. Domingo. 
48. The Brigadier-general the Marquis of La Torre, knight of the order of Santiago ; he entered Caracas in the aforesaid year, and governed until the year 1772, when he was promoted to be go vernor of the Havannah. 
49. Don Joseph Carlos de Aquiero, knight of the order of St. Jago ; who had served in the war of Italy as captain of the provincial grenadiers, and afterwards in the regiment ofiS
anish guards : he then held the government of Nueva Vizcaya, and afterwards, on account of his singular disinte restedness, nominated to this in 1777; but he re* turned to Spain. 
50. Don Luis de Unzaga y Amezaga, colonel of infantry : in the aforesaid year he left the go vernment of Louisiana for this, and exercised it till the year 1784, when he was promoted to the Havannah, being succeeded by, 
51. Don Manuel Gonzales, knight of the order of St. Jago, brigadier of the royal armies; he was nominated as provisional successor. 
52. The Colonel Don Juan Guillelmi, who had served in the corps of artillery ; he was promoted to the government in 1785. 
|INDEX TO ADDITIONAL INFORMATION CON CERNING THE CITT OF CARACAS. 
1. Foundation. 2. Privileges. 3. Temperature. 4. Meteorology. 5. Cyanometrical observa tion 6. Oxigen and nitrogen gas. 7. Va riation of the needle. 8. Inclination of the dip* ping needle. 9. Situation. 10. Its waters. 11. Streets. 12. Public squares. 13. Houses. 14. Public buildings. \5. Archbishopric. 16. Cathedral. 17 . Religious customs. IS. Religious costumes of the women. -19. Festi vals. 20. The stage t &&amp;gt;c. 21. Inhabitants. 22. Freed persons or tradesmen. 23. The uni versity. 24. Police. -25. Communications Kith the interior. 26. With Spain. 27. Geogra phical and statistical notices of the captainshipgeneral of Caracas, and present history. 1. Foundation. This city, situate in 10 31 
n. lat. and 69 3 w. long, from the meridian of 
Paris, was founded by Diego Losada in 1567, 47 QQ2 
300 
|CARACAS. 
years after Cumana, 39 after Coro, 33 after Barcelona, and 15 after Barquisimeto. 
2. Its privileges. It is the capital, not only of the province of Venezuela, but likewise of that immense extent of country occupied by the go vernments of Maracaibo, Barinas, Guayana, Cu mana, and the island of Margareta ; since it is the seat as well of the captain-generalship, the political and military authority of which extends over all these provinces, as of the royal audience, of the intendancy, and of the consulate, the jurisdiction of which extends as far as the captain-general ship. 
3. Temperature. Its temperature does not at alt correspond with its latitude ; for, instead of insupportable heat, which, it would appear, ought to reign so near the equator, it, on the contrary, enjoys an almost perpetual spring. It owes this advantage to its elevation, which is 460 fathoms above the level of the sea. Thus, al though the sun has the power usual in such a lati tude, the elevated situation of Caracas counter balances its influence. The transitions from heat to cold are great and sudden, from whence nume rous diseases arise; the most common of which are colds, called by the Spaniards calarros. 
4. Meteorology. Height of Fahrenheit s ther mometer at Caracas. 
In the winter. 
Generally at 6 A. M 58 
2 P. M. ? * ". . . 73 10 P. M. ..... 68 
The maximum . . . . 76 The minimum . ;7 v . 52 
In the summer. Generally at 6A.M. . . . .72 
2 P. M. . .VV . 79 10 P. M. . .- . . 75 
Maximum 85 
Minimum 69 
Humidity, according to the hydrometer of Duluc. 
Generally 47 
Maximum ".* " 58 Minimum . . . 37 The mercury, which rises in the most s. parts of Europe, and in the variations of the atmo sphere to ll-12ths of the Paris inch, ascends only 2-12ths in the e. parts of Tierra Firme. They ob serve at Caracas, in all the seasons, four small at mospherical variations every 24 hours, two in the day, and two in the night. 
5. Blue of the skies by the cyanometer ofSeaussure. 
Generally .... 18 
6. Oxigen and nitrogen gas. Of 100 parts, 28 of oxygen and 72 of nitrogen. 
The maximum of the first is 29 The minimum 
Jft . . 27
 
7. Variation of the needle. 
Sept. 27th, 1799 . ".- 4 38 45" 
8. Inclination of the dipping needle. Generally 43Jjj. Oscillation of the pendulum : in 15 minutes, 1270 oscillations. 
9. Situation. The city of Caracas is built in a valley of four leagues in length, in a direction from e. to w. and between that great chain of mountains which runs in a line with the sea from Coro to Cumana. It is, as it were, in a basin or hollow form ed by this chain ; for it has mountains of equal height to the n. and to the s. The city occupies a space of 2000 square paces ; the ground on which it stands remains as nature formed it, art having done nothing towards levelling it, or diminishing its irregularities. The declivity is every where decidedly from the s. : the whole of it is 75 fa thoms perpendicular from the gate De la Pastora to the n. unto the river Guaire, which bounds the city to the s. 
10. Its waters. It derives its waters from four small rivers. The first, which is called Guaire, bounds it entirely on the s. part without pene trating into the city. Although this be scarcely considerable enough to deserve the name of a river, it is too large to pass by the name of a rivulet. The second, which bears the name of Anauco, waters the e. side of the town ; and the part where it ap proaches nearest is called Candelaria, where there is built a handsome bridge, facilitating the com munication with the valley of Chacao. The third is the Caroata : its course is from n. to s. through all the w. part of the city, and separates it from the quarter called St. John, which parts are united by a stone bridge of a sufficiently solid construc tion, but the regularity of which does not equal that of the Candelaria. The fourth is named Catucho, to which the city owes the waters of an in finite number of public and private fountains; yet the inhabitants of Caracas, insensible to its bene fits, suffer it to run in the same channel that time has made for it, and amidst all the deformities which the rains have occasioned ; for the four bridges of communication which are thrown across it are rather to be considered the offsprings of ne cessity than as objects of ornament. These four rivers, after having served all the domestic uses of the city, run in one single channel across the valley of Chacao, which is covered with fruits, provi sions, and merchandize ; and, mixing their wa- 
|CARACAS. 
301 
tcrs with those of the Tuy, fall under this name into the ocean, at 12 leagues to the e. of cape Codera. 
11. Its streets. The streets of Caracas, like those of many modern cities, are in parallel lines, about 20 feet broad, paved, and running n. s. e. and a;. The houses are well built, about 300 feet from each other. 
12. Public squares. There are but three public squares deserving of the name, and these are not free from deformities. The great square, called Plaza Mayor, which ought to be the most regular, is deformed by booths built to the e. and w. which are let to shopkeepers for the profit of the city ; and for the trifling emolument thus derived, is sacrificed a most delightful prospect. This square occupies the same space as one of the gardens of the city, called Quadras , the size of which is about 300 square feet. The square is well paved, and in it is held a market, in which you might procure in abundance vegetables, fruits, fresh and salted meat, fish, poultry, game, bread, paroquets, and monkeys. The cathedral, which is situate on the e. side of the square, has no symmetrical connection with it. This square has on each side two entrances. The second square is that of the Candelaria, surrounded very regularly by an open palisade of iron upon stone work of an unequal height. This square, although not paved, has a soil of clay mixed with sand, which is as good as the best pavement, and altogether it does not fail to afford an agreeable coup d ceil. It owes nothing to the buildings that compose it, nor is there, indeed, one fit to engage the attention, save the church of Candelaria, which, although not of perfect geometrical proportion, has a front which diverts the eye, and is by no means a dis advantage to the square. The third square is that of St. Paul : its only ornament is a fountain in its centre. The church of St. Paul is, indeed, at the s. e. angle, but has no other symmetrical relation with the square than that it forms a part of it. This square is neither paved nor even. The other squares are, 1st, That of Trinidad, which has not even the form of a square, and the ground of which is extremely uneven and neglected : 2rf, That of St. Hyacinth, containing the convent of the Dominicans, and bordered on the e. by the pavement of a street, and crossed by an other, so as to induce a supposition that it was ne ver intended for a square : 3d, That of St. La zarus, which is a sort of inclosure before the church of that name, situate to the 5. e. of the city ; it has the merit of neatness, but so detached from the town, that it does not appear to form a part of it : 4M, The square of Pa
tora, which is surrounded by 
ruins : 5th, The square of St. John, which is spacious, but irregular, unpaved, and bordered only on the w. side by a row of houses of mean construction. It is in this square that the mounted militia are exercised. 
13. Houses. The houses of individuals are handsome and well built. There are a great num ber in the interior of the city, which consist of se parate stories, and are of a very handsome ap pearance. Some are of brick, but the greater part are of masonry, made nearly after the manner of the Romans, and on the plan now adopted when building in marshes or in the sea, &c. according to the method published by Mr. Tardiff in 1757. They make a sort of frame without a bottom, with planks of five feet long and three high, which becomes the model of the front of the wall about to be erected. The ground on which they build serves as a foundation to (his frame or support, and the frame is removed as each tier or part is added to complete the walls. They cover the walls with mortar, called in the country tapia. There are two sorts of this mortar r the first, to which they give the pompous name of royal tapia, is made of the sand of the river mixed with chalk, to which are frequently added flints, stones, and pebbles ; the second is composed of common sand with a very small quantity of chalk. A person easily distinguishes, by the mixture of these materials, that which is the most durable ; yet both acquire, by means of the pestle, a consistency which braves for a long time the inclemencies of the seasons and the effects of time. The outside of the houses, when made rough and whitened, appears equal to free stone. The timber of the roof is formed, as it were, into a double slope. The wood work is well joined, very elegant, and of an excellent descrip tion of wood, which the country furnishes in abun dance. The houses of the principal people of the city, in general, are neatly and even richly fur nished : they have handsome glasses, elegant cur tains of crimson damask at the windows and at the inner doors ; chairs and sofas of wood, with the seats covered with leather or damask stuffed with hair, worked in a Gothic style, but overloaded with gilding ; beds, with the head-boards raised very high, exposing to the sight nothing butgold, covered with handsome damask counterpanes, and several pillows of feathers covered with muslin cases ornamented with lace ; but there is seldom more than one bed of this magnificence in each house, and this is generally the nuptial bed, though being, in fact, merely kept for show. The feet of the tables and the commodes are richly gilt : ele gant lustres are suspended in the principal apart- 
302 
|CARACAS. 
fments ; the very Qorn ices appear to have been dipped in gold, whilst superb carpets are spread over the part of the floor whereon the seats of ho nour are placed ; the furniture is arranged in the hall in siich a manner that the sofa, which forms an essential part of it, stands at one end with chairs on the right and left, and opposite the prin cipal bed in the house, which stands at the other extremity, in a chamber, the door of which is kept open, or is equally exposed to view in an alcove. These apartments, always very elegant and high ly ornamented, are in a manner prohibited to those who inhabit the house : they are only opened, with a few exceptions, in honour of guests of superior rank. 
14. Public buildings. The city of Caracas possesses no other public buildings than such as are dedicated to religion. The captain-general, the members of the royal audience, the intcndant, and all the officers of the tribunal, occupy hired houses ; even the hospital for the troops is a pri vate house. The contaduria, or treasury, is the only building belonging to the king, and its con struction is far from bespeaking the majesty of its owner. It is not so with the barracks ; they are new, elegantly built, and situate in a spot where the sight breaks upon the city, and arc two stories high, in which they can conveniently lodge 2000 men. They are occupied only by the troops of the line ; the militia having barracks of their own, consisting of a house, at the opposite part of the city. 
15. Archbishopric. Caracas is the seat of the archbishopric of Venezuela, the diocese of which is very extensive, it being bounded on the n. by the sea, from the river Unare to the jurisdiction of Coro ; on the e. by the province of Cumana, on the s. by the Orinoco, and on the w. by the bishopric of Merida. Caracas was erected into an archbishopric in 1803. The annual revenue of the archbishopric depends on the abundance of the harvests and the price of commodities, on which they take the tithes : these tithes are equally divided between the archbishopric, the chapter, the king, and the ministers of religion. The fourth part, belonging to the prelate, amounted on an average, before the war terminated by the treaty of Amiens, to 60,000 dollars per annum. The decrease of cultivation will for a long time pre vent the episcopal revenues amounting to the above sum. Indeed the archbishop does not even enjoy the whole of this fourth part of the tithes, the king having reserved to himself the application of the third of this quarter, and charg ing upon it certain pensions. The seat of this 
archbishopric was established at Coro in 1532, and translated to Caracas in 1636. 
16. Cathedral. The cathedral church does not merit a description but from the rank it holds in the hierarchy ; not but that the interior is deco rated with hangings and gilding, and that the sacerdotal robes and sacred vases are sufficiently splendid, but that its construction, its architec ture, its dimensions, and its arrangements, are void of. majesty and regularity. It is about 250 feet long and 75 broad ; it is low and supported in the interior by 24 pillars in four rows, which run the whole length of the cathedral. The two centre rows form the nave of the church, which is 25 feet broad ; the other two rows divide the aisles at equal distances of 12{ feet, so that the nave alone is of the width of the two aisles, which are on its right and left. The chief altar, instead of being, like the Roman altars, in the centre, is placed against the wall. The choir occupies one half of the nave, and the arrangement of the church is such, that not more than 400 persons can see the officiating priest at whatever altar he may be performing the service. The exterior does not evince any taste or skill in the architect ; the steeple alone, without having received any em bellishment from art, has at least the merit of a boldness to which the cathedral has no pretensions. The only clock in Caracas is in this steeple ; it strikes the quarters, and keeps time pretty well. The humble architecture of the first church in Caracas springs from a source highly honourable to the inhabitants, and which we are therefore bound to relate : The episcopal chair having been translated from Coro to Caracas, (as we have be fore observed), in 1636, there was no necessity until this period for a cathedral in this city ; and when they hud begun to carry into execution a project of erecting a magnificent church, there happened, on llth June 1641, a violent earth quake, which did great damage in the city. This was regarded as an admonition of heaven to make the fabric more capable of resisting this sort of catastrophe, than of attracting the admiration of the curious. From this time, therefore, they no longer thought of, or rather they renounced, all ideas of magnificence, to give the building nothing but solidity. But as they have never since expe rienced any shock of an earthquake, they have resumed the project of building a handsome ca thedral. 
17. Religious customs. The people of Caracas, like all the Spaniards, are proud of being Chris tians, and are very attentive to the duties of re ligion, that is to the mass, days of obligation, to 
|CARACAS 
303 
{"sermons and processions ; but it is worthy of re mark, that they do not admit vespers in the num ber of religious exercises, agreeably to the cus tom of Old Spain and other Catholic countries. It is necessary that the men going to church should wear a cloak or great coat, or that they be dressed in a long coat ; one of these habits is indispensable, neither rank nor colour affording an exemption. 
18. Religious costumes of the women. The dress of the women, whether rich or poor, espe cially of the whites, ought to be altogether black. This dress consists of a petticoat and veil both black ; the slaves alone are obliged to have a white veil. The object of this attire was, that by im posing on the sex a veil, every kind of gallantry and coquetry might be banished from the place of worship, and that by establishing uniformity in dress and colour, the pious might be reminded of the equality of all in the eyes of God. But this dress, which was intended to be the same for every woman, and of a very common stuff, has become most rare and costly, and the gauze veils which the ladies wear, expose all their features and com plexion as far as the eyes. This dress, worn only in sacred duties, is now made of silk or velvet, enriched with handsome lace, which often costs from 400 to 800 dollars. Such as have no means of procuring the customary church dress, are obliged to go to the masses that are said before day-break, and which are called missasde mndrugada, and are performed at these hours only for the convenience of those who are destitute of clothes sufficiently decent to appear at church during the day. 
19. Festivals. The Spaniards have no other festivals but those contained in the Rom" i calen dar. They are so multiplied at Caracas that there are very few days in the year on which they do not celebrate the festival of some saint or virgin in one of the churches of the city. What greatly multiplies the number is, that each festival is pre ceded by nine days of devotion consecrated en tirely to prayers, and followed by eight days, in whicli the faithful of the neighbourhood, and even of the whole city, join to prayers, public amuse ments, such as fire-works, music, bulls, &c. ; but the pleasures of these festivals never extend to the table. Public feasts, so common among all other people, are unknown on such occasions among the Spaniards. These people are sober even in the delirium of pleasure. The most striking part of their festivals is the procession of the saint they celebrate ; they perform this always in the after noon ; the saint, represented by an effigy of human 
2 
stature, is richly dressed ; it is borne on a table handsomely decorated, and followed or preceded by some other saint of the same churchy dressed less sumptuously ; a great number of banners and crosses open the cavalcade; the men walk in two lines ; each of tiie principal persons holds a wax taper, then follow the music, the clergy, the civil officers, and at last the women and a rile of bayonets. The followers are always very numer ous. All the windows in the streets through which the procession passes, are ornamented with floating streamers, which give the whole neigh bourhood an air of festivity and rejoicing. Ihe windows of the French, in particular, are filled with ladies, who repair from all parts of the city to view the agreeable spectacle. But the princi pal and almost exclusive devotion of the Spaniards is to the holy Virgin ; they have her in every church under different denominations, and in every case she has established herself in a man ner more or less miraculous. 
20. The Stage. The sum of the public amuse ments at Caracas is the play-house, at which they perform only on festivals, the price of admission being a real, nearly sixpence English, a sura sufficiently indicating the talents of the actors, and the beauty and convenience of the theatre. All the plays, bad enough in themselves, are yet more miserably performed. The performers of Caracas may be compared to strolling players who live by moving pity rather than by affording amusement; every body must suppose from this description, that an exhibition of this tort is alto gether deserted, but the reader may be assured that the rich and poor, the young and the old, the nobleman and plebeian, the governor and the go verned, all assiduously frequent the theatre. In dependently of three tennis-courts, a few billiardtables in a bad condition, scattered through the city, and which are but rarely frequented, com plete the catalogue of amusements at Caracas. Indeed the Spaniards appear averse to all places of amusement ; they live in their houses as it they were prisons, they never quit them but to goto church, or to fulfil the offices imposed on them by their stations in society. 
21. Inhabitants. The city of Caracas contain ed, according to the clerical census of 1802, 31,234 souls, and in 1806 they exceeded 40,000. This population is classed into whites, slaves, freed people, and a very few Indians. The first form almost a fourth part of the amount, the slaves a third part, the Indians a twentieth part, and the freed men the remainder. In the white popula tion there are six Castillian titles, three marquisses, 
&gt; O3" f - / 
f v-
-r, ht .t u K *
&gt;# 
304 
|CARACAS. 
and f h rce counts. All the whites pretend to be noble, and nearly one third of them are acknowledged to be so. The whites are all either planters, merchants, soVdiers, priests, monks, financiers, or lawyers. A Spanish white person, especially a Creole, however poor he may be, thinks it the greatest disgrace to labour as a mechanic. The Europeans in Caracas form at least two very distinct classes ; the first com prises those who come from Spain with appoint ments ; the second those actuated by industry and a spirit of enterprise, and who emigrate to acquire wealth; the greater pnrt of these come from Cata lonia and Biscay ; their views arc purely mercan tile. Both Catalonians and Biscay ans are dis tinguished among their fellow-citizens by the good faith they observe in their business, and by their punctuality in their payments. The former class, the European placemen, are most obnoxious to the Creoles, and these are in point of ability and edu cation almost always the superiors. The Spa niards from the Canary islands, who arc impelled by want, rather than fired by ambition, to quit their native soil and to establish themselves at Ca racas, import with them the united industry of the Catalonians and Biscayans. Their genius assimilates more to that of the latter than to that of the former ; but, in fine, both are useful citizens, like all who strive by honest means to gain their livelihood, am! who are not ashamed to prove by example, that man is born to labour. The women of Caracas are agreeable, sensible, and engaging ; lew of them are fair, but they have jet black hair, with complexions as clear as alabaster ; their eyes are large, well set, and lovely, whilst the car nation of their lips marks a health and vigour of constitution. There are a very few, however, above the middle size, whilst there are a great many under ; and their feet too are rarely hand some. As they pass a great part of their lives at their windows, it may be said that they are soli citous to display that in which nature has most favoured them . There are no female schools here ; the women therefore learn nothing but what their parents teach them, which is confined, in many cases, to praying, reading badly, and writing worse ; it is difficult for any but an inspired lover to read their scrawl. They have neither dancing, drawing, nor music masters ; all they learn of these accomplishments is to play a few airs on the guitar and pianoforte ; there nre but a very few who understand the rudiments of music. But in spite of this want of education, the ladies of Ca racas know very well how to unite social manners with politeness, and the art of coquetry with femiaine mod-esty. This is, however, a picture only 
of those women whose husbands or fathers possess large fortunes or lucrative places ; for that part of the female sex who arc doomed to procure their own livelihood, seldom know of any other means of existence than the public prostitution of their virtue: about 200 of these poor creatures pass their days in rags and tatters in the ground-floors of houses, and stroll out only at night to procure the pittance for their next day s fare ; their dress is a white petticoat and cloak, with a pasteboard bonnet covered with lustring, to which they at tach a bunch of artificial flowers and tinsel. The same dress often serves in one evening for two or three of these unhappy beings. The class of do mestic slaves is considerable at Caracas, since a person believes himself rich only in proportion to the number of slaves he has in his house. In ge neral, four times more servants are kept than are ne cessary, for this is thought an effectual metfiod of concealing poverty. Thus a white woman goes to mass with two Negro or Mulatto women in her train, without having an equal value in any other species of property. Those who are reputedly rich, are followed by four or five servants, whilst as many attend every white person of the same family going to another church. Some houses at Caracas contain 12 or 15 servants, without count ing the footmen in attendance on the men. 
22. Freed persons. Probably there is not a city throughout all the West Indies that has so great a proportion, with respect to other classes, of enfranchised persons and their descendants, as Caracas ; they carry on all the trades which the whites disdain. Every carpenter, joiner, mason, blacksmith, locksmith, tailor, shoemaker, and goldsmith, &c. is or has been an enfranchised slave; they do not excel in any of these trades, because in learning them mechanically they al ways err in the principle : moreover, indolence, which is so natural to them, extinguishes that emulation to which the arts owe all their progress. However, their masonry and their carpentry are sufficiently correct, but the joiner s art is yet in its infancy. They work very little; and what appears rather contradictory is, that they work much cheaper than the European artists ; in ge neral, burdened with families, they live heaped up together in poor houses, and in the midst of priva tions : In this state of poverty, to employ them, you must afford an immediate advance of money. The blackstnith never has coals nor fire. The carpenter is always without wood even for a table ; even the wants of their families must be administer ed to by the employer. In fine, the predominant passion among this class of people is to consume 
|CARACAS. 
305 
t.I*eir lives in the exercises of devotion ,and they are tond of forming themselves into religious societies; indeed there are few churches that have not one or two of these fraternities, composed entirely of en franchised slaves. Every one has its uniform, differing from the other only in colour. 
23. C ti verstti/. The education of the youth of Caracas and oi the whole archbishopric is entirely in a college and an university united together. The foundation of the college preceded that of the university by more than 60 years. This institu tion originated in the piety and care of bishop A. Gonzales de Acuna, who died in 16S2. At first nothing was taught lirre but Latin, with the ad dition of scholastic philosophy and theology. It Jbas now a reading and a writing school ; three Latin schools, in one of which they profess rhetoric ; two professors of philosophy, one of which is a lay or secular priest, and the other a Dominican ; four professors of theology, two for school divinity, one for ethics, and another for positive divinity, the last of which ought always to be a Dominican ; a professor of civil law ; a professor of canon law ; a professor of medicine. The university and col lege of Caracas have only a capital of 47,748 dol lars and 6| reals, put out at interest, and produc ing annually 2387 dollars, 3| reals: this sum pays the 12 professors. All the ranks of bachelor, licentiate, and doctor, are granted at the univer sity. The first is given by the rector, the two others by the chancellor, who is also endowed with the quality of schoolmaster. The oath of each rank is to maintain the immaculate conception, not to teach nor practise regicide or tyrannicide, and to defend the doctrine of St. Thomas. In this col lege and university there were, in 1802, 64 boarders, and 402 students not boarders, viz. 
In the lower classes, comprising rhetoric, 
Philosophy 
Theology 
j 
,t.&gt; 
Canon and civil law 
Physic t , 
In the school of sacred music 
466 
24. Police. The Spaniards of Caracas, of all people in the world, stand least in need of a police to preserve public tranquillity. Their natural so briety, and more especially their phlegmatic dis position, render quarrels and tumults very rare among them. Here there is never any noise in the streets ; every body in them is silent, dull, and grave ; 300 or 400 people coming out of a church make no more noise than a tortoise moving along the sand. But if the magistrate has nothing 
|VOL. I. 
to fear from open crimes, he has so much the more to apprehend from assassinations, thefts, frauds, and treachery. The Spaniard is far from exempt from that vindictive spirit, which is the more dangerous as it seeks its revenge only in the dark; and from that rancour which veils itself w ith the mask of friendship to procure an oppor tunity of gratifying its vengeance. A person who from his station and condition has no chance of revenging himself, save by his own hands, exhi bits very little or no passion when he receives the offence ; but from that instant he watches the op portunity, which he seldom suffers to escape him, of plunging a poniard in the heart of his enemy. The Spaniards from the province of Andalucia are particularly branded with this criminal habit. We are assured that these unfortunate events were un known here before the year 1778, at which time the liberty of trading with the province of Vene zuela, which was beibrc exclusively granted to the company of Guipuscoa, was extended to all the ports of Spain, and drew a number of Spaniards to Caracas from every province, and particularly from Uiat of Andalucia. It is true that almost ail assassinations that happen at Caracas are perpe trated by the Europeans : those that can be laid to the charge of the Creoles are most rare. But all the thefts are committed by the whites or pre tended whites of the country, and the enfranchised persons. False measures, false weights, changing of commodities and provisions, are likewise fre quent practices ; because they are looked upon less as acts of dishonesty than as proofs of an ad dress of which they are proud. However great may be the occupation of the police, it is certain many things call loudly upon their attention. It will hardly be believed that the city of Caracas, the capital of the province, and able to supply horned cattle to all the foreign possessions in America, is many days in the year itself in want of butcher s meat. The residence of a captaingeneral, the seat of an archbishop, of a royal audi ence, and of the principal tribunals of appeal, with a population of more than 40,000 souls, and, in short, with a garrison of 1000 men, experience famine in the midst of abundance. If filth does not accumulate in the streets, it is owing to the frequency of the rains, and not to the care of the police ; for they are never washed but in honour of some procession. Such streets as procession* do not pass through are covered with an herb like the weed on ponds, the panicum dactylum of Linnaeus. Mendicity, which is in almost every other country the province of the police, appear* to bo unnoticed by it in Caracas. The streets are 
R K 
306 
|CARACAS. 
crowded with poor of both sexes, -who have no other subsistence than what they derive from alms, and who prefer these means of living to that of labour. It is feared that the indiscriminate cha rity exhibited here is productive of the worst ef fects ; that it affords to vice the means of remain ing vicious. The police are indeed acquainted with these abuses, but cannot repress them without the imputation of impiety. To form a correct idea of the number of mendicants that wander in the streets, it is but necessary to know that the arch bishop distributes generally alms every Saturday ; that each mendicant receives a half-escalin, or l-16th of a dollar; and that at each of these pious distributions there is given a sum of from 75 or 76 dollars, which should make the number of beggars at least 1200 ; and in this list are not included those who are ashamed to beg publicly, and to whom the worthy prelate D. Francis d r lbarra, a Creole of Caracas, distributes certain revenues in secret. The cabildo, composed of 22 members, and se conded by the alcaldes de barrio, who are magis trates distributed throughout the wards of the city, A?ould be more than sufficient to manage the af fairs of the police ; but the presence of the higher authorities, who wish to share the prerogatives of command, has made a division of all matters of police between the governor, the lieutenant-go vernor, and a member of the audience, who, under the title of judge of the province, exercises its func tions in conjunction with the authorities just men tioned. 
25. Communications with the interior. Caracas, the centre of all the political, judicial, fiscal, mili tary, commercial, and religious concerns of its de pendencies, is also naturally that of all the com munication in the interior. The roads are almost every where just traced, and nothing more. The mud and overflowing of the rivers, over which there are neither bridges nor passage-boats, render them impracticable in the rainy season ; and in no part of the year are they convenient. They count the distance by a day s journey, and not by leagues : but a fair computation of a day s journey is 10 leagues, of 2000 geometrical paces each. The orders transmitted by the governor to the several towns of the interior arrive there by express, and communications of whatever nature are returned by the same means. There are no regular couriers setting out from the capital, excepting for Maracaibo, Puerto Cabello, Sante Fe, Cumana, and Gnayana. All the towns situate on the roads to these four chief places enjoy the advantages of a post. The courier for Maracaibo sets out from Caracas -every Thursday evening at six o*clock ; 
it carries the letters of Victoria, Tulmeco, Mamcay, Valencia, St. Philip, Puerto C;ibello, and Coro ; it is 10 days going from Caracas to Mara caibo, and arrives from Maracaibo at Caracas only every 15lh day, but from Puerto Cabello every Tuesday. On the 6th and 22d of each month, a courier sets out from Caracas for Santa Fe ; it carries the letters of San Carlos, Guanare, Araux, Toe ay o, iJarquisimeto, Barinas, Merida, Carta gena, Santa Marta, and Pern; and arrives, orought to arrive, the 4th and 20th of each month ; it is generally 42 days in going from Caracas to Santa Fe. The courier of Cumana and Guayana arrives at Caracas once a month ; it proceeds, or stops, according to the state of the roads and rivers. Five days after its arrival at Caracas it sets out again. The letters for Guayana go directly from Barcelona by a courier; and those for Cumana and Margarcta by another. This arrives at Us place of destination in 12 days, and that of Guayana in 30 days. 
26. With Spain. The official letters from Spain arrive at Caracas every month. A king s packet sails on one of the first three days of each month from Coruna, touches at the Canaries to leave their letters, then sails for the Havanah, and leaves in its way to Puertorico the letters addressed as well for that island as for tlie government of Caracas. The latter are immediately forwarded by one of the little vessels kept for this service. During war Hie mail from Spain, instead of touch ing at Puertorico, leaves the letters for Caracas and its dependencies at Cumana, and those for the kingdom of Santa Fe at Cartagena, and finally al ways proceeds to the Havanah, from whence its departure for Spain is regular and periodical. The answers from Caracas, even those that are of ficial, are sent to Spain by the merchant vessels which sail from Guaira to Cadiz. 
27. Geographical and statistical notices of the captainship-general of Caracas, and present his tory. Depons Voyage to the e. part of Tierra Firme, or the Spanish main, in S. America, com prises an ample description of this region; and is the principal authority for the anterior and subse quent notices. This territory is situate between the 12th degree of n. latitude and the equinoctial. It comprehends 
Venezuela, containing 500,000 inhabitants Maracaibo, 100,000 
Cumana, 80,000 
Spanish Guayana, 34,000 Isle of Margareta, 14,000 
728,000 
|CARACAS. 
507 
f Of the population two tenths are -whites, three slaves, four freedmen and their descendants, and the remainder Indians. There is scarcely any emi gration from Spain to Tierra Firme. The govern ment of Caracas, like that of other parts of Spanish America, is so constituted as to keep it dependent on the parent country. The governor or captaingeneral represents the monarch, and commands the military force,. There are delegated governors, who have each an assessor: the royal audience of Caracas consists of a president, who is the captaingeneral, a regent, three judges, two fiscals, one for criminal affairs, the other for the finances, with a reporter and other necessary officers. It adminis ters justice, regulates the finances, and has other freat prerogatives. The naval force of Tierra irme is trifling, and could not resist a single frigate. Several sea-ports have fortresses. Maracaibo has 25,000 inhabitants, is defended by three forts and four companies of troops of the line, and a propor tion of militia. The haven or port of Coro, called La Vela de Coro, sixteen leagues e. of Maracaibo, had at the time of General Miranda s expedition in 1806, two batteries with 15 or 18 pieces of cannon of various calibres from six to 18 pounders. Puerto Cabello, 58 leagues to the e. of Coro, has a strong fort with a large and numerous artillery. In time of war it is supplied with two companies of regular troops. In case of attack, says Depons, 3000 militia might be collected here in eight days. La Guaira, the haven of Caracas, 25 leagues to the e. of Puerto Cabello, is very strongly fortified. Cumana, 100 leagues e. of La Guaira, is of difficult access, has a fort, and might collect a force of 5000 men. The island of Margareta, four leagues n. of Cuniana, has trifling batteries, one company of re gular troops, one of artillery, and several of militia. Thus it appears the strong places are distant from each other 60 or 100 leagues ; hence it is observed, a debarkation on the coast might easily be effected in various places, and the troops proceed into the country, whilst the ships, by attacking the forts, would distract the military operations. The mili tary force, as stated by Depons, is a regiment of reliar troops of 918 men, distributed at Caracas, a Guaira, and Puerto Cabello : 400 troops of the line are at Maracaibo, at Cumana J50, at Guiana 150, and at Barinas 77. The artillery at the re spective places is served by separate companies besides militia ; the whole armed force of the cap tainship-general, regular troops and militia, is stated at 13,059. There is no religion but the lioman Catholic. To be suspected of heresy is dangerous ; to be convicted, fatal. The tribunals of the inquisition are erected at Mexico, Lima, and Carta 
gena, and are very powerful. They prohibit bad books to the number of 5420. Spanish America abounds in priests, who are held in great respect ; the missionaries are numerous ; the churches are decent and often elegant Tbe tithes are paid, one tenth part to the king, one fourth to the bishop, one fourth to the chapter, and remainder to the parish priests and to other pious uses. The income of the bishop of Caracas is 40,000 dollars. The produc tions of this region are cco, coffee, sugar, indigo, and tobacco. Besides the present products, there is a great variety of others which the soil offers to the inhabitants, without requiring any advance, or subjecting them to any trouble, but that of collect ing and bestowing on them a light and easy pre paration. Among these Depons mentions vat/nUla
 wild cochineal, dyeing woods and barks, gums, rosin, and medical oils, herbs, roots and bark for medicine. From this country half Europe might be supplied with wood for its furniture and cabinet work. Commerce might draw much from the ani mal kingdom. The neat cattle are calculated at 1,200,000 ; horses and mares 180,000 ; and mules at 90,000 ; sheep are innumerable, and deer abun dant : notwithstanding this abundance, agriculture is at a low ebb in this country. La Guaira, Puerto Cabello, Maracaibo, Cumana, Barcelona, and Margareta, havearight to trade with themother country. In 1796 the imports from Spain to Ca racas were estimated at 3, 1 18,81 1
 dollars, and the exports at 283,316 dollars. There is a limited trade to the other colonies, which brings about 400,000 dollars into the country. It exports to foreign West India islands articles of its own pro duce, except cacao, in neutral bottoms ; part of the returns must be in Negroes or in farming or house hold utensils, and the remainder in specie. But this remainder is principally smuggled in manu factured goods. The contraband trade, divided chiefly between Jamaica, Curacao, and Trinidad, was estimated at 750,000 dollars annually before the war of 1796. It has increased greatly since that period. The whole regular exports of Ca racas from 1793 to 1796 are stated at 12,252,415 dollars ; from 1797 to 1800, 6,442,318 dollars. The finances of Caracas are under the direc tion of an intendant. The revenue arises prin cipally from the customs, a duty of five per cent, on sales from stamps, licences, and tithes, and from the produce of the cruzada and of the sale of tobacco. The two last are destined for the treasury at home. There is usually a deficit, even in time of peace; in 1797 the receipt was 1,147,788 dol lars ; expenditure, 1,886,363. According to Humboldt, the dollars imported into Caracas inl a a 2 
308 
|CAR 
1803 amounted to 5,500,000, and the exports con sisted of produce to the value of 4, 000 ,000 dollars, lie also states the population in 1808 at 900,000 souls. The receipts of Caracas, Guatemala, and Chile, are consumed within the country. The population of some of the chief cities is thus stated ; Caracas 40,000, La Guaira 6000, Puerto Cabello 7600, Coro 10,000. The harbour, or La Vela de Coro, as it is commonly called, and its environs, are supposed to contain not less than 2000. In 1797 three state prisoners \vere sent from Spain to Ca racas, on account of their revolutionary propensi ties. Being treated with great indulgence by the officers and soldiers to whose care they were com mitted, they formed the project of a conspiracy against the government. They engaged a number of persons, some of them of consequence, in their party. After gaining their first converts, the spirit did not spread. The coldness and apathy of the people did not admit of the effervescene they de sired. After the plot had been kept a secret for many months it was disclosed to the government. Some of the ringleaders escaped, and others were taken. It was found that seventy-two had entered into the conspiracy ; six were executed. The rest either escaped, or were sent to the galleys or banished from the country. For an account of the recent revolution in Caracas, see VHNBZUELA. 
|CARACAS, some islands of the N. sea near the coast of the kingdom of Tierra Firme, in the pro vince and government of Cumana. They are six in number, all small and desert, serving as places of shelter to the Dutch traders, who carry on an illicit commerce on that coast. 
|CARACAS, a small port of the coast of Tierra Firme, in the province and government of Vene zuela, between the capital and cape Codera. 
|CARACHE, a settlement of the province and government of Maracaibo, situate n. of the city of Truxillo, on the shore of a small river which enters the Matazan. 
|CARACHIS, SAN CARLOS DE, a settlement of the province and country of the Amazonas ; a re duction of the missions which belonged to the abo lished order of the Jesuits. It is at the mouth of the river Huerari, where this enters the Maranon. 
|CARACOA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Parinacoche in Peru, where there is a spring of warm medicinal water. 
|CARACOL, Port, on the coast of the S. sea, and of the province and government of Panama ; it is near the point of Garachine, behind mountZapo. 
|CARACOLI, a port of the coast of the kingdom of Tierra Firme, and of the province and govern ment of Venezuela, to the w. of cape Codera. 
|CAR 
|CARACOLT, a bay formed by the s. coast, in the province and government of Darien, of the kingdom of Tierra Firme ; it lies at the back of point Gara chine. 
|CARACOLI, a settlement of the province and government of Carta-gena, situate on the shore of the Rio Grande de la Magdalena, and on the . of the town of Maria. 
|CARACOLLO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Oruro in Peru, eight leagues dis tant from its capital. 
|CARACOTO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Lampa in Peru. 
|CARACOTO, another, in the province and corregi miento of Sicasica in the same kingdom. 
|CARAGAIAS, a town of the island of Cuba, situate on the n. coast between Cadiz and Nizao. 
|CARAGUATAI, a river of the province and government of Buenos Ayres; it runs s. s. w. and enters the Ayum or Yumeri. 
|CARAGUET, a small river of Nova Scotia or Acadia ; it runs e. and enters the sea in the gulf of St. Lawrence, opposite the island of its name. 
|CARAHUACRA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Huarochiri in Peru; annexed to the curacy of Yauli. 
|CARAIBAMBA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Aimaraez in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Chalvanca. 
|CARAIMA ALT A, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Quillota in the kingdom of Chile ; situate on the coast between point Caraimilla and point Perm Blanca. 
|CARAIMILLA, a settlement on the coast of the province and corregimiento aforementioned, between point Caraima Alta, and the isle of Obispo. 
|CARAMA, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Antioquia in the new kingdom of Granada. 
|CARAMANTA, a city of the province and go vernment of Antioquia in the new kingdom of Granada ; founded by Sebastian de Benalcazar in 1543, near the river Cauca. Its temperature is hot and unhealthy, but it is fertile in maize, vege tables, grain, and abounds with herds of swine : near it are many small rivers which enter the Cauca, and some salt pits of the whitest salt. On the mountains within its jurisdiction, are some settle ments of barbarian Indians very little known. This city is indifferently peopled, and is 65 leagues dis tant to the n. e. of Popayan, and 50 from Antio quia. Long. 75 33 w. Lat. 5 58 n. 
|CARAMATIBA, a settlement of the province and captainship of Rio Grande in Brazil ; situate on the shore of the river Carabatang. 2 
|CAR 
|CARAMBAB A, a settlement of the province and captains/lip of Para in Brazil; situate at the mouth or the river Tocantines. 
|CARAMPANGUE, a river of the province and corrcgixiiento of Quillota in the kingdom of Chile ; it runs n. n. w. near the coast, and enters the se?i&gt; between the rivers Laraquite and Tibul. At its entrance the Spaniards have the fort of Arauco. 
|CARAMPOMA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Huarochiri in Peru. 
|CAR AN DA I TI, a river of the province and go vernment of Paraguay ; it enters the head of the Uruguay, between the Pirati and Uruguaypita. 
|CARANGAS, a province and corregimiento of Peru, bounded on the n. by the province of Pacages, e. by Paria, s. by Lipes, and w. by Arica ; it is 3(&gt; leagues in length, n. to s. and 30 in width at the most. Its climate is extremely cold and subject to winds, so that it produces no other fruits than such as are found upon the sierra. It has considerable breeds of cattle both of the large and small kindjhuacanos, sheep peculiar to the country, called llamas, and no small quantity of vicunas; also in that part which borders upon the province of Pacages are some herds of swine. Its silver mines are much worked, and of these the most esteemed is that called Turco, in which is found the metal n.azizo. Towards the tc. are some un peopled sandy plains, in which pieces of silver are frequently found, commonly called papas ; of these, lumps have been picked of such a size as to weigh 150 marks. It is watered by some streams, but by no considerable rivers : the corregidor used here to have a repartimiento of 540,526 dollars, and it used to pay annually 4o6 dollars for alcava/a. The inhabitants, who are almost all Indians, amount to 1100, and they are divided into 25 settlements. The capital is Tarapaca, and the others are, Turco, Core, 
Cosapa, Tunquiri, 
Turquiri, Chipaya, 
Chiliahua, Andamarca, 
Carahuara, Orinoca, 
Totora, Belen, 
Huaillamarca, Huachacalla, 
Llanquera, Iscara, 
Chuquicota, Sabaya, 
Chuquichambi, Asiento de Carangas, 
Undavi, Riberade Todos Santos. 
Corquemar, Negrillo. 
San Miguel, 
|CARANGAS, ASIENTO DE, belonging to the bishopric of Charcas, and a settlement of the afore said province, having formerly been its capital, where were kept the royal coffers, and where the 
|CAR 
corregidor used to reside, until they were removed to Tarapaca, at 30 leagues distance. It thus be
 came reduced to a scanty population of Indians, annexed to the curacy of Huachacalla. 
|CARANGUES, formerly a barbarous nation of Indians, to the n. of the kingdom of Quito; the district of which at present belongs to the coiregimie-nto of the town of Ibarra, where, on a large plain, are still to be seen the ruins of a magnificent palace which belonged to the Incas : in its vici nity is a settlement called Carangui, distant 23 leagues s. of the town of Ibarra. 
|CAIIANGUKS, with the dedicatory title of St. An tonio, another settlement of the same province and corregimiento
 situate in the road which leads down from Popayan. 
|CARAJNIA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Yauyos in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Laraos. 
|CARANKOUAS, Indians of N. America, who live on an island or peninsula in the bay of St. Bernard, in length about 10 miles, and five in breadth ; the soil here is extremely rich and plea sant ; on one side of which there is a high bluff, or mountain of coal, which has been on fire for many years, affording always a light at night, and a strong thick smoke by day, by which vessels are sometimes deceived and lost on the shoal ly coast, which shoals are said to extend nearly out of sight of land. From this burning coal, there is emitted a gummy substance the Spaniards call chcta
 which is thrown on the shore by the surf, and collected by them in considerable quantities, which they are fond of chewing ; it has the appearance and con sistence of pitch, of a strong, aromatic, and not disagreeable smell. These Indians are irreconcileable enemies to the Spaniards, always at war with them, and kill them whenever they can. The Spaniards call them cannibals, but the PVench give them a different character, who have always been treated kindly by them since Mons. de Salle and his party were in their neighbourhood. They are said to be 500 men strong, but we have not been able to estimate their numbers from any very accu rate information. They speak the Attakapo lan guage ; are friendly and kind to all other Indians, and, we presume, are much like all others, notwith standing what the Spaniards say of them. 
|CARANQUE, an ancient province of the Indians, in the kingdom of Quito, towards the n. From the same race is at the present day composed the town of St. Miguel de Ibarra. The natives rose against the Inca Huaina Capac, but he succeeded in reducing them to obedience by force of arms, causing the authors and accomplices of the ins ur
310 
|CAR 
reel ion to be drowned in the lake Yaguarcocha, which from thence takes its name, and signifies the lake of blood, with which it was quite polluted ; the Indians stating, according to their traditions, that no less than 20,000 people were thus sacri ficed. Part of this province is at present compre hended in that of Ibarra, and part in that of Otavalo. 
|CARAP, a small river of the province and go vernment of Guayana. It rises between the Acamon and the Agualey, and taking its course be tween these two, enters the Caroni on the e. side. 
|CARAPAICURA, a small river of the province and government of Cumana. It rises in the serrania of Imataca, runs s. and enters the Cuyuni on the n. side. 
|CARAPANATUBA, a river of the province of Guayana, in the part belonging to the Portuguese. It runs s. s. e. and enlers the mouth of the Maraiion before you come to the town and fort of Macapa. 
|CARAPATO, a river of the province and corregimienlo of Sicasica. It is but small, rises to the w. of the settlement of Caracoto, runs . and enters the Chuquiavo. 
|CARAPEGUA V, a parish of the province and government of Paraguay, situate near a small river, 11 leagues s.e. of Asuncion. Lat. 25 45 31" *. Long. 57 16 56* w. 
|CARAPO, a settlement of the province of Guay ana, and government of Cumana, one of those be longing to the missions of the Catalanian Capuchin fathers. 
|CARAPO, a river of the province and goTernment of San Juan de ios Llanos in the new kingdom of Granada ; it rises in the country of the Chiricoas Indians, runs n. and enters the Meta. 
|CARAPU, a small river of the province and go vernment of Guayana ; it rises near the lake Jeupa, runs from s. to n. and enters the Paragua. 
(
|ARAPUCHO, MORIIO DK, a mountain on the coast of Peru, in the province and corregi miento of Carangas. 
|CARAQUES, Bay of, on the S. sea-coast, and in the province and government of Guayaquil. It is close to cape Pasao, and near the equinoctial line. There was a settlement here, bearing the same name, the ruins of which are still visible. 
|CARAQUET, a small island of the gulf of St. Lawrence, on the coast of Nova Scotia or Arca dia, by the Orphan s bank. 
|CARARA, a small river of the province and captainship of Para in Brazil; it runs n. and en ters the sea between the settlemeut of Senaraboca and the island of San Juan. 
|CAR 
|CAR ARE, a large river of the new kingdom of Granada. It rises in the valley of Alferez, to the if. of the city of Tunja, runs from*, tow. and join ing the Zarbe, enters the large river of Magdaiena. On the c. side, near the narrow pass which forms its shores, the French have constructed a fort to guard against invasion from the infidel Indians. 
|CARARI, a strait of the large river Magdaiena, formed by great rocks. There was formerly here a fort, which has been moved to a place at some little distance. The course of the waters in the above strait is so rapid as to render it sometimes impossible for vessels and canoes to pass through it* 
|CARAS, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Caxatarnbo in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Andajes. 
|CARASA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Cochabamba in Peru. 
|CARASANI, a settlement of the province and corregntiento of Larecaja in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Combaya. 
|CAIIATE, a small island of the S. sea, near the coast. 
|CARATES, a river of the province and go vernment of Maracaibo. It rises in the mountains of Lonia, runs s. w. and after many windings, enters the great lake of Maracaibo. 
|CARAVELAS, Mouth of the, the entrance of a bay on the n. coast of the island of Cuba. 
|CARAUELE, Point of the, an extremity of the coast looking to the e. in the island of Marti nique, one of those two which run into the sea in the above direction. 
|CAUAUKLE, a small island of the N. sea, situate near the n. e. coast of the island of Martinique, on the n. side of Garaucle point. 
|CARAUELI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Cumana in Peru. 
|CARAUELLES, a river of the province and captainship of Puerto Seguro in Brazil. It rises at the foot of the sierra Fria, and describing a small circle, runs .?. e. and according to Cruz, e. and enters the sea opposite the island of Pajaros. 
|CARAZ, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Huailas in Peru. 
|CARBET, a settlement of the island of Mar tinique, one of the Antilles ; situate on the n. t. coast, with a good port. It was a curacy of the regular order of Jesuits, now abolished. 
|CARBET, two very high mountains of the above island. They are full of sharp points similar to those on Montserrat in Cateluna. They are near the coast, lying towards the n. w. part; and the French call them Pitons de Carbet. 
|CARBET, a point on the e. coast of the island 
|CAR 
of Guadalupe, between the Three Rivers and the A gujero del Perro. 
|CAKBET Point, on the s, coast of lake Superior, in New France, opposite the island of Pliilipeau.v. 
|CARBET, a river of the island of Guadalupp, which runs nearly e. and enters tiie sea between the Grande and the Orange. 
|CARBON, Island of, situate in the middle of a lake on the coast of the province and govern ment of Buenos Ayres. 
|CARBOV, MONTH UE, a settlement of the pro vince and correginriento of Puchacay in the king dom of Chile ; situate upon the coast and on the shore of the bay of Culumo, near the mouth of the river Biobio. 
|CARBON IE RE, a settlement of the island of Newfoundland, situate on the e. coast, on the shore of the bay of Concepeion. 
|CARCAI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Lucanas in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Soras. It has a hot spring of water of very medicinal properties, and its heat is so great that an egg may be boiled in it in an instant. 
|CARCARANAL, a river of the province and government of Buenos Ayres. It rises in the pro vince of Tucuman, in the mountains of the city of Cordoba, runs nearly from e, to w. with the name of Tercero, and changing it into Carcaranal, after it becomes united with the Saladillo, joins the Plata, and enters the Salado and the Tres Hermanas. 
|CARCAZT, a settlement of the government and jurisdiction of Pamplona in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, situate between two mountains, which cause its temperature to be very moderate. It pro duces much wheat and maize ; in its cold parts such fruits as are peculiar to that climate, and in the milder parts sugar-cane. Its neighbourhood abounds with flocks of goats ; and the number of inhabitants may amount to about 200 Spaniards and SO Indians. It is situate on the confines which divide the jurisdictions of Tunja and Pamplona. 
|CARCHIPOR, a river of the province and go vernment of Cayenne in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. It rises in the mountains of the same pro vince, and runs into the sea on the side of cape Orange. 
|CARDIGAN, about 20 miles e. of Dartmouth college, New Hampshire. The township of ORANGE once bore this name, which see. 
|CARDIN, a settlement of the province of Ve nezuela and government of Maracaibo, situate on the shore of the coast, in the interior of the gulf formed by the peninsula of cape San Roman. 
|CAR 
311 
|CARDINALES, SOMBREROS DE. See article 
PlTANGOAS. 
|CARDOSO, REAL DE, a settlement and real of gold mines in the province and caplanship of Todos Santos in Brazil; situate on the shore of 
which runs w. and enters the Ohio. 
|CAREN, a valley or meadow-land of the king dom of Chile, renowned for its pleasantness, beauty, and extent, being five leagues in length ; also lor a fountain of very delicate and salutary water, which, penetrating to the soil in these parts, ren ders them so exceedingly porous, that a person tread ing somewhat heavily seems to shake the ground under him. There is an herb found here that keeps green all the year round : it is small, resembling trefoil, and the natives call it cartn : it is of a very agreeable taste, and gives its name to the valley. 
|CARENERO, a bay of the coast of the king dom of Tierra Firme in the province and govern ment of Venezuela. It is extremely convenient for careening and repairing ships, and from this circumstance it takes its name. It lies behind cape Codera towards the e. 
|CARET, ANSE DE, a bay of the island of St. Christopher, one of the Antilles, on the n. e. coast, and in the part possessed by the French before they ceded the island to the Englissh. It is be tween the bays of Fontaine and Morne, or Fuente and Morro. 
|CARETI, a river of the province and govern ment of Darien, and kingdom of Tierra Firme. It rises in the n. mountains, and enters the sea in the bay of Mandinga. 
|CAREU, a settlement of the island of Barbadoes, in the district of the parish of Christen nrch. 
|CARGONACHO, a settlement of the province and cor regimiento of Castro Vireyna in Peru ; an nexed to the curacy of Philpichaca. 
|CARG UAIRASO, a lofty mountain and vol cano of the province and corregimiento of Riobamba in the kingdom of Quito. It is in the dis trict of the asiento of Ambato, covered with snow the whole year round. Its skirts are covered with fine crops of excellent barley. In 1698 this pro vince was visited by a terrible earthquake, which opened the mountain and let in a river of mud, formed by the snows which were melted by the fire of the volcano, and by the ashes it threw up. So dreadful wen- the effects of this revolution that the whole of the crops were completely spoiled ; and it was in vain that the cattle endeavoured to 
312 
|GAR 
escape the destruction which followed them whereevcr they fled. Still are the vestiges of this cala mity to be seen, and there are large quantities of this mud or lava, now become hard, scattered on the s. side of the settlement. 
|CARHUA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Canta in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of its capital. 
|CARII UACA IAN, a settlement of the same pro vince and corregimiento as the former ; annexed to the curacy of Pomacocha. 
|CARHUA CALLAISGA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Jauja in Peru ; an nexed to the curacy of Chongos. 
|CARHUACUCIIO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Lucanas in Peru ; an nexed to the curacy of Laramate. 
|CARHUAMAIO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Tarma in Peru. 
|CARhLAPAMPA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of liuarochiri in Peru; an nexed to the curacy of Lorenzo de Quinti. 
|CAUIIUAPAMPA, anotlier settlement of the pro vince and corregimienlo of Cajatambo in the same kingdom ; annexed to the curacy of Hacas. 
|CARIIUAZ, a settlement of the province and correoimiento of Huailas in Pern. 
|CARI, a river of the province and government of Cumnna in the kingdom of Ticrra Firme. It rises in the Mesa (Table-land) de Guanipa, and runs s. being navigable to the centre of the pro vince, and enters the Orinoco near the narrow part. 
|CARI, a settlement of the same province; one of those under the care of the religious order of S. Francisco, missionaries of Piritu. It is situate on the shore of the former river. 
|CARIAI, a small river of the country of the Amazonas, in the part possessed by the Portuguese. It is by no means a considerable stream, runs n. and enters the Xingu. 
|CARI A CO, a large gulf of the coast of Tierra Firrne, in the province and government of Cumamu It is also called, OfCumanii, from this capital being built upon its shores. The bay runs 10 or 12 leagues from a), to e. and is one league broad at its widest part. It is from 80 to 100 fathoms deep, and the waters are so quiet as to resemble rather the waters of a lake than those of the ocean. It is surrounded by the serranias
 or lofty chains of mountains, which shelter it from all winds ex cepting that of the n. e. which, blowing on itas it were through a straitened and narrow passage, js accustomed to cause a swell, especially from 10 
in the morning until five in the evening, after which all becomes calm. Under the above circumstances, the larger vessels ply to windward ; and if the wind be very strong, they come to an anchor on the one or other coast, and wait till the evening, when the land breezes spring up from the s. e. In this gulf there are some good ports and bays, viz. the lake of Obispo, of Juanantar, of Gurintar, and others. 
|CARIACO, a river of the same province and go vernment, taking its rise from many streams and rivulets which rise in the sermnia
 and unite be. fore they flow into the valley of the same name. Alter it has run some distance over the plain, it is cut off to water some cacao plantations, and then empties itself into the sea through the former gulf. In the winter great part of the capital, which i* situate upon its banks, is inundated, and the river is then navigated by small barks or barges ; but in the summer it becomes so dry that there is scarce* ly water sufficient to navigate a canoe. 
|CARIACO, a small city of the same province, situate on the shore of the gulf. [This city (ac cording to Depons) bears, in the official papers and in the courts of justice, the name of San Fe lipe de Austria. The population is only 6500, but every one makes such a good use of his time as to banish misery from the place. The produc tion most natural to the soil is cotton, the beauty of which is superior to that of all Tierra Firme. This place alone furnishes annually more than 3000 quintals ; and besides cacao they grow a little sugar. Lat. 10 SO 1 n. Long. 65 39 OL 
|CARIACOU is the chief of the small isles de pendent on Granada island in the West Indies ; situate four leagues from isle Rhonde, which is a like distance from the n. end of Granada. It con tains C915 acres of fertile and well cultivated land, producing about 1,000,000 Ibs. of cotton, be sides corn, yams, potatoes, and plaintains for the Negroes. It has two singular plantations, a
d a town called Hillsborough.~\ 
|CARTAMANGA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Loxa in the kingdom of Quito. 
|CARIATAPA , a settlement which belonged to the missions of the regular order of the Jesuits, in the province of Topia and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya ; situate in the middle of the sierra of this name, and on the shore of the river Piastla. 
|CARIBABARE, a small settlement which be longed to the missions of the regular order of the Jesuits, in the province and government of San -Juan de los Llanos of the new kingdom of Granada. 
C A R I B E. 
313 
Jt was formerly a very rich tract of land, si tuate on the shore of the river Cazanare, a stream which crosses and stops the pass into the coun try ; and for this reason there was a consider able establishment formed here by persons who belonged to the curacy of Santa Rosa de Chire. Its temperature is hot, but it is very fertile, and abounds in productions, which serve to provide for the other settlements belonging to the same mis sions : at present it is under the care of the reli gious order of St. Domingo. 
|CARIBANA, a large country, at the present day called Guayana Maritania, or Nueva Andalucia Austral. It extends from the mouth of the river Orinoco to the mouth of the Marafion ; com prehends the Dutch colonies of Esquibo, Surinam, and Berbice, and the French colony of Cayenne. It takes its name from the Caribes Indians, who inhabit it, and who are very fierce and cruel, although upon amicable terms with the Dutch. Nearly the whole of this province is uncultivated, full of woods and mountains, but watered by many rivers, all of which run for the most part from s. to e. and empty themselves into the sea ; although some flow from s. ton. and enter the Ori noco. The climate, though warm and humid, is healthy ; the productions, and the source of its commerce, are sugar-cane, some cacao, wild wax, and incense. The coast, inhabited by Europeans, forms the greater part of this tract of country, of which an account will be found under the respec tive articles. 
CA RIB AN A, a port on the coast of Tierra Firme, in the province and government of Darien, at the entrance of the gulf of Uraba. 
|CARIBE, a small port of the coast of Tierra Firme, in the province and government of Vene zuela, to the w. of cape Codera. 
|CARIBT, CARIBBEE, or GHARAIBES, some islands close upon the shore of the province and government of Cumana, near the cape of Tres Puntas. [The Caribbee islands in the West In dies extend in a semicircular form from the island of Porto Rico, the easternmost of the Antilles, to the coast of S. America. The sea, thus inclosed by the main land and the isles, is called the Ca ribbean sea; and its great channel leads n. id. to Ihe head of the gulf of Mexico through the sea of Honduras. The chief of these islands are, Santa Cruz, Sornbuca, Anguilla, St. Martin, St. Bar tholomew, Barbuda, Saba, St. Eustatia, St. Chris topher, Nevis, Antigua, Montserrat, Guadalupe, Deseada, Mariagalante, Dominica, Martinica, St. Vincent, Barbadoes, and Grenada. These are again classed into Windward and LeeAvard isles by 
|VOL. I. 
seamen, with regard to the usual courses of ships from Old Spain or the Canaries to Cartagena or New Spain and Porto Belio. The geographi cal tables and maps class them into Great and Little Antilles ; and authors vary much concerning this last distinction. See ANTILLES. The Charaibcs or Car ibbees were the ancient natives of the Wind ward islands ; hence many geographers confine the term to these isles only. Most of these were an ciently possessed by a nation of cannibals, the ter ror of the mild and inoffensive inhabitants of Ilispaniola, who frequently expressed to Columbus their dread of these fierce invaders. Thus, when these islands were afterwards discovered by that great man, they were denominated Charibbean isles. The insular Charaibs are supposed to be immediately descended from the Galibis Indians, or Charaibes of S. America. An ingenious and learned attempt to trace back the origin of the Ca ribes to some emigrants from the ancient hemis phere may be found in Bryan Edwards ; and it is to the valuable work of this author that we are indebted for the following illustrations of the man ners and customs of this people. The Caribes are avowedly of a fierce spirit and warlike dispo sition. Historians have not failed to notice these among the most distinguishable of their qualities. Dr. Robertson, in Note XCIII. to the first vol. of his History of America, quotes from a MS. History of Ferdinand and Isabella, written by Andrew Bernaldes, the cotemporary and friend of Columbus, the following instance of the bravery of the Caribes : A canoe with four men, two women, and a boy, un expectedly fell in with Columbus s fleet. A Spanish bark with 25 men was sent to take them; and the fleet, in the mean time, cut off their communication with the shore. Instead of giving way to despair, the Caribes seized their arms with undaunted resolu tion, and began the attack, wounding several of the Spaniards, although they had targets as well as other defensive armour ; and even after the canoe was overset, it was with no little difficulty and danger that some of them were secured, as they continued to defend themselves, and to use their bows with great dexterity while swimming in the sea. Herrera has recorded the same anec dote. Restless, enterprising, and ardent, it would seem they considered war as the chief end of their creation, and the rest of the human race as their natural prey ; for they devoured, without re morse, the bodies of such of their enemies (the men at least) as fell into their hands. Indeed, there is no circumstance in the history of mankind better attested than the universal prevalence of thee practices among them. Columbus was notj s 
314 
C A R I B E. 
only informed of it by the natives of Hispaniola, hut having landed himself at Guadalupe on its first discovery, he beheld in several cottages the head and limbs of the human body recently separated, and evidently kept for occasional re pasts. He released at the same time several of the natives of Porto Rico, who, having been brought captives from thence, were reserved as victims for the same horrid purpose. But among themselves they were peaceable, and towards each other faithful, friendly, and affectionate. They considered all strangers indeed as enemies, and of the people of Europe they formed a right estima tion. The antipathy which they manifested to wards the unoffending natives of the larger islands appears extraordinary, but it is said to have de scended to them from their ancestors of Guiana : they considered those islanders as a colony of Arrowauks, a nation of South America, with whom the Caribes of that continent are continually at war. We can assign no cause for such hereditary and irreconcilable hostility. With regard to the peo ple of Europe, it is allowed, that whenever any of them had acquired their confidence, it was given without reserve. Their friendship was as warm as their enmity was implacable. The Ca ribes of Guiana still fondly cherish the tradition of Raleigh s alliance, and to this day preserve the English colours which he left with them at part ing. (Bancroft, p. 259.) They painted their faces and bodies with arnotto so extravagantly, that their natural complexion, which was nearly that of a Spanish olive, was not easily to be distinguish ed under the surface of crimson. However, as this mode- of painting themselves was practised by both *exes, perhaps it was at first introduced as a de fence against the venomous insects so common in tropical climates, or possibly they considered the brilliancy of the colour as highly ornamental. The men disfigured their cheeks with deep incisions and hideous scars, which they stained with black, and they painted white and black circles round their eyes ; some of them perforated the cartilage that divides the nostrils, and inserted the bone of some fish, a parrot s feather, or a fragment of tor toise-shell ; a frightful custom, practised also by the natives of New Holland ; and they strung to gether the teeth of such of their enemies as they had slain in battle, and wore them on their legs and arms as trophies of successful cruelty. To draw the bow with unerring skill, to wield the club with dexterity and strength, to swim with agility and boldness, to catch fish, and to build a cottage, were acquirements of indispensable neces sity, and the education, of their children was well 
suited to the attainment of them. One method of making their boys skilful, even in infancy, in the exercise of the bow, was to suspend their food on the branch of a tree, compelling the hardy urchins to pierce it with their arrows before they could ob tain permission to eat. Their arrows were com monly poisoned, except when they made their mi litary excursions by night: on those occasions they converted them into instruments of still greater mischief; for, by arming the points with pledgets of cotton dipt into oil, and set on flame, they fired whole villages of their enemies at a distance. The poison which they used was a concoction of nox ious gums and vegetable juices, and had the pro perty of being perfectly innocent when received into the stomach; but if communicated immediate ly to the blood through the slightest wound, it was generally mortal. As soon as a male child was brought into the world, he was sprinkled with some drops of his father s blood. The ceremonies used on this occasion were sufficiently painful to the father, but he submitted without emotion or complaint, fondly believing that the same degree of courage which he had himself displayed was by these means transmitted to his son. As the boy grew, he was soon made familiar Avith scenes of barbarity ; he partook of the horrid repasts of his nation, and he was frequently anointed with the fat of a slaughtered Arrowauk : but he was not allowed to participate in the toils of the warrior, and to share the glories of conquest, until his for titude had been brought to the test. The dawn of manhood ushered in the hour of severe trial. He was now to exchange the name he had received in his infancy for one more sounding and signifi cant; a ceremony of high importance in the life of a Caribe, but always accompanied by a scene of fero cious festivity and unnatural cruelty. In times of peace, the Caribes admitted of no supremacy butthat of nature. Having no laws, they needed no ma gistrates. To their old men, indeed, they allowed some kind of authority, but it was at best ill-de fined, and must at all times have been insufficient to protect the weak against the strong. In war, experience had taught them that subordination was as requisite as courage ; they thereiore elected their captains in their general assemblies with great solemnity, but they put their pretensions to the proof with circumstances of outrageous barba rity. When success attended the measures of a candidate for command) the least and the triumph awaited his return. He exchanged his name a se cond time ; assuming in future that of the most formidable Arrowauk that had fallen by his hand. He was permitted to appropriate to himself as many J 
C A R I B E. 
of the captives as he thought fit, and his country men presented to his choice the most beautiful of their daughters in reward of his valour. It was probably this last-mentioned testimony of public esteem and gratitude that gave rise in these islands to the institution of polygamy, which, as hath been already observed, prc vailed universally among them, and still prevails among the Caribes of S. America; an institution the more excusable, as their women, from religious motives, carefully avoided the nuptial intercourse after pregnancy. Though frequently bestowed as the prize of suc cessful courage, the wife, thus honourably obtain ed, was soon considered of as little value as the captive. Deficient in those qualities which alone were estimable among the Caribes, the females were treated rather as slaves than companions : they sustained every species of drudgery; they ground the maize, prepared the cassavi, gathered in the cotton, and wove the hammoc ; nor were they allowed even the privilege of eating in pre sence of their husbands. Under these circum stances, it is not wonderful that they were less proJi6c than the women of Europe. Father Joseph Gumilla, in his account of the nations bordering on the Orinoco, relates (torn. i. p. 207. Fr. trans lation), that the Caribes of the continent punish their women caught in adultery like the ancient Israelites, " by stoning them to death before an assembly of the people ;" a fact not recorded by any other writer. We know but little concerning their domestic economy, their arts, manufactures, and agriculture ; their sense of filial and paternal ob ligations, their religious rights and funeral cere monies. Such further information, however, in these and other respects, as authorities the least disputable afford, we have abridged in the follow ing detached observations. Besides the ornaments which we have noticed to have been worn by both sexes, the women, on arriving at the age of pu berty, were distinguished also by a sort of buskin or half boot made of cotton, which surrounded the small part of the leg. The same sort of brodequin or buskin is worn by the female Hottentots and other nations of Africa; a distinction, however, to which such of their females as had been taken in the chance of war dared not aspire. In other respects, both male and female appeared as naked as our first parents before the fall. Like them, as they knew no guilt, they knew no shame ; nor was clothing thought necessary to personal comfort, where the chill blast of winter is never felt. Their hair was uniformly of a shining black, straight, and coarse ; but they dressed it with daily care, and .adorned it with great art, the men, in particular, 
decorating their heads with feathers of various co lours. As their hair thus constituted their chief pride, it was an unequivocal proof of the sincerity of their sorrow, when, on the death of a relation or friend, they cut it short like their slaves and captives, to whom the privilege of wearing long hair was rigorously denied. Like most other na tions of the new hemisphere, they eradicated, with great nicety, the incipient beard, and all super fluous hairs on their bodies ; a circumstance which has given rise to the false notion that all the Abo rigines of America were naturally beardless. On the birth of a child, its tender and flexible skull was confined between two small pieces of wood, which, applied before and behind, and firmly bound together on each side, elevated the fore- ~ head, and occasioned it and the back part of the skull to resemble two sides of a square ; a custom, still observed by the miserable remnant of lied Ca ribes in the island of St. Vincent. It has been said by anatomists, that the coronal suture of new born children in the West Indies is commonly more open than that of infants born in colder cli mates, and the brain more liable to external in jury. Perhaps, therefore, the Indian custom of depressing the os frontis and the occiput, was ori ginally meant to assist the operation of nature in closing the skull. They resided in villages which resembled an European encampment, for their ca bins were built of poles fixed circularly in the ground, and drawn to a point at the top ; they were then covered with leaves of the palm tree. In the centre of each village was a building of supe rior magnitude to the rest: it was formed with great labour, and served as a public hall or state house, wherein we are assured that the men (ex cluding the women) had their meals in common. These halls were also the theatres where their youth were animated to emulation, and trained to mar" tial enterprise by the renown of their warriors and the harangues of their orators. Their arts and ma nufactures, though few, displayed a degreeof inge nuity which one would have scarcely expected to find amongst a people so little removed from a state of mere animal nature as to reject all dress as superfluous. Columbus observed an abundance of substantial cotton cloth in all the islands which he visited ; and the natives possessed the art of stain ing it with various colours, though the Caribes de lighted chiefly in red. Of this cloth they made hammocs, or hanging beds, such as are LOW used at sea ; for Europe has not only copied the pat tern, but preserved also the original name, All the early Spanish and French writers expressly as sert, that the original Indian name for their svviag-j s i 2 
316 
C A R I B E. 
ing beds was amack or hamack, but Dr. John son derives (he English word hammoc from the Saxon. They possessed likewise the art of mak ing vessels of clay for domestic uses, which they baked in kilns like the potters of Europe. The ruins of many of these kilns were visible not long since in Barbadoes, where specimens of the manu facture are still frequently dug up; and Mr. Hughes, the historian of that island, observes, that they far surpassed the earthen ware made by the Negroes, in thinness, smoothness, and beauty. (Nat. Hist, of Barbadoes, p. 8.) Ligon, who vi sited this island in 1647, declares, that some of these vessels which he saw even surpassed any earthen ware made in England, " both," to use his own words, " in finesse of mettle and curiosity of turninge." Besides those, they invented various other utensils for economical purposes, which are enumerated by Labat. The baskets which they composed of the fibres of the palmeto-leaves were singularly elegant ; and we are told that their bows and arrows, and other weapons, displayed a neat ness and polish which the most skilful European artist would have found it difficult to have excel led, even with European tools. We are told, on good authority, that among the Caribes of the continent there was no division of land ; the har vests were deposited in public granaries, whence each family received its proportion of the public stock. Rochford indeed observes, that all their interests were in common. Their food, both ve getable and animal, excepting in the circumstance of their eating human flesh, seems to have been the same, in most respects, as that of the natives of the larger islands. But although their appetites were voracious, they rejected many of the best bounties of nature. Of some animals they held the flesh in abhorrence : these were the pecary or Me xican hog, the manati or sea cow, and the turtle. Labat observes, that they scrupled likewise to eat the eel, which the rivers in several of the islands supply in great plenty. The striking conformity of these, and some other of their prejudices and customs, to the practices of the Jews, has not escaped the notice of historians. On the birth of his first son, the father retired to his bed, and fast ed with a strictness that often endangered life. Lafitau, observing that the same custom was prac tised by the Tybarenians of Asia, and the Iberians or ancient inhabitants of Spain, and is still in use among the people of Japan, not only urges this circumstance as a proof, among others, that the new world was peopled from the old, but pretends to discover in it also some traces of the doctrine of original sin : he supposes that the severe penance 
thus voluntarily submitted to by the father was at first instituted in the pious view of protecting his issue from the contagion of hereditary guilt, avert ing the wrath of offended Omnipotence at the crime of our first parents, and expiating their guilt by his sufferings. The ancient Thracians, as we are informed by Herodotus, when a male child was brought into the world, lamented over him in sad vaticination of his destiny, and they rejoiced when he was released by death from those miseries which they considered as his inevitable portion in life ; but whatever might have been the motives that first induced the Caribes to do penance on such occasions, it would seem that grief and dejec tion had no great share in them ; for the ceremony of fasting was immediately succeeded by rejoic ing and triumph, by drunkenness and debauchery. Their lamentations for the dead seem to have ari sen from the more laudable dictates of genuine na ture ; for, unlike the Thracians on these solem nities, they not only despoiled their hair, as we have before related, but when the master of the fa mily died, the surviving relations, after burying the corpse in the centre of his own dwelling, with many demonstrations of unaffected grief, quitted the house altogether, and erected another in a distant situation. The dead body they placed in the grave in a sitting posture, with the knees to the chin. It is asserted, and we believe with truth, 
that the ex pectation of a future state has prevailed amongst all mankind in all ages and countries of the world. It is certain that the idea of a future state prevail ed among the Caribes ; they not only believed that death was not the final extinction of their being, but pleased themselves also with the fond conceit, that their departed relations were secret spectators of their conduct ; that they still sympathized in their sufferings, and participated in their welfare. To these notions they added others of a dreadful tendency ; for, considering the soul as susceptible of the same impressions, and possessing the same passions as when allied to the body, it was thought a religious duty to their deceased heroes, to sacri fice ait their funerals some of the captives which had been taken in battle. It was their custom to erect in every cottage a rustic altar, composed of ba nana leaves and rushes, whereon they occasionally placed the earliest of their fruits and the choicest of their viands, as humble peace-offerings, through the mediation of their inferior deities, to incensed Omnipotence : for it is admitted, that their devo tions consisted less in the effusions of thankfulness, than in deprecations of wrath. They not only believed in the existence of demons and evil spirits, but offered to them also, by the hands of their ) 
2 
boycs or pretended magicians, sacrifices and wor ship ; wounding themselves on such solemnities with an instrument made of the teeth of the agouti, which inflicted horrible gashes ; conceiving, per haps, that the malignant powers delighted in groans and misery, and were to be appeased only by human blood. 
C A KIBE, a settlement of the same province and government ; situate on the windward coast of the cape of Tres Puntas. In its district are 26 plan tations, 15 of cacao, and the rest of vines and maize, which yield but indifferently, from a want of water ; although they find means of supplying this in some degree by the rain. The community consists of 1070 souls ; and is five leagues dis tant from the settlement of Carupano. 
|CARIBEANA, now called PAIUA or NEW ANDAL.UCIA, which see. 
|CARIBES, a barbarous and ferocious nation of Indians, who are cannibals, inhabiting the pro vince which by them is called Caribana. They are divided under the titles of the Maritimos and Mediterraneos : the former live in plains and upon the coast of the Atlantic, are contiguous to the Dutch and French colonies, and follow the laws and customs of the former, with whom they carry on a commerce. They are the most cruel of any that infest the settlements of the missions of the river Orinoco, and are the same as those called Galibis. The Mediterraneos, who inhabit the $. side of the source of the river Caroni, are of a more pacific nature, and began to be reduced to the faith by the regular order of the abolished so ciety of the Jesuits in 1738. The name of Caribes is given not only to these and other Indians of the Antilles, but to all such as are cannibals. See CARIBE. 
|CARIBOU, an island towards the c. end of lake Superior in N. America, n. w. of Cross cape, and s. w. of Montreal bay. 
|CARICARI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Paria in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Toledo. 
|CARICAIU, also called LAGDACINA, a point of land on the coast of the province and government of the Rio del Hacha. 
|CARICHANA, a settlement of the province of Guayana, and government of Cumana ; one of the missions of the Rio Meta, which was under the care of the society of Jesuits, of the province of Santa Fe. It is situate on the shore of the Ori noco, by the torrent of its name ; and is at present under the care of the religious order of Capuchins. 
|CARICHANA, Torrent of, a strait of the river 
|CAR 
317 
Orinoco, formed by different islands, some covered by, and some standing out of, the water, so that the navigation is very difficult and dangerous. It is near the mouth of the river Meta. 
|CARIJANA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Larecaja in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Camata. 
|CARILLON, a fort belonging to the French, in New France. 
|CARIMBATAY, a parish of the province and government of Paraguay ; situate a little to the n. w. of the town of Curuguaty. Lat. 24 33 35". Long. 55 57 a). 
|CARIMBATAY, a river of the above province and government, which runs w. and enters the Xexuy near the town of Curuguato. 
|CARIMU, a small river of the province and colony of the Dutch, in Surinam ; one of those which enter the Cuiurn on the s. side. 
|CARINIS, a small river of the province and captainship of Para in Brazil. It rises in the coun try of the Aritus Indians, runs e. and enters the Guiriri. 
|CARIOCOS, a lake of the country of the Amazonas, in the Portuguese territories, on the shore of the river. It is formed by the Topinambaranas, which, according to Mr. Bellin, makes this sheet of water before it enters the former river. 
|CARIPE, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Cumana in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, situate in the middle of a serrania; one of the missions in that province belonging to the Aragonese Capuchin fathers. 
|CARI PORES, a settlement of S. America, to the n. of Brazil and of the river of Las Amazonas : although of barbarian Indians, it deserves particular mention, on account of its virtuous and pacific customs, so different from the brutality and sloth of the surrounding nations. These Indians are handsome, lively, bold, valorous, liberal, ho nest, and affable, and in short the most polished nation of Indians in all America ; they esteem ho nour, justice, and truth ; are enemies to deceit, eat bread made of caza-ce, which they have a method of preserving good for three or four years. They do not scruple to eat the flesh of some ugly snakes found in their woods, but are not cannibals ; nei ther do they revenge upon their prisoners taken in war the cruelties they experience from their enemies. 
|CARIUITOS, a settlement of the province and government of Venezuela in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. 
|CARIY, a parish of the province and govern
318 
merit of Paraguay ; situate on a Small river about 15 leagues c. of Asuncion. Lat. 25 30 27", Long. 56 52 to. 
|CARLISLE, a settlement of the island of Ja maica ; situate on the s. 
|CARLISLE, the chief town of Cumberland county, Pennsylvania, on the post-road from Phi ladelphia to Pittsburg ; is 125 miles zv. by w. from the former, ami 178 c. from the latter, and 18 s. w. from Hnrrisburgh. Its situation is pleasant and healthy, on a plain near the s. bank of Concdogwinet creek, a water of the Susquehannah. The town contains about 400 houses, chiefly of stone and brick, and about 1500 inhabitants. The streets intersect each other at right angles, and the public buildings arc a college, court-house, and gaol, and four edifices for public worship. Of these the Presbyterians, Germans, Episcopalians, and Roman Catholics, have each one. Dickinson college, named after the celebrated John Dickinson, csq. author of several valuable tracts, has a principal, three professors, a philosophical apparatus, and a library containing near 2000 volumes. Its re venue arises from 4000/. in funded certificates, and 10,000 acres of land. -In 1,787 there were 80 stuJents, and Us reputation is daily increasing. About 50 years ago this spot was inhabited by Indians and wild beasts. 
|GAULISH-, a bay on the w. side of the island of Barbadoes in the West Indies; situated be tween James and Charles forts, on which stands Bridge-town, the capital of the island. 
|CARLOS, SAN, a settlement of the province and captainship of Rey in Brazil ; situate on the shore of a small river which enters the head of that of Curituba. 
.CAJILOS, SAN, .another, of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of Je suits, in the province and government of Buenos Ayres ; situate on the shore of a small river near the river Pargua, about five leagues s. m. of Candelaria. Lat. 27 44 36" s. Long. 55 57 12" w. CARLOS, SAN, another, of the missions of the province and government of Tucurruin, in the ju risdiction of the .city of Salta.; situate on the shore of the river of Guachipas. 
|CARLOS, SAN, a city of the province and go vernment of Venezuela ; situate on the shore of the river Aguirre, to the n. of the city of Nirua. [It owes its existence to the first missionaries of Vene zuela, and its increase and beauty to the activity of its inhabitants. The greatest part of its popu lation is composed of Spaniards from the Canary islands; and as these leave their native country 
|CAR 
but to meliorate their condition, they arrive with a willingness to work, and a courage to undertake any thing that they think the most proper to an swer their views. Their example even inspires a sort of emulation among the Creoles, productive of public prosperity. Cattle forms the great mass of the wealth of the inhabitants. Oxen, horses, and mules, are very numerous. Agriculture, al though not much followed, is yet not neglected. Indigo and coffee are almost the only things thej grow. The quality of the soil gives the fruits an exquisite flavour, but particularly the oranges, which are famed throughout the province. The city is large, handsome, and well divided : they compute the inhabitants at 9500. The parish church, by its construction and neatness, answers to the industry and piety of the people. The heat at San Carlos is extreme ; it would be excessive if the n. wind did not moderate the effects of the sun. It lies in 9 20 lat. GO leagues s. w. of Caracas, 24 *. s.e. of St. Valencia, and 20 from St.Philip s. CARLOS, SAN, a town of the province afnd go vernment of Buenos Ayres ; situate on a small river about two leagues n. of Maldonado. Lat. 34 44 45" *. Long. 55 44 a). 
|CARLOS, SAN, REAL, a parish of the province and government of Buenos Ayres ; situate on a liver of the same name, about five leagues n. of Colonia del Sacramento. Lat. 34 25 S 1 s. Long. 57 50 a?. 
|CARLOS, SAN, DE MONTEREY, the capital of New California, founded in 1770, at the foot of the Cordillera of Santa Lucia, which is covered with oaks, pines, (foltis ternis), and rose bushes. The village is two leagues distant from the presidio of the same name. It appears that the bay of Mon terey had already been discovered by Cabrillo on the 15th November 1542, and that he gave it the name of Bahia de los Pinos, on account of the beautiful pines with which the neighbouring moun tains are covered. It received its present name about 60 years afterwards from Viscaino, in ho nour of the viceroy of Mexico, Gaspar deZunega, Count de Monterey, an active man, to whom we are indebted for considerable maritime expedi tions, and who engaged Juan de Onate in the con quest of New Mexico. The coasts in the vicinity of San Carlos produce the famous aurum merum (ormier) of Monterey, in request by the inhabi tants of Nootka, and which is employed in the trade of otter-skins. The population of San Carlos is 700. 
C AU LOS, SAN, a fort of the province and go vernment of Guayana, situate on the shore of the 
|CAR 
Rio Negro, on a great island formed by this river and that of Pasimoni. 
|CARLOS, SAN, a bay of the w. coast of Florida, 45 leagues from the soundings of Tortuguilla. JLat. 27 10 . Long. 284 SO . " 
|CARLOS, SAN, a small island of the gulf of Cali fornia, or Mar Roxo de Cortes, in the interior of the same, and very close upon the coast. 
|CARLOS, SAN, a river of the island of Guadalupe, which runs nearly due n.e. and enters the sea in the bay of the Great Cul de Sac. 
|CARLOS, SAN, a settlement (with the surname of Real) of the province and government of Buenos Ayres ; situate on the shore of the river La Plata, near the colony of Sacramento, which belonged to the Portuguese. In its vicinty,on the n. n. e. part, there is a lake of very good sweet water. 
|CARLOS, SA.V, an island of the straits of Magel lan, between the mountain of the Pan de Azucar and cape Galand of the n. coast. 
|CARLOS, SAN, a valley in the province and go vernment of Tucurnan, which is very fertile in vines, wheat, maize, carob-trees, tar, and in birds and animals of the chase. Its natives are those who most of all infested the Spaniards when they conquered this province. 
|CARLOS, SAN, a settlement and fort of the island of St. Christopher, one of the Antilles. 
|CARLOS, SAN, another, of the island of Cuba ; situate on the n. coast, on the point of land called the Pan de Mantanzas. 
|CARLOS, SAN, another, of the province and go vernment of Maracaibo ; situate in the island Paxara, on the shore of the Gran Laguna, or Great lake. 
|CARLO?, SAN, another, of the province and country of Las Amazonas; a reduction of the mis sions which were held there by the regulars of the society of Jesuits. It lies between the rivers Araucaso and Shiquita, in the territory of the Cahumaris Indians. 
|CARLOS, SAN, another, of the province and go vernment of Guatemala ; situate on the shore of the river of S. Juan, or Del Desaguadero. 
|CAULO?, SAN, some sierras or mountains, called De Don Carlos, in the province and captainship of Rey in Brazil. They run parallel to the sierra of Los Difuntos, in the extremity of the coast formed by the mouth of the river La Plata. 
|CARLOSAMA, a large settlement of Indians of the province and coiregimiento of Pastos in the kingdom of Quito, on the 5. shore of the river of its name. Its territory is most fertile, but the cli mate is very cold, and the streets almost always 
|CAR 
319 
impassable. It is to the w. n. w. of the settlement of Ipiales, and e. n. e. of that of Cumbai. 
|CARLTON, a settlement of the island of Barbad oes, in the district and parish of St. Thomas. 
|CARLUTAS, a river of the province and cap tainship of Rio Grande in Brazil. It rises near the coast, runs 5. s. e. and enters the sea between the Genibabu and the Rio Grande. 
|CARMA, a settlement of the province and corregimicn/o of Porco in Peru ; annexed to the cu racy of Poreo. 
|CARMEL, a township in Dut chess county. New York. By the state census of 179?&gt;, 237 of its inhabitants were electors. 
|CARMELO, a river on the coast of New Al bion, s. e. of Francisco bay. A little w. from it is Sir Francis Drake s harbour, where that navi gator lay five weeks. 
|CARMKLO, SIERRAS DEL, a cordiflera of very lofty mountains of the province of California; they run to the sea-shore from the sierra of the Enfado, as far as the cape of San Lucas. 
|CARMEN, a river of the province and colony of Surinam, in the part of Guayana possessed by the Dutch. It rises in the sierra of Rinocote, runs from w. to e. and gathering the waters of many others, enters in a large body into the Mnzarroni. 
|CARMEN, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Cartagena ; situate in the district of the mountains of Marca, between those of San Jacinto and San Francisco de Asis. It is one of those new settlements that were founded by the Go vernor Don Juan Pimienta in 1776. 
|CARMEN, another settlement, with the addition of Frayeles de el, which is the village of the pro vince and captainship of Todos Santos in Brazil; situate between the rivers Rans and Tucumbira. 
|CARMEN, another, in the same kingdom ; situate near a stream and on the shore of the river Tocantincs, on the e.-side, and not far from the Arrayal of San Feliz. 
|CARMEN, a large island of the gulf of California, or Mar Roxo de Cortes, near the coast, between the islands of San Ildcfonso and Agua Verde. 
|CAR MEX, a town of the province and captain ship of Espiritu Santo in Brazil ; situate on the shore and at the head of a river which gives it this name. 
|CARMOT, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Caxamarca la Grande in Peru ; situate on the shore of the river Chicama. 
|CARNELAND, ISLAS DE, islands near the coast of the province and government of Honduras, 
320 
C -A R 
close to those of Pcrlas and Mosquitos ; they are three in number, small and desert. 
|CARNERO, PUNTA DEL, a point on the coast of the S. sea, and of the province and government of Guayaquil ; one of the two which form the great bay of Tumbez. It is close to the point of Santa Elena. 
|CAHNERO, PUNTA DEL, another, on the coast of the kingdom of Chile ; it is very low, extend ing itself with a gentle slope towards the sea. The e. winds are prevalent here, rendering it dangerous to be passed. 
|CAKNRHO, PUNTA DEL, another point of land on the coast of the same kingdom. 
|CAHNERO, PUNTA DHL, a port of the coast of the kingdom of Chile, between the mouth of the river Lebo and the point of Rumena. 
|CARNESVILLE, the chief town of Franklin county, Georgia, 100 miles n. w. of Augusta. It contains a court-houie, and about 20 dwellinghouses. 
|CAROLINA, a province of N. America, and part of that extensive country anciently called Florida, bounded n. by Virginia, s. by the true Florida, zo. by Louisiana, and e. by the Atlantic. It is divided into N. and S. Carolina. Its ex tent is 135 leagues in length, nearly from s. w. to n. e. and 75 in width from e. to w. from 30 to 36 30 of lat. It was discovered by Juan Ponce de Leon in 1512, though it was not settled by the Spaniards then, but abandoned until the reign of Charles IX. king of France, when the French established themselves in it, under the command of admiral Chatilon, protector of the Protestants. He founded a colony and a fort call ed Charles fort, and gave the name of Carolina to the country, in honour to his monarch. This es tablishment, however, lasted but a short time, for it was destroyed by the Spaniards, who put to the sword the new colonists, and went away under the impression that they had now left the country in a perfectly abandoned state. But the English, at this time, were maintaining a footing here, un der the command of Sir Walter Raleigh, though they were not under any formal establishment until the reign of Charles II. in 1663, when the country was granted as a property to the following nobility, viz. the Count of Clarendon, Duke of Albemarle, Count of Craven, John Berkley, John Ashley, afterwards Count of Shaftsbury, George Carteret, John Colleton, and William Berkley ; by these it was divided into as many counties, and by them names were given to the rivers, settle ments, &c. Their privilege of proprietorship and 
jurisdiction extended from lat. 31 to 36 n. and they had an absolute authority to form establish ments and governments, according to the laws and statutes laid down by that famous and renowned philosopher John Locke ; accordingly the govern ment partook largely of the despotic, and the rulers had the power of acknowledging or renounc ing laws, of conferring titles, employments, pro motions, and dignities, according to their own caprice. They divided the population into three classes: The first was composed of those entitled the Barons, and to these were given 120,000 acres of land ; the second were two lordships, with the title of Counts, to whom were given 240,000 acres ; and the third, who were called Landgraves, a title corresponding to Dukes, had a portion of 480,000 acres. This last body formed the high councilchamber, and the lower was composed of the re presentatives of the counties and cities, both of th se together form ing the parliament, this being the real title, and not assembly, as in the other colonies. The first establishment was the city of Charlestown, between two navigable rivers called Ashley and Cowper ; the same offered an asylum to the Europeans, who on account of religious disturbances fled from Europe, and who having suffered great distresses there, had afterwards to encounter a very unfriendly reception from the Indians. Such was the state of affairs until 1728, when this city was taken under the protection of the English crown ; a corresponding recompence having been paid to the lords, the proprietors, who yielding it up, thus made a virtue of necessity; the Count Grenville, however, persisted in keep ing his eighth share. From that time it was divid ed into two parts, called North and South. The cli mate differs but little from that of Virginia, al though the heat in the summer is rather more powerful here ; the winter, however, is shorter and milder ; the temperature is serene and the air healthy ; tempests and thunder storms are fre quent, and this is the only part of this continent wherein ha vebeen experienced hurricanes; although they are but rare here, and never so violent as in the islands. The half of March, the whole of April, May, and the greater part of June, the season is mild and agreable ; in July, August, and nearly all September, the heat is intense ; but the winter is so mild, especially when the n.ts. wind prevails, that the water is seldom frozen. It is extremely fer tile, and abounds in wheat, barley, rice, and all kinds of pulse, flowers, and fruits of an exquisite flavour ; and the soil, which is uncultivated, is covered with all kinds of trees. The principal 
|CAR 
emolument which used to be derived to the Eng lish from the skins of the castor, is at present greatly abridged from the circumstance of the Indians invariably destroying this animal ; but the loss is in. a great measure made up from the great gain acquired in the sale of turpentine, fish, and pitch. Here they cultivate quantities of indigo of three sorts, much maize, and in the lowlands excellent rice. All this province is a plain 80 miles in length, carrying on a great commerce in the above productions, and formerly that of rice was very considerable ; it being computed to have yielded that article to the value of 150,000/. ster ling per annum. In its woods are many exquisite kinds of timber, and the country abounds with rabbits, hares, dantas, deer,. pheasants, partridges, cranes, pigeons, and other birds, and with num bers of ravenous and fierce wolves, against the attacks of which it is difficult to preserve the cattle. The European animals have also multi plied here astonishingly, so that it is not unusual for persons, who at first had not more than three or four cows, now to possess as many thousands. These two provinces forming Carolina have 10 navigable rivers, with an infinite number of smaller note, all abounding in fish ; but they hare few good ports, and the best of these is Cape Fear. N. Carolina is not so rich as is S. Carolina, and Denton was formerly the capital of the former, but it is at present reduced to a miserable village ; the capital of both is Charlestown, which since the last war is independent of the English, together with all the country, which now forms one of the 13 provinces composing the United States of America. See NORTH CAROLINA and SOUTH CAROLINA. 
|CAROLINE County, in Virginia, is on the s. side of Rappahannock river, which separates it from King George s county. It is about 40 miles square, and contains 17,489 inhabitants, including J 0,292 slaves. 
|CAROLINE County, on the e. shore in Mary land, borders on Delaware state to the e. and con tains 9506 inhabitants, including 2057 slaves. Its chief town Danton. 
|CAROjXI, a settlement of the province of Guayana, and government of Cumanti ; one of tlioseof the missions held in that province by the Catalanian Capuchin fathers. 
|CAROM, another, in the government of Maracaibo, and jurisdiction of V arinas. It is very poor aj;d of a hot temperature, but abounding in fruits of maize, yucas, plaintains, and sugar-canes. 
|CAROM, another, in the government of the Nuevo Reynode Granada ; situate on a lofty spot, and one of the most pleasant and delightful of any in the 
|VOL. I. 
|CAR 
321 
whole province. It abounds in gold mines, and is fertile in all the fruits peculiar to the climate, but it is much reduced. 
|CARONI, a large and abundant river of the pro vince of Guayana. It rises in the mountains in habited by the Mediterranean Caribes Indians, runs many leagues, laving the territory of the Ca puchin missionaries of Guayana. Its shores are very delightful, from the variety of trees and birds found upon them. It enters the Orinoco on the s. side, eight leagues from the garrison of Guayana, and 72 leagues before this river enters the sea, be ing divided into two arms, which form a small island. It is very abundant and wide, but it is not navigable, on account of (he rapidity of its cur rent, and from its being filled with little islands and. shoals, as likewise on account of a great waterfall or cataract, which causes a prodigious noise, and is close to the mission and settlement of Aguacagua. Its waters are very clear, although at first sight they appear dark and muddy, which effect is pro duced from the bed of the river being of a sand of this colour. Its source, though not accurately known, is affirmed by the Caribes Indians to be in the snowy sierra to the n. of the lake of Parime, that also being the source by which this lake is supplied. At its entrance into the Orinoco, it gushes with such impetuosity as to repel the waters of this river the distance of a gun s shot, [or, as Depons observes, half a league. Its co irse is di rectly from s. to n. and its source is more than 100 leagues from its mouth. 
|CAROPI, a river of the island and government of Trinidad. It runs from e. to w. and enters the sea in the gulf Triste. 
|CARORA, S. JUAN BAUTISTA DEL PORTILLO DE, a city of the province and government of Venezuela, founded by Captain John S damanca in 1572, and not in 1566, as is asserted by Father Coleti, in the Siege of Baraquiga. It is situate in the savanas or llanuras ; is of a hot temperature, but very heallhy, although deficient in water, since the river Morere, which passes in its vicinity, affords but a trifling stream in the summer, and is at times entirely dry. In its district are bred all kinds of cattle, but particularly thegoat,asthequantities of thorns and thistles found in this country render it peculiarly adapted for the nourishment of this animal. It abounds in very fine grains, also in aromatic balsams and gums, noted for the cure of wounds. At present it is reduced to a miserable population, unworthy of the name of a city, consisting of J/s/fes,Mulattoes, and some Indians ; but it still preserves a very good purish church, a convent of monks of St. Francisco, and T T 
an hermitage dedicated to St. Denis the Areopagite. It lies to the s. of the city of Barquisimeto, between that of Tucuyo and the lake of Maracaibo. f Carom is SO leagues to the s. of Coro. Its situation owes nothing to nature but a salubrious air. Its soil, dry and covered with thorny plants, gives no other productions but such as owe almost en tirely their existence to the principle of heat. They remark there a sort of cochineal tifaestre as fine as the misicca, which they suffer to perish. The land is covered with prolific animals, such as oxen, mules, horses, sheep, goats, &c. ; and the activity evinced by the inhabitants to make these advantageous to them, supports the opinion that there are but few cities in the Spanish West In dies where there is so much industry as at Carora. The principal inhabitants live by the produce of their flocks, whilst the rest gain their livelihood by tanning and selling the hides and skins. Al though their tanning be bad, the consumer cannot reproach the manufacturer, for it is impossible to conceive how they can sell the article, whatever may be its quality, at the moderate price it fetches. The skins and leather prepared at Carora are used in a great degree by the inhabitants themselves for boots, shoes, saddles, bridles, and strops. The surplus of the consumption of the place is used throughout the province, or is sent to Ma racaibo, Cartagena, and Cuba. They also manu facture at Carora, from a sort of aloe disthica, very excellent hammocs, which form another article of their trade. These employments occupy and support a population of 6200 souls, who, with a sterile soil, have been able to acquire that ease and competency which it appears to have been the intention of nature to deny them. The city is well built; the streets are wide, running in straight parallel lines. The police and the administration of justice are in the hands of a lieutenant of the go vernor and a cabildo. There is no military au thority. Carora lies in lat. 9 50 1 n. and is 15 leagues e. of the lake of Maracaibo, 12 n. of Tocuyo, 18 n. w. of Barquisimeto, and 90 w. of Caracas. 
|CARORA, a great llanura of the same province, which extends 16 leagues from e. to w. and six from n. to .. It was discovered by George Spira in 1534;, abounds greatly in every kind of grain and fruit, but is of a very hot temperature. Its population is not larger than that of the former city, to which it gives its name. 
|CARORI, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Venezuela ; situate on the shore of the Chirimichale, in the point of Hicacos. 
 CAROUGE Point, the northernmost extremity 
|CAR 
of the island of St. Domingo in the W. Indies ; 25 miles n. from the town of St. Jago. 
|CARPE, Island of the, in lake Superior of New France, between the n. coast and Cape Breton. 
|CARPINTO, PUNT A I&gt;F, a point on the coast of the province and government of the Rio del Hacha. 
|CARQUIN, a port of the coast of Peru and S. sea, in the province and corregimiento of Chancay. 
|CARR, a small plantation in Lincoln county,, district of Maine. 
|CARRANTASCA Lagoon, or CART AGO, is a large gulf on the *. side of the bay of Hon duras, about 70 miles n. w. of cape Gracios a Dios, and nearly as far s. e. from Brewer s la* goon. 
|CARRASCAL, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Cuio in the kingdom of Chile; situate s. of the city of Mendoza, and on the shore of the river of this name. 
|CARRETAS, PIERTO DK LAS, a port in the sierra of its name, in Nueva Espana. 
|CARRETO, a settlement of the province and government of Cartagena ; situate on the shore of the cano or dike near the sea-coast. 
|CARRETO, a river of the province and govern ment of Darien, and kingdom of Tierra Firme ; it rises in the mountains of the n. coast, and enters the sea behind the bay ot Calidonia. 
|CARRION D-: VKLAZCO, a small but beauti ful and well peopled city of the kingdom of Peru, in the pleasant llanura of Guaura ; it is of a mild, pleasant, and healthy climate, of a fertile and de lightful soil, and inhabited by a no small number of distinguished and rich families. 
|CARRIZAL, a settlement of the province and government of Venezuela; situate on the coast and point of Coro, to the n. of this city. 
|CARRIZAL, a sierra or chain of mountains of the same picwince and government, which runs from e. to w. from the shore of the river Guarico to the shore of the Guaya. 
|CARRIZAL, another settlement of the province and government of Sonora in Nueva Espana ; situ ate near a river, between the settlements of Bategui and San Marcelo. 
|CARRIZAL, another, of the province and cor regimiento of Rancagua in the kingdom of Chile, to the s. of the city of Mendoza, and on the shore of the river of this name. 
|CARRIZAL, another, of the province and go vernment of the Rio del Hacha, situate on the coast of the country of the Guajiros Indians, be
|CAR 
hind the cape of La Vela, which is at present destroyed. 
|CARRIZAL, another, of the missions of the pro vince of Taraumara, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya, to the s. of the garrison of Paso. 
|CARRIZAL, another, vrith the additional title of Rancho, in the missions of Nuevo Mexico. 
|CAIIUIZAL, another, with the dedicatory title of San Fernando, in the kingdom of Nucva Viscaya. 
|CARTAGENA, a province and government of the kingdom of Tierra Firme, in the jurisdiction of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, bounded n. by the sea, s. by the province of Antioquia, e. by the province and government of Santa Marta, from which it is divided by the Rio Grande de la Magdalena, and z&. by the province of Darien, being separated by the river San Juan ; it is 100 leagues long, running nearly from n. e. to s. w. and 80 wide, e. w. It was discovered by Rodrigo Bastidas in 1520, and subdued by the adelantado or governor Pedro de Heredia, at the expence of many battles, owing to the valour and warlike dis position of the natives. This country is of a very hot and moist temperature, full of mountains and woods, and towards the n. part swampy, sandy, and full of pools of sea- water, from the lowness of the territory ; but it is at the same time fertile, and abounds in maize, pulse, and fruits, as also in cattle, of the hides and fat of which this province makes a great traffic. Its mountains produce ex cellent woods, and the famous dyeing wood, equal to that ofCampeche, with an abundance of excel lent gums, medicinal balsams, and herbs. Here are many kinds of rare birds, animals, and snakes of different species ; amongst the former the most remarkable are the perico, of the figure of a cat, and so heavy that it takes a full hour to move itself 20 paces ; the mapurito, of the size of a small lap-dog, whose arms and means of defending him self from other animals and his pursuers consist simply in discharging some wind with such force and noise as to stupify his enemies, whilst he quietly makes his retreat to some neighbouring thicket. This province produces also indigo, tortoise-shell, and cotton, and some cacao of an excellent quality in the Rio de la Magdalena. It was well peopled with Indians in the time of its gentilism, but its inhabitants are now reduced to a very trifling number. It is watered by various rivers, but those of the most consideration are El Grande de la Magdalena, and that of San Juan, or Atracto, both of which are navigable and well stocked with alligators, tortoises, and a multitude of fishes. Its district contains 83 settlements, of 
|CAR 
333 
which there ate two cities, seven towns, and 96 settlements or villages, inhabited by 59,233 whites, 
13,993 Indians, and 7770 Negro and Mulatto slaves, according to the numeration of the fiscal of the royal audience of Santa Fe, Don Francisco Moreno y Escandon, in the year 1770. The ca pital has the same name, and the other settlements are, 
Towns. Jolojolo, 
Tenerife, San Jacinto, 
Mompox, Nuestra Seuora del Tamalameque, Carmen, 
S. Benito Abad, San Augustin de Zimiti, Playablanca. 
Ayapel, Teton, 
Cazeres. Zambrano, 
Settlements. San Francisco de Tubara, Asis, 
Boxon, Coloso, 
Usiacuri, Tolu Viejo, 
Jalapa, Pichelin, 
Barranquilla, Tacaloa, 
Soledad, Tacamocho, 
Malambo, Yati, 
Pueblo Nuevo, Pinto, 
Sabana Grande, Santa Ana, 
Santo Tomas, San Fernando, 
Palmar de la Can- San Cenon, 
delaria, Talaibua, 
Santa Catalina, Morchiquejo, 
Santa Rosa, Chilloa, 
Sabana Larga, Guamal,. 
San Benito, Penon, 
Guamare, San Pedro, 
San Juan de Saha- Norori, 
gun, Guayal, 
Turbaco, Retiro, 
Zimiriguace, San Sebastian, 
San Estanislao, Cascajar, 
Manati, Sto. Tomas CanluCarreto, ariense, 
Cerro de S. Anto- Tacasaluma, 
nio, Sinse, 
Real de la Cruz, Moron, 
Baru, San Christoval, 
Barranca Nueva, Santiago, 
Yucal, Caimitos, 
Pasa Caballos, Sinsilejo, 
Rocha, Sampues, 
Majetas, Chinu, 
San Basilio, S. Antonio Abad, 
San Cayetano, S. Andres, 
San Juan Nepomu- Pinchorroy, 
zano, San Emigdioj 
Hamenco, w&gt;
/&gt; Momil, ;,&gt;A 
T T2 
8*4 
|CARTAGENA. 
San Nicolas cle la 
Paz, San Juan de las 
Pal mas, Pueblo Nuevo, Santcro, Lorica, San Nicolas de 
Bari, San Bernardo A
bad, Morales, Babilla, Tablada, 
Tiquicio de Aden
tro, Tiquicio de Afu
era, 
Majagua, Ncchi, San Marcos, San Pelayo, Zerete, 
Zienega del Oro, San Carlos de Co
losina. San Geronimo de 
Buenavista. 
The capital is a large city adorned with beauti ful buildings, founded by Pedro de Heredia in 1533, on the shore of a great and very convenient bay more than two leagues in length. It was call ed Calamari in the time of the Indians, which sig nifies, in their language, the land of craw-fish, from the abundance of these found in it. It is situate on a sandy island, which forming a narrow strait, gives a communication to the part called Tierra Tiomba; on the left it is entered by a wooden bridge, having a suburb culled Xiximani, which is another island uniting with the continent by means of a bridge in the same manner as itself. It is well fortified, and is the residence of a go vernor, with the title of captain-general, dependent on the viceroy of Santa Fe, having been indepen dent till the year 1739. Besides the precinct and bastions, it has a half-moon, which defends the entrance or gate ; and at a small distance is the castle of San Felipe de Baraxas, situate on an eminence, and on the side of the bay the castles of San Luis, Santa Cruz, San Joseph, San Felipe, and Pastel illo, which were rebuilt in a modern manner, in 1654, by the Lieutenant-general Don Tgnacio de Sala, with the names of San Fernando, San Joseph, El Angel, and El Pastelillo. The cathedral chujrch is magnificent, and included in it is the parish of Sagrario, besides two other pa rishes called La Trinidad and Santo Toribo. It has the convents of monks of St. Francisco, St. Domingo, St. Augustin, St. Diego, La Merced, and San Juan de bios, which is an hospital, and situate at the top of a high mountain without the walls of the city, at a quarter of a league s dis tance from the convent of the barefooted Augustins, called Nuestra Senora de la Popa ; to this con vent vessels are accustomed to offer up a salutation as soon as they discover it at sea. It has also a college which belonged to the society of Jesuits, a convent of Santa Clara, one of the Observers of San Francisco, and another of barefooted Car 
melites. At a small distance without the city is the hospital of San Lazaro for lepers, which ma lady is epidemical in the country. It has also a tribunal of the inquisition, established in 1610, of which there is only three in all America, and put ting this city, in this point of view, on a footing with the metropolitan cities Lima ami Mexico. It is the head of a bishopric erected in 1534 by his holiness Clement V r II. The bay abounds in fish of various kinds, but it is infested by marine wolves. The climate of this city is very hot: from May to No vember, which arc the winter months, thunder, rain, and tempests are very frequent, but from this inconvenience they derive an advantage of filling with water their cisterns, culled aljibes, and which afford them the only supply of this most necessary article ; accordingly every house is fur nished with one of these cisterns : from December to April, which is the summer, the heat is exces sive, occasioning continual perspiration, which debilitates the frame, and causes the inhabitants to have a pale and unhealthy appearance, although, they nevertheless enjoy good health, it being not unusual to find amongst them persons exceeding 80 years of age. The irregularity of this climate produces several very afflicting disorders, as the black vomit, which is most common amongst strangers and sea-faring people, few of whom have the luck to escape it, but no person ever has it twice. The inhabitants are likewise much trou bled with the leprosy, or disease of St. Lazarus ; the culebri/la, which is an insect which breeds under the skin, and causes a swelling which is accustomed to terminate in gangrene and spasms or convulsions : besides these inconveniences, there are multitudes of troublesome insects which infest the houses, such as beetles, niguas, scorpions, centipeds, and morcielagos . The largest trees are the caob, the cedar, the i/naria, and balsam ; of the first are made canoes, out of the solid trunk, for fishing and commerce ; the red cedar is better than the white, and the two last, not to mention their utility from the compactness of their timber, for their delicious smell and beautiful colour, are the trees fro;n whence are procured those admirable distillations called the oil of Maria and balsam of Tolii. Here are also tamarind trees, medlars, sapolas, papayas
 cassias, and Iiulian apple trees, producing deli cate and pleasant fruits ; the fruit, however, of the last mentioned is poisonous, and many who, de ceived by the beauty of these apples, have the rashness to taste them, soon repent of their folly, for they immediately swell to a distressing degree : so if perchance any one should sleep under its branches, he will be afflicted in the same way. 
|CARTAGENA. 
325 
The antidote, however, is oil taken in abundance internally, and applied outwardly. Neither wheat nor barley are known here, but the place abounds in maize and rice, of which they make cakes, and which are the common bread of the natives, and more particularly so that called cazceve., being a sort of cake made of the root yuca
 name, or moniato. There are also a great number of cotton trees. The arms of this city are a green cross upon a gold ground, with a lion rampant on each side. It was sacked in 1593 by Robert Baal, a pirate ; in 1583, by Sir Francis Drake, 23 years from the time of its being fortified, arid not from its foundation, as according to Mr. La Matiniere ; again in 1695, by Mr. Ducase, assisted by the adventurers or tiibustiers, who completely pil laged it : but a great sensation having been caused amongst the inhabitants at the loss of a superb se pulchre made of silver, in which it was usual on a good Friday to deposit the eucharist, they had the good fortune to obtain its restitution through the interest and favour of Louis XI V. The English, under the command of Admiral Vernon and Sir Charles Ogle, besieged this city in 1740, when, although its castles were destroyed, and it was completely besieged, it would not surren der, being gloriously defended by the viceroy Don Sebastian de Eslava, and Don Bias de Lezo, who caused the English to abandon the enterprise with precipitancy and with great loss. [For this conduct on the part of the English, several reasons "were assigned besides the strength of the place ; namely, the mortality among the troops, want of skill in the commanders, and certain differences between the admiral and the general. The forti fications which they demolished have since been repaired. It is the only part of all America where there is effective coin of a fourth part of a real in silver. Its inhabitants amount to 9160 souls in communion. It has been the native place of many celebrated persons, such are, 
Don Augustin Samiento de Sotomayor, of the or der of Santiago, viscount of Portillo. 
Don Andres de la Vega, professor at Salamanca, a famous lawyer. 
Fray Carlos de Melgarejo, a religious Domini can, an excellent preacher, and a man of unble mished life. 
Don Gaspar de Cuba and Arce, head collegiate of San Marcos de Lima, oidor of Chile. 
Don Gonzalo de Herrera, Marquis of Villalta, governor of Antioquia. 
Don Gregorio Castellar y Mantilla, governor of Cumana, and general of the armada of the guard of the coasts of Cartagena. 
Don Joseph de Paredes, captain of infantry, knight of the order of Santiago. 
Fray Joseph Pacheco, of the order of St. Au gustin, master, visitor, and vicar-general in his pro vince of the Nuevo Reyno. 
The Father Joseph de Urbina, of the extin guished company, rector of the college of Santa Fe. 
Don Jnan Fernandez Rosillo, dean of the church of his country, bishop of Verapez and of Mechoacan. 
Fray Juan Pereyra, a religious Dominican. 
Don Lope Duke Estrada, knight of the order of Santiago. 
It is in long. 75 24 and lat. 10 25 n. [For account of the present revolutions, see VENE ZUELA. 
Bisnops who have presided in Cartagena. 
1. Don Fray Tomas del Toro, a monk of the order of St. Domingo, elected the first bishop In 1532 ; but being at Talavera, his country, at the time, he unfortunately died before he was conse crated. 
2. Don Fray Geronimo deLoaisa, a Dominican monk, renowned for his virtue and taleat, and for his experience in Indian affairs ; he was elected in the room of the former, was consecrated at Valladolid, and there he erected the church into a ca thedral in J538, the same year in which he entered Cartagena ; from hence he was promoted to the archbishopric of Lima in 1542. 
3. Don Fray Francisco de Santa Maria y Benavides, of the order of St. Gerome, of the illustrious family of the Marquises of Fromesta ; serving at that time the Emperor in Flanders, he to.ok to a religious life, and was elected bishop of Cartagena in 1543. The city, in his time, was plundered by two pirates, headed by the Spanish pilot Alonso Vexines, who committed this act out of revenge for a flogging he had received ; they also ill-treated the venerableprelate, who had the additional griev ance, in the year 1551, of witnessing the city in flames. In 1554 he was promoted to the church of Modonedo in Galicia, and was succeeded in Cartagena by, 
4. Don Fray Gregorio de Beteta, a Dominican monk, brought up in the con vent of Salamanca, and one of the twenty who went to the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, from whence he passed over to Mex ico to convert the Indians, and afterwards with the same object to the provinces of Santa Marta, Uraba, and Cartagena ; and being teacher and curate in one of his settlements, he received the order of presentation to this bishopric in 1555 ; although he endeavoured to decline the dignity, 
326 
|CARTAGENA. 
he was at length persuaded to accept it by the ac clamations and remonstrances of all parties, and especially of the vicar-general of his order : he began to preside without being consecrated ; but being yet full of scruples, he renounced the office, and without permission returned to Spain : he then went to Home, but being desired by his holiness to return to his diocese, he was said to have been so much affected as not to have been able to prevail upon himself to enter the city : he returned, there fore, immediately to the coast, and embarked for Florida, with a view of converting some of the infidels ; and with this object he again set off for Spain, in order to obtain his renunciation ; when being at length tired with his wanderings, and worn out with age, he died in his convent of To ledo in 1562. 
5. Don Juan dc Simancas, native of Cordova, collegian of San Clemente de Bolonia; he entered in 1560, went to be consecrated at Santa Fe, and upon his return, had the mortification to find that the suburbs of Xiximani had been sacked by some French pirates ; which disaster was again repeated in the following year, 1561. This bishop, after having governed his church for the space of 10 years, and suffering much from the influence of a hot climate, left the see without a licence, and returned to his country, where he died in 1570. 
6. Don Fr. Luis Zapata de Cardenas, of the order of St. Francis, native of Llercna in Estremadura, third commissary-general of the Indies ; elected bishop in 1570, promoted to the archbi shopric of Santa Fe before he left Spain, and in his place was chosen, 
7. Don Fr. Juan de Y
ivero, a monk of the or der of St. Augustin, native of Valladolid ; he passed over into America, was prior of the convent of Lima, founder of the convent of Cuzco, elected bishop, which he renounced ; nor would he ac cept the archbishopric of Chacas, to which he was promoted : he died in Toledo. 
8. Don Fr. Dionisio de los Santos, of the order of Santiago, prior of the convent of Granada, and provincial of the province of Andalucia ; elected in 1573: he died in 1578. 
9. Don Fr. Juan de Montalvo, of the same order of St. Domingo, native of Arevalo ; elected bishop, he entered Cartagena in 1579, passed over to Santa Fe to the synod celebrated there by the archbishop ; and in 1583 had the mortification of seeing his city sacked, plundered, and destroyed by Sir Francis Drake; which calamity had such a great effect upon him, and well knowing now that he had no means of relieving the necessities of the 
poor, who wer dependent upon him, he fell sick and died the same year. 
10. Don Fr. Diego Osorio, of the same order of St. Domingo ; he went over as a monk to Car tagena, from thence to Lima and Nueva Espaua, received the presentation to this bishopric in 1587, which he would not accept, and died in 1579, in Mexico. 
11. Don Fr. Antonio de Hervias, also a Domi nican monk, collegian of San Gregorio de Valla dolid, his native place, where he had studied arts ; he passed over to Peru, and was the first morning-lecturer in the university of Lima, ma nager of the studies, qualificator of the inquisition, vicar-general of the province of Quito, and after wards presented to the bishopric of Arequipa, then to that of Verapaz, and lastly to that of Car tagena, where he died in 1590. 
12. Don Fr. Pedro de Arevalo, monk of the or der of St. Gerome ; he was consecrated in Spain, and renounced the bishopric before he came to lake possession of it. 
13. Don Fr. Juan de Ladrada, a Dominican monk, native of Granada ; he was curate and re ligious instructor in the Indies, in the settlements of Suesca and Bogota, vicar-general of his religion in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, lecturer on the sacred scriptures and on theology in Santa Fe, was consecrated bishop of Cartagena in 1596 : he rebuilt the cathedral, established a choir of boys and chaplains, and made a present of a canopy to l)e carried by the priests over the blessed sacra ment when in procession ; he assisted at the foun dation of the college of the regulars of the society of Jesuits, and of that of the fathers called the barefooted Augustins, on the mountain of La Popa ; he had the satisfaction of having for his provisor the celebrated Don Bernardino de Almansa, a wise and virtuous man, who was after wards archbishop of Santa Fe ; he frequently visited his bishopric, and after having governed 17 years, died in 1613. 
14. Don Fr. Pedro de Vega, a monk of the same order of St. Domingo, native of Bubierca in the kingdom of Aragon, professor of theology and of the sacred writings in the universities of Lerida and Zaragoza ; he entered Cartagena as bishop in 1614, and his short duration disappinted the hopes he had so universally excited, for he died in 1616. 
15. Don Diego Ramirez de Zepeda, friar of the order of Santiago, native of Lima, a renowned preacher, and consummate theologist ; being at Madrid, he was elected, and died before he could reach the bishopric. 
|CARTAGENA. 
327 
16. Don Jr. Die
o de Tores Atamairano, a monk of the order of St. Francis, native of Tr-uxillo in Estremadura, commissary-general of the provinces of Peru ; he received his consecration at Lima, entered Cartagena in 1620, and died in the following year, 1621. 
17. Don Fr. Francisco de Sotomayor, of the order of St. Francis, native of San Tome, in the bishopric of Tuy, guardian of the convents in Montibrte and Salamanca, difinidor general in the chapter which was celebrated at Rome ; elected to the bishopric of Cartagena in 1622, and promoted to that of Quito before he left Madrid, in 1623. 
18. Don Fr. Luis Ronquillo de Cordova, of the order of the Santissima Trinidad, native of Gra nada, where he read arts and theology, was mi nister in the convent of Malaga, and twice in that of Seville, provincial and vicar-general of Andalucia ; he was elected bishop in 1630 : he governed eight years, and returned to Spain without a licence ; lie received notice of his promotion to the bishop ric of Truxillo in Peru, which honour he declined, and retired to his convent in Granada, where he died in 1642. 
19. Don Fr. Christoval Perez de Lazarraga, of the order of San Bernardo, native of Madrid, qualificator of the inquisition ; he took to an eccle siastical life when quite a child, was collegian of the college of Meira, afterwards of those of Sala manca and Alcaia, professor of philosophy, moral and theological, abbot of the college of Nueslra Sefiora de Salamanca, a most learned theologist; elected and consecrated bishop of Chiapa, and be fore he left the court promoted to the bishopric of Cartagena, of which he took possession in 1640 : he thrice visited his bishopric, and after a grievous illness of 90 days duration, died in 1648. 
20. Don Francisco Rodriguez de Zepeda Valcarcel, native of Zamora ; lie studied grammar in the town of Garcia, jurisprudence in .Salamanca, \vasprofessorofla\vsin Valladolid, abbot of Cifuentes, and canonical doctor of the church of Siguenza ; elected bishop of Cartagena, of which he took possession in 1630 ; and having governed only 11 months, he died in the following. 
21. Don Diego del Castillo y Arteaga, native of Tudela ; he studied in the university of Alcaia, was collegian of Malaga, professor of arts, hav ing substituted this title for that of theology, cano nical master of the church of Avila ; presented to the bishopric of Cartagena in 1652, which he declined. 
22. Don Garcia Martinez Cabezas, native of the town of Don Benito in Estremadura ; he vis pub
lie professor of the institutes, primate of canons in the university of Maese Rodrigo de Seviila, when he was adopted as prorisor by the archbishop of Lima, Don Gonzalo de Ocampo, as he passed through that city ; he was doctoral canon of the church of Charcas, afterwards school-master, trea surer, and archdeacon, from whence he went to Lima as inquisitor, and was elected bishop of Car tagena, but died before he took possession of hfs office, in 1653. 
23. Don Antonio Sanz Lozano, native of Cavanillas, chief collegian in Alcaia, public professor of theology, a man of learning and of acute ge nius ; being rector of his college, he was presented by the king to the bishopric oi Cartagena, of which he took possession in 1661, governed with great skill for 20 years, and was promoted to the arch bishopric of Santa Fe in 1681. 
24. Don Antonio de Benavides and Piedrola, native of the city of Andujar, canon of Badajoz ; elected bishop of Cartagena in 1681 : his govern ment being very troublesome, and disturbed by a cessation of religious rites, occasioned by the cir cumstance of the nuns of Santa Clara, who were under the care of the religious order of St. Fran cis, having been put under the ordinary jurisdic tion, he was called to the court, and arrived there in 1691 ; and not being willing to accept of any other bishopric in Spain, he died in Cadiz. 
25. Don Fr. Antonio Maria Casiani, monk of Basilio, of the university of Alcaia ; elected in 1713. 
26. Don Francisco Gomez Callcja, doctoral Ca non of the church of Zamora ; elected in 1718. 
27. Don Manuel Antonio de Silva, dean of Lima, named through promotion of the former, who not having accepted of the same, there became a dis pute as to which was rightly entitled to the bishop ric of Cartagena, when it was declared by the court in favour of the former, who governed from 1725 till 1736. 
28. Don Gregorio de Molleda y Clerque, native of Lima, consecrated at Rome with the title of bishop of Isauria, domestic prelate to his holiness, and made bishop of Cartagena in 1736, afterwards promoted to the see of Truxillo in 1740. 
29. Don Diego Martinez Garrido, of the order of Santiago, opponent to the professors in the uni versity of Salamanca j elected in 1740 : he died in 1746. 
30. Don Bernardo de Arbiza y Ugarte, native of Cuzco, in the university of which he studied and graduated as doctor of both laws ; he was chief auditor of the royal audience of Panama, 
Oil 
|CARTAGENA. 
when he was promoted to the bishopric of Carta gena in 1746, of which he took possession in the following year, and governed until 1752, when he was promoted to the church of Truxillo. 
31. Don Bartolome Narvaez y Berrio, canon of this holy church of Cartagena, and native of this country ; presented to this bishopric in 1752, and governed here until he died in 1754. 
32. The Doctor Jacinto Aguado y Chacon, ca non penitenciario of the holy church of Cadiz ; elected in 1754, and promoted to the bishopric of Arequipa before he embarked for this of Car tagena. 
33. Don Diego Antonio Valenzuela Faxardo, native of the city of Santa Fe of Bogota; elected in 1751 : he died in 1755. 
34. The Doctor Don Manuel de Sosa Betancur, archdeacon of the holy church of Caracas ; elected in 1755 : he died in 1765. 
35. Don Diego Peredo, native of the town of Leon of Mechoacan ; elected in 1765, promoted to the bishopric of Yucatan in 1722. 
36. Don Augustin de Alvarado y Castillo ; pro moted to the bishopric of Santa Fe in 1774. 
37. The Doctor Don Bias Sobrino y Minayo; elected in 1774, and promoted to the archbishopric of Quito in 1776. 
38. Don Fr. Joseph Diazde la Madrid, a monk of the order of St. Francis, native of the city of Quito; elected in 1777. 
Governors of Cartagena. 
1. Don Podro de Hereclia, founder of the city ; and its adelanlado or governor, a native of Madrid, and a valorous conqueror, in 1532. 
2. The Licentiate Badillo, nominated Juez de Residencia ; he exercised the government during the commission in 1536. 
3. The Licentiate Santa Cruz, judge of another second residence, who became adelantado in 1537. 
4. The Licentiate Miguel Diez de Armendariz ; he entered in 1545, had for judge ( of his resi dence the Licentiate Juan de Montano, oidor of Santa Fe, whom he sent to Spain. 
5. Don Pedro de lierediu, who for the second time was provisional governor until the year 1556, when he died, being drowned in the fleet which was wrecked in the Gordas sands. 
6. The Doctor Juan de Maldo-sado, fiscal of the audience of Santa Fe in 1556. 
7. Jorge de Quintanilla, provisionally nomi nated by the audience of S nta Fe. 
8. The Brigadier Don Gonzalo Ximinez de Qucsada ; nominated by the audience as residen tiary to the three former, in the same year, 1556. 
9. Antonio de Castro ; provisionally nominated. 
10. Juan de Bustos Villegas, nominated by the king ; he entered in 1557, and was promoted to the presidency of Panama in 1563. 
11. Anton Davalos de Luna, a field-officer ; he entered in 1563, and governed till 1567, when he died. 
12. Don Lope de Orozco, as provisional gover nor in the same year. 
13. Francisco Bahamonde y Lugo ; he entered in J 572, and died in 1573. 
14. Hernan Suarez de Villalobos, nominated provisonally by the audience of Santa Fe in 1574. 
15. Pedro Fernandez del Busto, who entered in the above year, and was promoted to the govern ment of Popayan in 1577. 
16. Don Pedro de Lodena, in 1593. 
17. Don Pedro de Acuiia, knight of the order of San Juan, field-officer, in 1601 ; he had the title of president of the Philippines, and died the same year. 
18. Don Geronimo Suazo Casasola, of the habit of Santiago; he died in 1605. 
19. Don Francisco Sarmientode Sotomayor, no minated in the interim, in 1606. 
20. Don Diego Fernandez de Valazco, in 1608. 
21. Don Diego de Acuna, in 1614. 
22. Don Garcia Giron de Loaysa, who governed until 1620. 
23. Don Diego de Escobar, knight of the order of Santiago, who died whilst exercising the govern ment. 
24. Don Francisco dc Berrio, nominated in the in the interim, in 1628. 
25. Don Francisco de Murga, knight of the or der of Santiago, a field-officer, and celebrated engineer ; appointed to fortify the Plaza, being at the time governor of Marmora in Africa : h died in 1634. 
26. Don Nicolas de Larraspuru, nominated in the interim, in 1636. 
27. Don Gonzalo dc Herrera, Marquis of Villalta, nominated in the interim, in 1637, on account of the former not having accepted the office. 
28. Don Vincente de los Reyes Villalobos, pro visional governor in the same year, 1637, being the governor of Moxos. 
29. Don Melchor de Aguilera, a field-oflicer; he entered in 1638, was suspended and called to account by Don Bernardino de Prado, oidor of Santa Fe. 
30. Don Ortuno de Aldape ; being governor of Muzo, he was nominated in the interim, in 1641. 
31. Don Luis Fernandez dc Cordova, of the or
|CARTAGENA. 
329 
tier of Santiago., a commander of the galleons ; he was deposed and sent to Spain for having married without a licence ; and in his place the audience of S,anta Fe nominated as provisional governor, 
32. Don Francisco Ilexe Corbalan,, until arrived the right owner in, , 
33. Don Clcmerite Soriano, colonel of militia, in 1616 ; he died in the following year. 
34. Don Pedro Zapata, colonel of inilkia, of the order of Santiago ; nominated as governor pro tempore in 1648. 
35. Don Fernando de la RLva Agiiero, of the order of Santiago, a field-officer, being .governor of Puertorico; he entered Cartagena in 16 49, and was promoted to the presidency of Panama in 1654. 
36. Don Pedro Zapata, twice nominated as pro prietor in the aforesaid year ; but dying, his place was filled pro tempore by, 
37. Don Francisco Rexe Corbalan. 
38., Don .Juan Perez de Guzman, of the habit of Santiago, a field-officer, and governor of Antioquia ; nominated provisionally, and afterwards appointed to the government of Puertorico. 
39. Don Diego de Portugal, colonel of militia, knight of the order of Alcantara; nominated in 1659, through the circumstance of Don Fernando AgUero being appointed governor of Cartagena in Cadiz. 
40. The Licentiate Don Manuel Martin de Palomeque, nominated by the king ; he afterwards became oidor of St. Domingo. 
41. Don Juan Perez de Guzman, the second time nominated as proprietor; he entered in 1661, and was removed to the presidency of Panama in 1664. 
42. Don Benito de Figueroa Barrantes, of the habit of Alcantara, a field-officer ; he went as go vernor of Larache in Africa in 1665, and from thence to be president of Panama. 
43. Don Joseph Sanchez Ximenez, who was governor of the island of Santa Catalina, nomi nated to this government, which he did not exer cise, having been found poniarded and killed in his bed. 
44. Don Antonio de Vergara Azcaratc, knight of the order of Santiago, nominated previously in 1668. 
45. Don Pedro de Ulloa Ribadeneyra, of the order of Santiago ; nominated in 1669. 
46. Don Joseph Daza, general of the artillery. 
47. Don Rafael Caspir y Sanz, colonel of mi litia, native of Tortosa, nominated in 1678; in whose time happened those weighly disputes with the bishop Don Antouio de Benavides; he was succeeded by, 
|VOL. i. 
48. Don Juan de Pando y Estrada, a field-of ficer ; who took possession in 1684. 
49. Don Martin de Ceballos y la Cerda, in J686. 
50. Don Diego de los Rios, a field-officer ; in his time happened the sacking and taking of Car tagena by the French, in 1695. 
51. Don Juan Diaz Pimienta, knight of the order of Caltrava, a field-officer, gentleman of the chamber to the Emperor Leopold, of the house of the Marquises of Villareal, noted for his valour and military conduct in the siege of Buda, where he was wounded ; nominated as governor to con sole the afflicted natives of Cartagena, taking with him a certain number of Spansih troops from the kingdom, of Galicia ; he entered in 1696, died in 1706. 
52. Don Joseph de Zuniga y la Cerda, of no less credit than the former ; he was governor of Florida at the time that he was elected to this, in 1712, and which he exercised until 1718, when he returned to Spain in the unlucky fleet of Anto nio Ubilla, which was lost in the channel of Baha ma, the frigate in which he sailed being the only vessel saved. 
53. Don Alberto de Bertodano, a renowned bri gadier in Flanders, where he had lost an arm in action ; lie was nominated in 1720, and exercised the government until his death, in 1722. 
54. Don Luis de Aponte, colonel of the regi ment of the crown, afterwards brigadier, an officer of the greatest skill and renown of any in the army ; he was nominated in 1723, and exercised the government until his death. 
55. Don Juan Joseph de Andia, Marquis of Villahermosa, brigadier-general; nominated through the deatli of the general : he entered Cartagena in 1712, and governed till 1730, when he was pro moted to the presidency of Panama. 
56. Don Antonio de Salas, who had been colo nel of the regiment of infantry of Saboya ; he en tered in 1731, and died in 1735. 
57. Don Pedro Fidalgo, brigadier and captain of the royal Spanish guards ; promoted to this go vernment in 1736 : he died in 1739, 
58. Don Melchor de Navarrete, who was king s lieutenant; he entered as provisional governor through the death of the proprietor : in his time the town was besieged by the English until the ar rival of the right owner, 
59. Don Basilio de Gante ; who had risen to the rank of brigadier, at that time king s lieutenant of the fortified town of Ceuta, when he was pro moted to the government of this, in 1742 : he ex.ercised it till 1739, when he returned to Spain. 
60. Don Ignacio de Sala, lieutenant-general, na 
if ff 
330 
|CAR 
live of Barcelona, a celebrated enginceer ; also re nowned in the constructing of the land-gate or en trance to Cadiz : he was promoted to this govern ment for the purpose of inspecting and repairing the towers which had been destroyed bj Admiral Vernon, which commission, after he had executed, he returned to Spain in 1755, and died directorgeneral of the body of engineers. 
61. Don Fernando Morillo Velarde, knight of the order of Alcantara, colonel of infantry, at that time king s lieutenant, when he received the go vernment on account of the proprietor having gone to fortify the town of Portobelo. 
62. Don Diego Tabares, knight of the order of Santiago, brigadier-general; promoted to this goYernment from that of Camana in 1755, and goYernecl till 1761, when arrived his successor, 
63. Don Joseph de Sobremonte, Marquis of this name, a brigadier, who was captain of the regiment of Spanish guards when he vras nominated : he goTerned till 1770, when he died. 
64. Don Gregorio de Sierra, also captain of gre nadiers of the express regiment of Spanish guards ; he entered Cartagena in 1771, and died in 1774. 
65. Don Juan Pimienta, colonel of the regi ment of the infantry of Zamora, in rank a briga dier, and knight of the distinguished order of Charles III. ; lie entered into the possession of the government in 1774, and died in 1781. 
6f). Don Roque de Quiroga, king s lieutenant of the fortified town, or Plaza ; promoted as provincial governor through the death of his antecessor, un til arrived, under the king s appointment, the pro prietor, 
67. Don Joseph de Carrion y Andrade, a bri gadier, who before had been governor of the Plaza of Manilla, and had rendered himself re nowned when it was besieged by the Emperor of Marruecos, being nominated to this government in 1774 : he died in 1785. 
|CARTAGENA, a river of the province and go vernment of Choco : it rises in the mountains of this province near the settlement of Noanama, and enters the sea immediately at the cape of Corrientes. 
|CARTAGENA, a plain of the province and cor~ regitniento of Maule in the kingdom of Chile, close to the port of San Antonio. 
|CARTAGO, a city of the province and go vernment of Popayan, founded by the Brigadier George Robledo in 1540, who gave it this name, with the dedicatory title of San Juan, his patron; the greater part of the military in it having corne from the city of Cartagena in Europe. It did lie between the rivers Otun and Quindio; but the 
|CAR 
continual invasions it has experienced from the Pijaos and Pimaes Indians, who are a bold and warlike people, determined its inhabitants to re move it at the end of the 17th century to the spot where it now stands ; having bought for that pur pose some land of Tomasa Izquierdo, on the bank of an arm of the river of La Vieja, which is a large stream, and navigable for canoes and rafts, and which is at the distance of rather better than a quarter of a mile from the large river Cauca. into which the above river enters, forming before the city an island, which abounds in animals of the chase, and in cattle, and having on its banks ex cellent fishing. This city is of a dry and healthy climate; and although hot, the atmosphere is al ways clear and serene. It is situate upon a level and somewhat elevated plain , of beautiful appear ance ; the streets arc spacious, wide and straight. It has a very large grand square. Its buildings are solid and of good structure, and universally roofed over with straw, having, however, the walls of solid stone from the top to the bottom ; others are built of brick, and others with rafters of wood, the walls being of clay, (which they call imbittidos, or inlaid), so solid as to resist the force of the most violent earthquakes, as was experienced in one that happened in 1785. At a small distance from the city are various lakes or pools of water, which they call cienegas, formed by nature, assisted by art. It is the residence of the lieutenant-gover nor of the government of Popayan, of two ordi nary alcaldes, two of La llermandad, two members of an inferior court, a recorder, a procurator-gene ral, a major domo de propios, and six regulars, the ctibildo enjoying the privilege of electing and confirming these officers yearly. It has also a bat talion of city militia, and two disciplined compa nies ; also some royal coffers, which were brought from the city of Anserma. Besides the church of Matrix, in which is venerated, as the patroness, the Holy Virgin, under the image of Nuestra Sefiora de la Paz, (this being the pious gift of Philip III.) it has five parishes, viz. Santa Ana, Santa Barbara, Llano de Buga, Naranjo, Micos, and Pueblo de los Cerritos. The territory is extremely fertile and pleasant, abounding as well in fruits and pulse as in birds of various sorts ; and in no part whatever are plantains so various, or of so fine a quality. The coffee is good, and the cacao, which is of two sorts, is excellent, and is called yellow and purple bayna. Of no less estimation is the tobacco, with which a great traffic was formerly carried on at Choco. The district of this city abounds in trees, medicinal herbs and fruits, and in an exquisite variety of cacao plants; also 
|CAR 
in beautiful singing birds ; and in its rivers are many sorts offish of a fine flavour, particularly the pntalo. It is not without mines of gold, and /a &gt;aderos or washing places, but these are not worked, save by a few day-labourers. In the church of the monks of San Francisco is venerated an image of the most Holy Mary, with the title of La Probeza, painted on a piece of cotton-stuff, adorned with two fine pieces of silver, the natives paying great de votion to this superb work, from the wonderful tilings that have been said to have been effected through the prayers offered up to her of whom this is the semblance. This city has been the native place of, 
Don Melchor dc Salazar, governor of Choco, aud founder of the city Toro. 
Of the Doctor Don Francisco Martinez Bueno, presbyter and visitor of the bishopric of Popayan ; A mail of great literature. 
Of the Doctor Don Manuel de Castro y Rada; a most exemplary curate. 
Of the Father Joseph Vicuna, who, after having been a celebrated Jesuit, became a monk in the college of missions for propagating the faith in Po
fayan, and died whilst preaching to the Andaquies udians. 
Of the Father Estevan de Rivas, who, after hav ing filled the title of jurist with great credit, be came a Franciscan monk, and died an exemplary penitent in his convent at Cartagena. 
Of the Doctor Don Francisco Felipe del Campo, professor de prima of canons in the university of Santa Fe ; a celebrated orator. 
Of the Doctor Don Geronimo dc Rivas, trea surer and dignitary of the holy church of Popayan, provisor and ecclesiastical governor of that bishop ric. 
Of the Doctor Don Joseph de Renteria, assessor of the viceroyalties of Santa Fe and Lima, honorary oidor of the audience of Charcas : all of whom have borne testimony to the clearness and acuteness of their understandings and excellence of their dis positions. But for all the information on these subjects, we have to thank Don Manuel del Cam po, the son of the last mentioned, who resides in this court, and to whom the merits thus severally applied, unitedly belong 
The arms of this city are three imperial crowns with a sun, and its inhabitants amount to about 5000 or 6000 : 25 leagues n. e. of Popayan, in 4 46 n. lat. 
|CART AGO, another capital city, of the province of Costa Rica, in the kingdom of Guatemala, situate 10 leagues from the coast of the N. sea, and 17 froia that of the S. in each of which it has a 
|CAR 
good port : it was formerly rich and flourishing, on account of its commerce with Panama, Cartagena, Portobelo, and the Havanah ; but it is at the present day reduced to a miserable village of very few in habitants, and without any commerce. It has, be sides the parish church, a convent of monks of St. Francis, and is in 9 42 s. lat. 
|CARTAGO, a river of the same province and go vernment as is the former city : it runs w. and ea ters the S.sea, in the port of La Herradura. 
|CARTAGO, a bay in the province and govern ment of Honduras, inhabited by the infidel Mosquitos Indians. 
|CARTAMA, a river of the province and govern ment of Antioquia : it rises in the mountains o/ Choco, traverses the valley to which it gives it* name, and running e. enters the Cauca. 
|CARTEL, a port of the coast of the province and government of Florida, opposite the castle of St. August in. 
|CARTER, a new county in the state of Tennes see, formed of a part of the county of Washing ton. 
|CARTERET, a maritime county of New Bern district, N. Carolina, on Core and Pamlico sounds. It contains 3732 inhabitants, including 713 slaves. Beaufort is the chief town. 
|CARTERET, a district and jurisdiction of S. Caro lina, on the sea-coast. 
|CAUTERET, a cape or extremity of the coast ei the same province, and one of those which form Long bay. See ROMAN. 
|CARTERSVILLE, a town in Powhatau county, Virginia, on the s. side of James river, 4t miles above Richmond. 
|CARUALLEDA, NUESTRA SENORA DE, a city of the province and government of Venezuela, in the kingdom of Tierra Firme ; founded by Francis Faxardo in J568, and not in 1560, as ac cording to Coleti : it has a small but insecure port. The town is also a miserable place, having suffered much injury, a short time after its foundation, by the violent disturbances caused in its neighbour hood by the Governor Don Luis de Roxas : 80 leagues e. of Coro. 
|CARUALLO, a settlement of the province and captainship of Paraiba in Brazil, situate near the sea-coast, and on the shore of the river Camaratuba. 
|CARUGAMPU, a small river of the province and government of Paraguay : it runs w. and en ters the Parana between the rivers Capuy and Paranay. 
|CARUJAL, PUNT A DE, a point on the coast of the province and government of Cartagena, called v u 2 
|CAS 
also De Picdras : at its top is, according to Hie ac count of Don Juan de la Cruz, the ttugio del Gato, which serves as a watch-tower, which others maintain is situate upon the point Canoa, just by its side. 
|CARUMAS, a settlement of the province and correginiie/ifo of Mosquehua in Peru. 
|CARUPANO, a settlement of the province and government of Curaana in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, on the sea-shore, at the cape of Tres Punlas : there are in its district 25 small estates of aicciOy 35 of sugar-cane, a few of yucas and other fruits ; some of them belonging to its inhabitants, and others to the inhabitants of Margareta and Cumana. 
|CAR U PAR ABAS, a nation of Indians but little known, who inhabit the woods and shores of the rivers which run into the Negro. 
|CARVEL OF ST. THOMAS, a rock between the Virgin isles e. and Porto Rico on the zy.r at a small distance it appears like a sail, as it is white and lias two points. Between it and St. Thomas, passes Sir Francis Drake s channel. 
|CARVER, a township in Plymouth county, Massachusetts. Here is a pond with such plenty of iron ore, that 500 tons have been dragged out of the clear water in a year. They have a furnace upon a stream which runs from the pond ; and the iron made of this ore is better than that made out of bog ore, and some is almost as good as refined iron. 
|CARVER S River, a brancli of St. Peter s river, which empties into the Mississippi. See ST. PIERRE o.r PET tn s River. 
|CASA, a settlement of the island of Joanes or Marajo, on the coast of Brazil, near the mouth of the great arm of the river Amazonas, on the e. coast. CAS ABA MBA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Andahuailas in Peru; annexed to the curacy of Chincheros. 
|CASABLANCA, SAN GABRIEL DG, a settle ment of the head settlement of Teutitlan, and alcaldia mayor of Cuicatlan, in Nuera Espafia: it contains 31 families of Indians, who live by the commerce of salt from some salines which they have in their district, at about a league s distance from this settlement ; here are also some crops of maize : it is of a hot temperature, and lies two leagues from its head settlement. 
|CASABLANCA, also with the dedicatory title of Santa Barbara, a town of the province and corregimiento of Quillota in the kingdom of Chile, situate on the coast : it formerly belonged to the jurisdiction of Valparaiso, from which it was se parated. 
|CAS 
|CASACACHA, a settlement of the province anil corregimiento of Paria in t Peru; annexed to the curacy of Condocondo. 
|CASACORES, a lakein Paraguay or La Plata in S. America, about 100 miles long. 
|CASA-GRANDE, a town of the province and government of Sonora in Nueva Espana ; situate in the country of the Apaches Indians, on the shore of the large river of Gila. 
|CASAGULA, a snowy mountain or paramo of the province and corregimiento of Amboto in the kingdom of Quito. 
|CAS AN ARK, a large river of the province and government of San Juan de los Llanos in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; on the shores of which are various settlements of the missions, which under this name were held at the expence of the regulars of the society of Jesuits, and which are at present under the care of the monks of St. Domingo : it rises in the paramos or mountain-deserts of Chita, of the district of the city of Pamplona, and after running many leagues, divides itself into two branches : the one, named the Uruhi, enters the Meta ; and the other, named the Sirapuco, enters the Orinoco, first receiving those of Purare and Tacoragua. To the w. of this river are the rcducciones of the Pantos Indians, and to the w. those of the Pautes ; to the e . and upon a plain, is the river San Salvador, affording an handy port for commu nication with the Meta and the Orinoco : it is after wards entered by the river Tame, which pours into it in a large stream from the same sierras, and has upon its banks the two numerous nations, the redttcciones of the Giraras and Botoyes Indians. 
|CASANAR;:, some very extensive llanuras or plains which lie between the rivers Orinoco, Sinaruca, and Meta. 
|CASANARE, asettlcment of Indians, of the reducciones which were made by the regulars of the society of Jesuits, in the same province and govern ment as the former river : it consists of the A chaguas Indians, being situate on the shore of that river, with a good and well-frequented port : it is fertile, and abounds in maize, yucas, and above all in cattle : its natives, who are very numerous, employ themselves in making little trunks of cane neatly painted of various colours, and mats and sieves, which they call manares : here arc also some white inhabitants, and the reduction is now under the care of the religion of St. Domingo. 
|CASANAV, a settlement of the province and government of Cumana in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, situate near the coast and the city of Cariaco. 
|CASAPA, a settlement of the missions which 2 
|CAS 
Were held by the Jesuits, in the province and gorernment of Paraguay; situate almost to the s. of Villa Rica. 
|CASA-PIEDRA, ISLA DE, an island of the coast and kingdom of Brazil, and province ami captainship of the Rio Janeiro, close to Cape Frio. 
|CASA-PIEDRA, a settlement of this province and kingdom ; situate near the coast and upon the shore of a river thus called. 
|CASA-PIEDRA, a river which runs s. s. e. in this province, and joins the sea very near Cape Frio. 
|CASAPOEIRA, BAHIA DE, or DEBARRERAS BERMEJAS, a bay on the coast and in the captain ship of Marafion, and kingdom of Brazil, between the islands Ygirapa and Sipatuba. 
|CASARA, -A settlement of the province and corregimiento of Andahuailas in Peru; annexed to the curacy of Chincheros. 
|CASARA, another settlement of the province and corregimiento of Vilcas Huaman, also of Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Hualla. 
|CASARANI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Condesuyos de Arequipa in Peru. 
|CASARIDA, a settlement of the province and government of Maracaibo ; situate on the coast, at the mouth of the river of its name. 
|CAS A RID A. This river rises near the coast, runs 7i. and enters the sea. 
|CASAS-GRANDES, an extensive and beautiful valley of the province of Los Apaches in Nueva Espana. 
|CASAUATAI, a river of the province and country of the Amazonas : it rises from the lake of the Gran Cocama, in 6 48 s. lat. runs to the s. of the Mara/Ion, and following its course towards the n. for more than 25 leagues, runs e. to enter the Ucayale on its e. side, and afterwards to receive the waters of the Zapote. 
|CASCABAMBA, a settlement of the province and corngimiento of Andahuailas in Peru ; an nexed to the curacy of Talavera. 
|CASCABELES, a river of the province and corregimiento of Pastos in the kingdom of Quito : it rises near the ruins of the city of Simancas, and enters the river Caqueta, where are also the ruins of the city of Mocoa. 
|CASCADE, a small river of country and land of Labrador : it runs s. between the rivers Bois and San Francisco, and enters the sea in the strait of Bellisle. 
|CASCAJAL, a river of the province and king dom of Tierra Firme : it rises in the mountains of Portovelo, and runs into the sea through the bay of this city. 
|CAS 
|CASCAJAL, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Cartagena ; situate on the shore of the river Cauca, in the district and jurisdiction of the town of MOID pox. 
|CASCAJO, ISLA DEL, an island of the coast uf the province and- government of Cartagena, close to the island of Arenas. 
|CASCAJO, a point of the 5. coast of the island of Santo Domingo, in the French possessions : it lies between port Nonet and port Salud. 
|CASCARA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Parinacochas in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Lampa. 
|CASCAS, a settlement of the province and cor regimiento of Caxamarca in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Contumaza ; in the district of which there is, at three leagues distance, a large piece of hewn stone of 13 yards long and three quarters of a yard wide on every face, particularly rough and unpolished. 
|CASCAS, a large swamp of the province nnd go vernment of San Juan de los Llanos, which is formed from different arms of the rivers Sarare and Apure, and communicates itself with the lake of Arechona ; both of these lakes being near the last river, and at the skirt of the paramo or mountain de* sert of C hisgas. 
|CASCAY, a settlement of the province and correghnitnlo of Paucartambo in Peru. 
|CASCAYUi\CA,an ancient province of Peru, to the n. e. of Cuzco, conquered by Tupac YupanCfui, twelfth Emperor. 
|CASCO Bay, in the district of Maine, spreads n. w. between cape Elizabeth on the s. w. arid cape Small Point on the n. e. Within these points, which are about 40 miles apart, are about 300 small islands, some of which are inhabited, and nearly all more or less cultivated. The land on these islands, and on the opposite coast on the main, is the best for agriculture of any on the sea-coast of this country. Casco includes several bays. Maquoit bay lays about 20 miles n. of cape Elizabeth. The waters of Casco extend several arms or creeks of salt water into the country. The waters go up Meadow s river, where vessels of a considerable size are carried by the tide, and where it flows within one mile of the waters of Kennebeck. Oft the e. side of cape Elizabeth is the arm of the sea called Stroudwater. Farther e. is Presumpscot river, formerly called Presumpca,orPresumpkeag, which rises in Sebago Pond. This river opens to the waters of Casco" bay on the e. of Portland ; its" extent is not great, but it has several valuable mills upon it. Rayal s river, called by the natives Westecustego, falls into the bay six miles from 
|CAS 
Presumpscot river. It has a good harbour at its mouth for small vessels, and has several mills upon it ; two miles higher a fall obstructs the navigation. Between it and Kennebeek there are no rivers ; some creeks and harbours of Casco bay throw them selves into the main land, affording harbours for small vessels, and intersecting the country in various forms.  
|CASCONA, a settlement of the province and government of Antioquia; situate at the mouth of the river Nare, at its entrance into the Magdalena. 
|CASCUEMBEC, a small island of Nova Scotia, close to the n. point of the island of San Juan. 
|CASIBANI, a river of the province and country of the Amazon;ts : it rises in the cordi/lera of the Mochovos and Pichambios Indians, runs in a ser pentine course to the n. then inclining for many leagues to the s. e, enters the Maranon or Amazonas, near the settlement of Nuestra Senora de Guadalupe. 
|CASIDI, a river of the province and government of Guayana : it enters the Orinoco, according to Bellin, but which is afterwards contradicted by his own map, since it is there represented as having its source to the e. of the city of Pamplona, and as running into the river A pure. 
|CASIGUA, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Maracaibo ; situate on the coast, and near the entrance or mouth of the great lake. 
|CASILDA, ENSI:ADA DE, a bay on the*, coast of the island of Cuba, 
|CASIMBUCO, a settlement of the province and cotregimiento of Chayanta or Charcas in Peru ; an nexed to the curacy of Pocoata. 
|CASIMENA, a settlement of the jurisdiction of the city of Santiago de los Atalayas, in the govern ment of San Juan de los Llanos, of the Nuevo Rey no de Granada : it is of a very hot temperature, arid abounds in fruits of a similar climate. Its na tives, who arc numerous and consist of the Neolitos Indians, are very industrious, docile, and of good dispositions, having been reduced to the faith by the missionaries of the extinguished society of Je suits. The settlement is at present in the charge of the barefooted order of St. Francis, and lies three leagues from the settlement of Surimena, on the shore of the large river Meta. 
|CASIPA, a large lake of the province of Nueva Andalucia Austral or South, to the w. of the Vacaronis Indians : it is 30 leagues in length from n. to s. and 2 i in width from e. to w. Four large rivers flow from it, the principal of vvh ich are Arous or Aroi and Caroa, the which enter the Orinoco on its e. side. Its woods are inhabited by some barbarous 
|CAS 
nations of Caribi s Indians, such as are tlie Canuris to the n. the Ifcparagois to the e. the Aravis to the s. and the Chaguas and Lasipagotes to the to. In this lake tortoises and alligators abound ; its waters are hurtful, and the climate here is unhealthy : hurricanes are frequent here, from the winds which blow from the neighbouring mountains. 
|CASIPOURE, a river of the province oi Guayana, in the French possessions : it runs from w. to e. and enters the sea, its mouth being half a league wide, near cape Orange, in 5 27 . 
|CASIPOUHE, a cape or point of the coast opposite the side of cape Orange. 
|CASIQUIN, a river of the province and govern ment of Mainas in ~the kingdom of Quito, which runs many leagues, and enters the Maranon. 
|CASIRI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Parinacocha in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of its capital : in its vicinity is an elevated mountain, in which great Indian wealth is said to be secreted. 
|CASIRI AQUI, CANO DE, a large and copious arm of the river Negro, by which this communi cates with the Orinoco, and through that with the Maranon or Las Amazonas ; which communication, however, has been frequently doubted and con troverted since the short time of its having been discovered. 
|CASIROUGE, a small island of the e. coast oi Newfoundland, between Bellisle and the port Gobos. 
|CASIRR,UENTI, a large and copious river abounding in fine fish, of the province and govern ment of San Juan de los Llanos : it passes through the llanuras of Cazanare and Meta, and, near the settlement of San Joaquin de Atanari, enters the Meta. 
|CASIUINDO, a settlement of the province and government of Tucuman, in the jurisdiction of the city of Xuxuy ; annexed to the curacy of Cochinoca : it has two hermitages, which serve as chapels of ease, with the dedicatory title of Rinconada and Hio de San Juan. The natives fabricate powder of excellent quality, and in its district are gold mines, which are not worked. 
|CASMA, ALTA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Santa in Peru ; situate on the coast of the S. sea, with a moderately good port. It was sacked in 1586 by Edward David, an Eng lish pirate. 
|CASMA, ALTA, another settlement of this pro vince, called, for distinction s sake, Casma Baxa. 
|CASMAL, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Chachapoyas in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Olleroi. 
|CAS 
|CASONA, a river of the province of Quay ana : it runs e. and enters the Esquivo. 
|CASPANA, a settlement of the province and corregiriliento of Atacama, and of the archbishopric of Charcas, in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Chiuchiu. 
|CASPEAN, or BEAUTIFUL, a small lake in Greensborough, Vermont. It has Hazen block house on its w. side. It is a head water of La Moille river. 
|CASPIYACU, a small river of the province and government of Mainas in the kingdom of Qui to : it runs from 5. s. e. to n. n. w. and enters the Yana at its sources. 
|CASQUIPIBIAC,ariveron thew. sideofChaleur bay, about a league from Black cape, n. w. by n. in the bottom of Casquipibiac cove, at the distance of about one league from which is the great river of Casquipibiac. It lies about w. from the former, and affords a small cod and salmon fishery. 
|CASSITAH, an Indian town in the w. part of Georgia ; which, as well as the Coweta town, is 60 miles below the Horse ford, on Chattahousee liver. 
|CASTA, SAN PEDRO DE, a settlement of the province and corregimicnto of Coquimbo in the kingdom of Chile : it runs n. n. e. and enters the Mames near the sea-coast. 
|CASTAHANA, Indians of N. America, who resemble the Dotames, except that they trade principally with the Crow Indians, and that they would most probably prefer visiting an establish ment on the Yellow Stone river, or at its mouth on the Missouri. 
|CASTEENS, a small river of the province of Sagadohook : it runs s. and enters the sea in the bay of Penobscot. On its shore and at its mouth is a settlement of Indians, where the English have a fort and an establishment. 
CA STELA, a large and navigable river of the province and government of Moxos in the king dom of Quito, being formed from those of the Beni and Paravari ; it afterwards unites itself with that of the Ytenes, and changes its name to Madera, which joins the Maranon on the s. side, in lat. 3 13 18 ; s. 
|CASTELLANOS, PUERTO, a port in the large island of San Sebastian, and near the coast of Bra zil, and province and captainship of San Vincente. 
|CASTILLA, SANTO TOMAS DE, a settlement of the province and government of Honduras in the kingdom of Guatemala. Its port is good, and well frequented with vessels. 
|CAS 
335 
|CASTILLA DEL ORO. See Ti ERR A FIR ML
|CASTILLO, a river of the province and district of Quillota in the kingdom of Chile : it runs w&gt; and joins the Perquilabquien to enter the Longamilla. 
|CASTILLO, a port of the coast, in the same pro vince and kingdom, between the former river and the port Valparaiso. 
|CASTILLO, a settlement of the province and government of Tucuman, in the jurisdiction of the city of Cordova ; situate on the shores of the river Terccro, near the mouth where this enters the Saladillo. 
|CASTILLOS Gii ANDES, an island of the pro vince and captainship of Key in Brazil. It is very near the coast, betvvee* the cape Santa Maria of the river La Plata and the cape of Las Yncas ; the Portuguese have a fort in it. 
|CASTILLOS GR ANDES, another island, with the addition of Chicos, to distinguish it from the other in the same province and kingdom, and at a little distance from the above island. 
|CASTILLOS GHANDES, a point of land or ex tremity of the island of Guadalupe, opposite those of Deseada and of Marigalante. It is thus called from two castles which it has in it. 
|CASTINE, the shire town of Hancock county, district of Maine, is situate on Penobscot bay. It was taken from the town of Penobseot, and incor porated in Feb. 1796. It is named after a French gentleman who resided here ISO years ago ; as also 
|CASTINE River, which is about 14 miles long, is navigable tor six miles, and has several mills at the head of it. It empties into Penobscot bay. 
|CASTLE Island. See CROOKED Island. 
|CASTLETOWN, a township in Richmond county, Staten island, New York, which contains 805 inhabitants, including 114 slaves ; 114 of its inhabitants are electors* 
|CASTLETON, a township and. river in Rut land county, Vermont, 20 miles s. e. of mount In dependence at Ticonderoga. Lake Bombazon is chiefly in this town, and sends its waters into Castleton river, which, rising in Pittsford, passes through this town in a s. westerley course, and falls into Pultney river in the town of Fairhaven, a little below Colonel Lyon s iron works. Fort War ner stands in this town. Inhabitants 805. 
|CASTOR S River, in Newfoundland island, empties in the harbour of St. John s. Its size is considerable for 15 miles from the sea. 
|CASTOK, ESTANQUE DEI/, a lake of the pro vince and colony of Virginia, on the shore f tht 
336 
|CAS 
Ohio, and between the rivers of Great and Little Mance. 
|CASTORS, a port on the s. coast of Nova Scotia, between the White isles and the port of Tangier. 
|CASTRO, a capital city of the province and government of Chiloe in the kingdom O f Chile ; Copied by the order of Don Lope Garcia dc Cas tro, governor of Peru, who gave it his name in 1560 : it lies between two small rivers, and has a good port; is inhabited by some good and opuJent families, and enjoys a pleasant and healthy temperature. It is also called Chiloe, and is of a regular and beautiful form ; has, besides the pa rish church, a convent of monks -of St. Francis, and a bishop auxiliary to that of Santiago. It was sacked by the Dutch in 1643; is 42 leagues s. of the city of Osorno, in lat. 42 40 s. 
|CAST no, another capital city of the province and .governmerrtof Esmeraldas or Atacames in the king dom of Quito ; founded in the valley of Fili by Francisco Quintero, in 1586. 
|CASTRO, another settlement of the province and corrcgimienlo of Chilian in the kingdom of Chile; situate in the island of Maule, on the shore of the river Longomilla, 
C ASTRO-VI REY N A, aprovincc and corregimiento of Peru, bounded n. w. by the province ofCanete, n. by that of Yauyos, n. e. by that of Angaraes, and partly by the jurisdiction of Huamanga and Huanta, w. by that of Vilcas Huaman, s. w. by that of Lucanas, and s. s. w. and w. by that of Yea. It is uneven and barren, and its inhabi tants, on this account, amount scarcely to 6900, although it is 22 leagues in length from e. to . and 25 in width n. tos. No mines have been dis covered here, nor are there any other roads to it than merely such as are opened through passes in the snow, or where no obstruction is offered by the copious streams which every where precipi tate themselves down from the mountains, and which are particularly lacge in the rainy season, which is from October to March. Its productions ;ire wheat, maize, and potatoes; and in some glens, where the cold is not so great, fruits and cattle are extremely plentiful. Here are also lla mas, vicunas, and huanacos, the wool of which they turn to some profit. This province is wa tered by rivers, some of which descend from the provinces of the coast of the S. sea, and others from the further side of the cordillera, running towards the e. and entering the Maranon ; it is also watered by the Caiiete, which rises from the Chicha, and collects other streams in this province ; !&gt;v the Pisco, which rises from, a lake called .Oracocha ; by the Yea, from the lake Choclo
A T 
cocha ; and by the Calcamayo, which enters the province of Vilcas Huaman. In all the waters of this province, notwithstanding they are very abun dant, there is a great scarcity of fish, and without doubt this arises from the cold which prevails here. This province is but thinly peopled, and its inhabitants are poor : they do not, we have heard, amount to more than 7000 souls. It consists of six curacies, to whkh there are 29 other settlements annexed. Its yearly reparlin/iento amounted to 86,400 dollars, and it paid an alcavala equal to 691 dollars. The capital is of the same name : this is a small and poor town, situate on a lofty spot, where the cold is most intense : close to it runs a river, which is made use of for working the mills of the silver mines ; which, although they pro duce this metal of a good quality, they are by no means well stocked with it. The town has a con vent of monks of St. Francis, and two large estates called Huallanto and Huallanga, in which thera are churches annexed to this curacy : is 14 leagues from Huancablica, 26 from Pisco, and 60 from -Lima. Long. 74 44 . Lat. 13 49 s. The other settlements of the province are, 
Sacsaquero, Tambillo, 
Cinto, Azavi, 
Huacahuaca, Tambo, 
Pilpichaca, Capillas, 
Cargonacho, Sangaiaico, 
Santa Ana, Andaimarca, 
A costambo, Santiago, 
Cordova, iluachos, 
Ocobamba, Chiris, 
Ayamarca, Cotas, 
Ocozo, Cocas, 
Lamari, Anna, 
Pacomarca, Huanactambo, 
Querco, Huanac, 
Laramanca, Cadrillo, 
Quisahuara, Yanac, 
Huaitara, Tancara. 
|CASUIIATI, a mountain of the province and government of Buenos Ayres, on the shore of the river Hueque Lenori. 
|CASUI1O, a river of the province and coun try of Las Amazonaa, in the Portuguese pos sessions : it runs s. s. e. and enters the Trombetas. 
|CASWELL County, in Hillsborough district, N. Carolina, borders on Virginia, n : it contains 10,096 inhabitants, of whom 2736 are slaves. Leesburg is the chief town. 
|CAT Island, orGuANAHANi, one of the Ba hama islands. See ST. SALVADOR. 
|CATA, a settlement of the province and govern
|CAT 
mcnt of Venezuela ; situate upon the coast near cape Blanco. 
|CATABAW River. SeeWATEREE. 
|CATABAW INDIANS, a small tribe who have one town called Catabaw, situate on the river of that name, hit. 44 39 n. on the boundary line between N. and S. Carolina, and contains about 450 inha bitants, of which about 150 are fighting men. They ;&gt;re the only tribe which resides in the slate ; 144,000 acres of land were granted them by the proprietary government. These are the remains of a formidable nation, the bravest and most generous enemy the Six Nations had, but they have degenera ted since they have been surrounded by the whites, j 
|CATABUHU, a river of the province and country of Las Arnazonas : it rises near (lie equi noctial line, runs s. e. and enters the liio Negro. 
|CATACACIJI, a settlement of the province and corregimienlo of Caxamarca in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Santa Cruz, in which there is a streaai of water which distils from some crevices, and deposits in its bed a sort of white stone or crystalline substance, which they call catachi, and which being dissolved in water, is accounted a spe cific in the flux. 
|CATACAOS, a settlement of the province arid corregimiento of Piura in Peru. 
|CATACOCHA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Loxa in the kingdom of Quito. 
|CATACUMBO, a river of the province and government of Maracaibo, which rises to the e. of the city of Las Palmas, and runs e. increasing its stream by many others which flow into it, until it unites itself with the Sulia, to enter the lake of Maracaibo ; where, at its mouth, it extends itself and forms a large pool of water called La Laguneta. 
|CATAGANE, a settlement of Canada, situate on the side of lake Superior, close to the point of Chagovamigon, [or more properly called Camanistigovan.  
|CATAGUAR, a settlement of the province and government of Cumana ; situate to the e. of the citv of Cariaco. 
|CAT A LA NA, an island of the gulf of Califor nia, or Mar Koxo de Cortes ; situate near the coast, between the islands of Monserrat and Santa Cruz. 
|CAT A LIN A, SANTA, a settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Tezcoco in Nucva Espnila ; annexed to the settlement of Nuestra Senora de la Purificacion. It contains 132 fami lies of Indians. 
|CATALINA, another settlement in the head settleVOE. i. 
|CAT 
337 
nientand district ofTepaxtlan, and alccldiz mayor of Cuercavaca, in Nueva Espana. 
|CATALAN A, SANTA, another {settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mot/or of Tepcaca in the same kingdom. 
|CATALINA, SANTA, another, with the distin guishing title of Martyr, in the head settlement and alialdia mayor of Zacatlan in the same kingdom. 
|CATALINA, SANTA, another settlement of the head settlement of Teutalpan, and alcaldia mayor of Zacatlan, in the same kingdom. 
|CATALINA, SANTA, a small settlement of thr head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Juxtlahuaca in the same kingdom. 
|CATALINA, SANTA, another, of the head settlement of Tantoyuca, and alcaldia mayor of Tarnpico, in the same kingdom : it is of a hot tem perature, and contains 80 families of Indians, who apply themselves to the culture of the soil ; is JO leagues to the e. of its head settlement. 
|CATALINA, SANTA, another, of the province and corregimiento of Omasuyos in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Huaicho. 
|CATALINA, SANTA, another settlement of the province and corregimiento of Cauta in Peru ; an nexed to the curacy of Pari : it has some hot me dicinal baths. 
|CATALINA, SANTA, a small settlement of the district and jurisdiction of Valladolid in the pro vince and bishopric of Mechoacan of Nueva Espana. 
|CATALINA, SANTA, another, of the head settlement of Mistepequc, and alcaldia mayor of Nejapa, in Nueva Espana: it is of a cold temperature, situate at the foot of a mountain, with 60 families of Indians, and is 4 leagues from its head settle ment. 
|CATALINA, SANTA, another, of the head settlement of Quiatoni,and alcatdia mayor of Teutitlan, in Nueva Espana, with 20 families of Indians ; and is one league n. of its head settlement. 
|CATALINA, SANTA, another settlement of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of Jesuits, in the province of Tepeguana and kingdom of Nueva Viscaya, on the shore of the river Las Nasas ; is 30 leagues to the n, zc. of its capital. 
|CATALINA, SANTA, another settlement, with the addition of Sera, of the province and govern ment of Maracaibo, in the district of the city of Pedraza ; situate on the shore of the river Pariva ; is one of the missions which are held in Bariuas by the religion of St. Domingo. 
|CATALINA, SANTA, another, of the samepro
|CAT 
vince and government, on the shore of the river Masparro, between the cities of New and Old Barinas. 
|CATALINA, SANTA, another settlement of the province and government of Venezuela, on the shore of the river Mosquitos, near where this river enters the Orituco. 
|CATALINA, SANTA, another settlement of the province and government of Cartagena, in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. 
|CATALINA, SANTA, another settlement of the province and government of La Sonora in Nueva Espana ; situate in the country of the Sobaipnris Indians, on the shore of a river which enters the Gila, between the settlements of San Cosme and San Angelc. 
|CATALINA, SANTA, another settlement of the province and government of Tucuman, in the jurisdiction of the city of Xuxuy, with four cha pels of ease. 
|CATALINA, SANTA, another settlement of (he province and alcaldia mayor of Los Zoques in the kingdom of Guatemala. 
|CATALINA, SANTA, another, of the province and alcaldia mayor of Chiapa in the same king dom. 
|CATALINA, SANTA, another settlement of the island of Barbadoes, in the parish and district of S. George. 
|CATALINA, SANTA, another settlement of the island of Jamaica, which is a parish of the Eng lish, situate in the s. part. 
|CATALINA, SANTA, some sierras or mountains of the coast of Brazil, in the province and captainship of Rey, opposite the island of Santa Catalina, from which they take their name. 
|CATALINA, SANTA, a cape or point of land on the coast of the province and government of Cos tarica and kingdom of Guatemala, between the port of Las Velas and the town of Nicaragua. 
|CATALINA, SANTA, a small island close to the s. coast of the island of St. Domingo, between La Saona and the bay of Cabal lo. 
|CATALINA, SANTA, another island of the coast of Florida to the . of Georgia. 
|CATALINA, SANTA, another island of the coast of Georgia, between the islands Sapola and Assabaw. 
|CATALINA, SANTA, a bay on the coast of the straits of Magellan, between point St. Silvestre and point St. Antonio de Padua. 
|CATALINA, SANTA, a bay of the e. coast of (he island of Newfoundland, between the Saint s cape and New cape. 
|CAT 
|CATALINA, SANTA, a river of the province and colony of Maryland, in the county of Talbot. It runs s. and enters the sea in the bay of Chesnpeak. 
|CATALINA, SANTA, an island of the N. sea, near the coast of Tierra Firrnc, opposite the Escudo de Veraguas. It is of a good temperature, fer tile, and abounding in cattle and fruits. It had in it a settlement defended by two castles, called San tiago and Santa Teresa; which, together with the town, were destroyed by an English pirate, John Morgan, who took the island in 1665 ; and al though it was recovered in the same year by the president of Panama and Colonel Don Juan Perez de Guzman, it remained abandoned and desert. 
|CATALINA, SANTA, another small island near the coast of Brazil. See ST. CATHERINE. 
|CATALINA, SANTA, a small island, situate to the s. of St. Domingo, and close to it in the front of the settlement of Jliguey. 
|CATALINA, SANTA, a valley, in which there it also a small settlement, in the Nuevo Reyrio de Leon ; annexed to the curacy of its capital, from whence it lies three leagues (a the aw. It contains 20 families in its neighbourhood, and produces only some sorts of pulse and some goats. 
|CATALINA, SANTA, another valley of the pro vince and corrcgimiento of Moquehua in Pern, bounded by a river and by the cordillera. 
|CATALINA, SANTA, a bay on the s. coast of Nova Scotia, between the port Carnero and that of Ours or Oso. 
|CATAMAIU, a large and rapid river of the province and government of Loxa in the kingdom of Quito, also called Chira, at the part where it enters the sea. It rises in the paramo or desert mountain of Sabanilla ; and collecting the waters of several smaller rivers, runs from 5. to rr. until it unites itself with the Gonzanama, which enters it on the 5. side, in lat. 3 47 s. ; it then turns its course to the w. and afterwards to the s. w. and receives the tributary streams of the rivers Quiros, Macara, and Pelingara ; all of which enter it on thes. side. Being swelled with these, it takes the name of Amotape, from the settle ment of this name, situate on its shore. Near its mouth this river is called Colan, and it empties it self into the sea in the corregimiento and province ofPiura. The countries which it laves arc fertile and beautiful, and its banks are covered with or chards and plantations of sugar-canes of the terri tory of Loxa. The climate here is very hot, arid in the valleys formed by this river the inhabitants are mucli afflicted with the tertian fever ; ifs- Wa ters are generally very cold and unwholesome
. 
|CATAMARCA, S. FERNANDO BE, a city of the province and government of Tucuman, found ed by Juan Gomez Zurita, in 1558, in the fertile an4 extensive valley of Conando. It has a fort to repress the encroachments of the Indians. The name of Cafiete was given it in honour to the vice roy who then commanded in Peru ; .this was after wards changed to London, in honour to the queen of.England, wife of Philip II. king of Spain. The inquietudes caused amongst the inhabitants by the infidel Indians induced Don Geronimo Luis de Cabrera, son of a governor of that province, in 1663, to remove it to another not less fertile val ley, and to give it the name of San J uan de la Rivero ; and lastly, by the permission of the king, in 1683, it was transferred to a spot in the valley of Catamarca ; where it still remains, under the same title, at 80 leagues distance from itsrfirst sta tion. It has, besides the parish church, a convent of the Reco-letos monks of St. Francis, with the dedicatory title of .San Pedro de Alcantara; an hospital of Merced ; and a house of residence, which formerly belonged to the regulars of the company of Jesuits. On the w. side of the val ley is a mountain in which there are gold mines ; and on the w. also from n. to s. runs a serrania, the skirts of which are for many leagues covered with estates and cultivated grounds, and filled, from the abundance of fine pastures, with lage and small cattle and with mules. A tolerably large river runs through the valley in the rainy season, and terminates in some lakes which are formed by it about 30 leagues s. of the city. The commerce of this city is very small, so that there is no coin cur rent ; and even the payments of the royal duties are paid in effects, and in the productions of the country, such as cotton, linens, pepper, brandy, and wheat. Lat. 27 s. 
|CATAMARCA, a settlement of the same province and government ; situate in the district of this eity. 
|CATAMBUCU, a settlement of the province and government of Popayan in the kingdom of Quito. 
|CATAN, SAN FRANCISCO DC, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Caxamarca in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Chetu. 
|CATAN ERA, an ancient province of Peru, in that of Condesuyos, in which dwelt the nation of the Quechuas. It was subjected to the empire by the Inca Capac Yupanqui, fifth Emperor. 
|CATANIAPU, a river of the province and go vernment of Gtiayana or Nueva Amlalucia. It rises to the*, of the settlement of Sau Joseph d 
|CAT 
339 
Mapoycs, runs w. and enters the Orinoco close to the torrent of Los Atures. 
|CATAPUIN, SAN JUAN DK, a settlement of the province and government ofQuixos y Macas in tlie kingdom of Quito. 
|CATARAQUA, or CATARAKUI, a copious river of the province and country of the Iroquecs Indians. It rises from tlie lake Ontario, runs n. e. and continues its course as far as Quebec, from whence it takes the name of St. Lawrence, and then enters the sea. 
|CATARAQUA, a bay on the . coast of lake Ontario, in New France or Canada. 
|CATARUBEN, a settlement of the missions of San Juan de los Llanos in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; one of the seven which were held by the regulars of the company of Jesuits, and be longing- to the nation of tlie Salivas Indians. The Caribes burnt and destroyed it in 1684. 
"CATAUOSI, a settlement of the province and correg-imieHto of Aymaraez .in Peru; annexed to the curacy of Pampamarca. 
|CATAS-ALTAS, a settlement or village of the Portuguese, in the province and captainship of Espiritu Santo, and kingdom of Brazil ; situate on the shore of the river Doce or Dulce. 
|CATAUBA, a river of Virginia, which runs . e. and enters the Thames. 
|CATAUBA, another river in S. Carolinay&gt;which runs s. e, and enters the Watery. 
|CATA WESS Y, a township 
Northumberland county, Pennsylvania; situate ou the s. e. bank of the &lt;*. branch of Susquehannah river, opposite the mouth of Fishing creek, and about 20 miles n. e. of Sunbury.J 
|CATC A, a settlement of the province and corre* gimienio of Paucarlambo in Peru. 
|CATCH, or BOUTIN, a port of the coast of Nova Scotia, between the bay of CJieboucto and the island of Samborough. 
|CAT EMU, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Quillota in the kingdom of Chile, on the shore of the river Quillota. 
f_CATHANCE, or CATHANTS, a small river in Lincoln county, Maine, which rises in Topsham, and empties into Merry Meeting bay, and ha* se veral mills upon it. M&lt;. 
|CATHERINE S Isle, ST, a small island in the captainship of St, Vincent s in Brazil, be longing to the Portuguese, 47 leagues s. of Cananea island. It is about 25 miles from n. to s. in habited by Indians, who assist the Portuguese against their enemies, the natives of Brazil. Lat, 27 L0 . Long. 47 15 w. 
" 
340 
|CATII BRINK S Isle, a pleasant island on the harbour of Sunbnry, in the stale of Georgia, j 
|CATII RHINE S Isle, a small productive island on the s. coast of St. Domingo, 20 leagues e. of the town of St. Domingo. 
|CATiiEuiNi. sTown, in Ontario count}-, New York, lies three miles s. of the 5. end of Seneca ake. 
|CATILINA, a bay of the e. coast of the island of Newfoundland, between the capes Santos and Nnevo. 
|CATO, a military township in New York state, 12 miles s. e. of lake Ontario, and about 1 20 s. of Oswego fort. 
|CATOA, a river of the province and country of Las Amazonas. It rises in the mountains of the Andes, runs n. and enters the Maranon on the s. side, between the rivers Coari and Coyame. 
|CATORCE, or LA PUHISSIMA CONCEPCTON DE ALAMOS DE CATOHCE, one of the richest mines of New Spain, and in the intendancy of San Luis Potosi. The. real de Catorce, however, has only been in existence since 1773, when DOFI Sebastian Coronado and Don Bernarbe Antonio de Zepeda discovered these celebrated seams, which yield an nually the value of more than from 18 to 20 mil lions of francs, or from 730,460/. to 833,500/. sterling. 
|CATTAHUNK, one of the Elizabeth isles, in the state of Massachusetts. See BUZZARD S Bay. 
|CATUARO, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Cuinana in the kingdom of Tierra Firme ; situate near to and s. of the city of Cariaco. 
|CAUACUAN, a river of the province and captainship of Rey in Brazil. It runs e. and enters the Uruguay, between the rivers Ipau and Piricaya. 
|CAUAIAMA, a small river of the province and government of Buenos Ayres. It runs e. and en ters the Uruguay, between the rivers Guarey and Bracuaenda. 
|CAUAILLON, a settlement and parish of the French, in their possessions in St. Domingo : situ ate on the coast and at the w. head, near the bay of its name, between the settlements of Torbec and Los Cayos. 
|CAUAIU, a small river of the same province and government as the former. It runs w. and enters the Parana, between the rivers Verde and Yocare-mini. 
|CAUAIU, a bay of the same island, opposite the Isla Vaca or Cow island. 
|CAUALA, a settlement of the province and cap tainship of Espiritu Sanlo in Brazil ; situate n. of Vijiarica. 
|CAU-ALLERIZAS, a settlement of the pro vince and government of Yaguarsongo in the king dom of Quito. 
|CAUANA, a settlement of the province and corregiwicnto of Conch ucos in Peru. 
CAlJASAN, SAN FUANCISCO XAVIER DE, a town of the province of Copala, and kingdom of Nueva Vi/caya ; situate in the midst of the sierra of Topia, on the coast of the S. sea, on the shore of the river Plastia. It has a small port for lesser vessels, which has oftentimes been invaded by enemies. It is a curacy administered by the cler gy, and to which two small settlements of Mexican Indians are annexed. 
|CAUCA, a large and copious river of the pro vince and government of Popayan, which rises in the mountains of the government of Mariquita, and running 160 leagues from s. ton. in which course it collects the waters of many other rivers, it passes near the cities of Popayan, Buga, Cali, and Anserma ; from whence it is navigable until it enters the large river of the Magdalena. It is very narrow where it passes through the cities of Po payan and Antioquia, and forms the letter S, tak ing its course through rocks, which render its na vigation very dangerous. The Indians, however, are so dexterous in guarding their canoes from running against the rocks by paddles, that it is very seldom indeed that any accident occurs to them. They call this strait Las Mamas de Caramanta, from a city which was here of this name. Many make this navigation for the purpose of avoiding a round-about journey of many days, and in a bad road through the mountains ; and it is said that some have had the good fortune to dis cover a route by water free from all difficulties, and that this was actually made by the pontificate of the bishop of Popayan, Don Diego de Moutoy. 
|CAUCA, a small river of the province and go vernment of Venezuela. It runs n. and enters the sea at the mouth of the Golfete or Little gulf. 
|CAUCAQUA, a settlement of the province and government of Venezuela ; situate near the river Tuy, opposite the cape of Codera. 
|CAUCHUPIL, a river of the kingdom of Chile; it runs to the s. s. e. and then turning s. enters the Lebo. 
|CAUIAN, a settlement of the province and captainship of Para in Brazil; situate on the 
shore of the river Maranon, near the port of Curupa. 
|CAUJANA, an island of the N. sea; situate in the middle of the mouth of the large river Ma ranon. 
|CAUIJA, a lake of the province and govern ment of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia. It is n. of that of Ipava, from \vhencc, according to some, the river Orinoco takes its rise. 
|CAUINAS, an ancient and barbarous nation of the province of Charcas in Peru, whicji was bounded by the nation of the Candies ; here was a superb palace belonging to the Incas, built upon the top of an high mountain, the remains of which are yet to be seen near the settlement of TJrcos, and those of Querquesana and Quiquijana, these being about nine miles distant from the afore said palace. 
|CAUIUSARI, a river of the province and go vernment of San Juan de los Llanos in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It rises in the mountains of the country of the Guames Indians, runs e. for many leagues, and enters the Apure. 
|CAUJUL, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Caxatambo in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of A ndajes. 
|CAUMARES, a barbarous nation inhabiting the woods which lie upon the banks of the river Ma ranon towards the n. Some of them were reduced to the faith by the missionaries of the extinguished company of Jesuits of the province of Mainas, and formed part of the population of the settlement of San Ignacio de Pevas. 
|CAUN, a settlement of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of the Jesuits, in the province of Cinaloa. 
|CATJO, or Couvo, a river of the province and government of Guayana. It runs towards the e. and enters the sea, at the distance of 2{ leagues from the mouth of the river Aprovaca : its banks on the e. side are inhabited by some barbarous Indians of the Yr.us nation. 
|CALOS, a barbarous nation of Indians who in habit the woods to the w. of the river Putumayo. They are thought to be a branch or tribe of the Abives, and are but little known. 
|CAUQUE, a settlement of the kingdom and presidency of Guatemala. 
|CAUQUENES, a river of the kingdom and government of Chile. It rises in the mountains of its cordiflcra, and enters the Maule. 
|CAUQUICURA, an ancient and large province of the kingdom of Peru, to the s. of Cuzco. It was conquered and united to the monarchy by Mayta Capac, fourth Emperor. 
C A 
341 
|CAUQUJS, a. nation of Indians of the kingdom of Chile, and one oft lsc most warlfkeand valorous, who resisted and put a check to fhe conquests of Yupanqui, eleventh Emperor of Peru, obliging him to retreat with his army to Coquimbo. 
|CAURA, a large and copious river of the pro vince of Guayana, arid government of Cumana. It rises in some very lofty sierras, and its shores are inhabited by many Indians, who retreat hither when pursued by the Caribes, who are accustomed to kill the adults, and to keep as prisoners the women and children, in order to sell them to the Dutch. This river is the largest of the kingdom of Tierra Firme ever discovered since that of the Orinoco. It runs 60 leagues before it enters into this latter river, through chains of rocks, which so im pede its navigation as to render it unsafe for any hut very small craft. On its shores are t\vo forts, one at the mouth, where it enters the Orinoco ; and the other at its mid-course. The Maranon and the Orinoco also communicate witli it by an arm which is very considerable, and is called the Rio Negro. 
|CAURA, a settlement of the jurisdiction of the town of San Gil, in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra nada. 
|CAURANTA, a settlement of the province and government of Cumana ; situate on the coast and at the point of Paria. 
|CAURE, a small river of the province and ijovernment of San Juan de los Llanos in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It rises opposite that city, to wards the s. and then enters the Ariari. 
|CAURI, a settlement of the province and corregimienlo or Tarma in Peru; annexed to the cu racy of Cayna. 
|CAURIMPO, a settlement of the province and government of Cinaloa; situate between the forts Rio and Mayo. It is a re.duccion of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of Jesuits. 
|CAUSAN, a river of the province and colony of Georgia, is the same as that of the name of Cornbahi. It runs till it enters the sea. 
|CAUTE, a small river of the island of Cuba, which runs to. and enters the sea. 
|CAUTEN, a large river of the kingdom of Chile, in the district and province of Repocura. It rises in the district of Maquegua, runs continu ally from e. to w. collecting the waters of many other rivers, in such a gentle and mild course, that it has also acquired the name of Las Darnas. It passes before the Ciudad Imperial, and enters the S. sea. It is 300 toises broad at its mouth, and of sufficient depth to admit of a ship of the line*; at 
343 
certain seasons of the year it is o rilled with fish, for seven leagues from its mouth, that the Indians are accustomed to harpoon them from the shores. 
|CAUTEY, a point of land, or cape, which is one of those which form the entrance of the former river. 
|CAUTQ, a settlement of the s. coast of the island of Cuba; situate on the shore of a river which bears the same name. 
|CAUX, MONTANA* DE, mountains in the pro vince and government of French Guinea, which run along the shore of a river of the s;une name, be tween the rivers Orapu and Aprovaque. 
|CAVALLO, as some erroneously spell it, a sea-port town in the province of Venezuela, in Tierra Firme. Lat. 10 28 . Long. 68 8 . See CABELLO PUERTO and CAVKLLO PUERTO. 
|CAVAILLON, a town on the s. side of the 5. peninsula of the island, of St. Domingo, about three leagues n, e. of Les Caye
, and jfiye w. by s. of St. Louis. Lat. 18 IS .f 
|CAVELLO, PUERTO, "BORBURATA. One teague e. of Puerto Cavello, was originally the only resort of vessels trading to this part of Venezuela. Puerto Cavello was merely frequented by smugglers, fishermen, and the outcasts of the interior. The old town is surrounded by the sea, excepting a pace of a few fathoms to the w. ; through which they have now cut a canal communicating to the sea on the n. of the town to that on the s. ; thus forming an island, the egress being by a bridge with a gate which is shut every evening, and at which is placed the principal guard, .This island being too small for the increasing population, houses were built on a tongue of land to the w. of the town, which was the only part free from inun dation ; and this has now become the residence of the merchants, and the principal place. The total population of Puerto Cavello is 7600, of which, excepting the military and the officers of govern ment, none are of the nobility. The .whites are generally employed in trade and navigation ; the chief correspondence being with the ports of the continent or the neighbouring colonies ; for, al though the port has been open from 1798 to the trade of the metropolis, there is as yet but little communication with it. Of about 60 vessels trad ing to this place, 20 at least are from Jamaica, and 20 from Cura
oa, whilst only four or five are from Spain. According to the custom-house books, the cargoes of these veesels are of little value ; but the revenue is defrauded, and the vessels discharge their lading on the coast before entering the port. This place supplies all the a 1 , part of Venezuela, 
4 
and the jurisdiction of Valencia, San Carlos, Bariquisimeto, San Felipe, and a part of the valleys of Aragoa. About 20 Europeans engross the \vhole trade. All vessels trading to the neighbourhood resort here for repairs, and nothing but the unwholsomeness of the air prevents Puerto .Cavcllo becoming the most important port in America. This insalubrity arises from the exhalations from the rain water that accumulates in a clayey marsh to the s. of the city. It is particularly filial to those who are not seasoned to the climate. In 1793 a Spanish squadron anchored at Puerto Cavello ; but in six months of its stay, it lost one-third of the crew; and in 1802 a French squadron in 20 days lost 161 officers and men. It has been computed that 20,000 piastres fortes would be suf ficient to drain this fatal marsh. The inhabitants are supplied by conduits with water from a river that runs into the sea one-fourth of a league zt), of the town. A military commander is also at the head of the police, and is likewise the administra tor of justice, his decisions being subject to an ap peal to the royal audience. The people have de manded the establishment of a cabildo
 but without success. They obtained in 1800 a single alcalde, who is appointed annually ; but great inconveni ences have been found to arise from this arrange ment. 
!T here is no convent, and but one church, in Puerto Cavello. The foundation of another church was begun, but for want of funds it has not been completed. There is a military hospital, and an other for the poor. The garrison consists of a company of the regiment of Caracas in time of peace ; but during war it is reinforced from the militia and troops of the line. There arc from 300 to 400 galley-slaves always em ployed on the public works. 
.Puerto Cavello is 30 leagues from Caracas, in embarking for La Guaira, and 48 leagues in the direction of Valencia, Maracay, Tulmcro, La Victoria, and San Pedro. Reaumur s thermo meter is generally in August at 26, and in Janu ary from 18 to 19. Lat. 10 20 n. Long. 70 SO a?, of Paris. See PUIIRTO CABET-LO. 
|CAVENDISH, a township in Windsor county, .Vermont, w. of vVeathersfield, on Black river, having 491 inhabitants. Upon this river, and within this township, the channel has been worn down 100 feet, and rocks of very large dimensions have been undermined and thrown down one xipon another. Holes are wrought in the rocks of va rious dimensions and forms ; some cylindrical, from one to eight feet in diameter, and from one to 15 feet in depth ; others are of a spherical form, 
from six to 20 feet diameter, worn almost perfectly smooth, into the solid body of a rock. 
C A VI ANA, an island in S. America, towards the n. za. side of Amazon river. Lat. 30 . 
|CAVOGLIERO, a bay on the s. side of the island of St. Domingo, at the mouth of the river Itomaine, 24 leagues e. of St. Domingo. 
|CAXABAMBA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Riobamba in the kingdom of Quito. 
|CAXABAMBA, another settlement of the province and corregimiento of Huamachuco in Peru. 
|CAXACAI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Caxatambo in Peru. 
C AX A MA RCA, a province and corregimiento of Peru, in the bishopric of Truxillo ; bounded 5. e. by the province of Caxamarquilla, e. by that of Chachapoyas, n. w. by that of Luya and Chillaos : all these three being situate at that part of the Maranon which serves as a limit to this pro vince of Caxamarca. It is bounded n. by the pro vince of Jaen, n. w. by that of Piura, w. by that of Sana and by a part of Truxillo, and s. by that of Huamachuco. It is in length 40 leagues from s. e. to n. w. ; and in breadth, or across, 36 leagues. To enter it through the i province of Truxillo, which is the grand road, it is necessary to pass the cordillera, which is not here so lofty as in the s. pro vinces. This province, however, abounds with eminences which are branches of the cordillera ; and on account of the height and situation of these, a great variety of temperature is experienced, some parts being subject to an intense heat, and others to a severe cold. Thus it partakes of the nature of the sierra, and its uneven figure no less corresponds with it : but it is for the most part of a good temperature, particularly in the capital. The province abounds greatly in all kinds of fruits and cattle : in it are fabricated cloths, baizes, blankets, canvas for sails of ships, and cotton garments of a very fine and excellent quality. Formerly its prin cipal commerce was in swine ; at present it is not, though these animals still abound in some parts. It is watered by many rivers, of which those rising on the u\ side of the cordillera, as the Sana, Lambayeque, and those passing through the province of Truxillo, all enter the S. sea. The others, amongst 
hich that of the Criznejas is the largest, incoporate themselves with the Ma ration. On i&lt;s shores are lavaderos, or washing- places of gold; awl its rivers in general abound in very good and wholesome fish. Besides the fruits and the pro ductions of every kind found in this province, it has to boast many gold and silver mines, some of which are worked. There a e also some of copper, 
very fine lead, brimstone, and alcaparrosa. To wards the n. part, where it touches the province of Jaen, are found some bark-trees, the production of which, although not equal to the trees of Loxa, is of the colour of heated copper, and possesses all the virtues of the common bark. Here are also many medicinal herbs, and amongst them the cele brated calaguala. In the time of the Indians, and before the conquest, it was so well peopled that its natives formed upwards of 500 settlements. At present they amount to 46,000, being divided into 46 settlements. The capital bears the same title, and the repartimicnto of the corregidor used to amount to 80,000 dollars, and it paid an alcavala of 640 dollars per annum. 
mi .m , 
1 he settlements are, 
Caxamarca, the ca- S. Juan de Llallan, 
pital, Nepos, 
Santa Catalina, Tinguis, 
San Pedro, San Miguel de PlSan Joseph, laqu.es, 
Cherillo, Celedin, 
Jesus, Sorocucho, 
Asuncion, San Marcos, 
Contumaza, Catacachi, 
Cascas, Amarcucho, 
Guzmanga, Ichocan, 
San Benito, San Juan de.IIuaraTrinidad de Chctu, bos, 
c -r- i 
S. Francisco dc 
Cay an, Santa Cruz, Pion, Santa Catalina de 
Chugod, San Pablo de Cha
lique, S. Luis de Tumba
din, S. Bernardino de 
Nice, 
v. u r ochabamba, 
Llama, 
Cachen , 
Cuter vo, 
Queracoto, 
Chachopin, 
Tocmocha, 
Zocota, 
Todos Santos de 
Chota, Tacabamba, Yauyucan. 
The capital is large and handsome ; its figure is irregular, and it is situate upon a level plain. The houses are of clay, and the streets are wide and straight. The parish church, which has three naves, is of finely worked stone, and the building expcnces of it were defrayed by King Charles II. in the time of the viceroy the Duke of La Palata, in 1682. It has a parish of Spaniards, called Santa Catalina ; two of Indians, which are Saa Pedro and San Joseph ; two convents of the order of St. Francis, one of the Observers, and another of the Recoletans ; an hospital and a convent of Bethlemitcs, a monastery of nuns of La Concepcion, an house of entertainment of Nuestra Senora de 
344 
Las Mercedes, and an hospital for women. It contains more than 2000 inhabitants, and amongst these many illustrious families, descended from the first conquerors. The Indians here are accounted the most industrious of any in the kingdom. The temperature is mild, and it abounds in fruits and pastures : here arc also mines of various metals. Here it was that Atahualpa was put to death by the Spanish, being the last Inca and Emperor of Peru ; and there is still to be seen a stone, of a yard and an half long and two-thirds wide, which serves as the foundation to the altar of the chapel where he met his fate. Of this palace, which was for the most part built of mud, but which was very large, and was afterwards converted into the prison, the chapel, and house of the corregidor, called De Cabildo, nothing has been left save a piece of wall of about 12 yards long and eight wide. It has not long been forgotten to what point the Emperor waved his hand, to signify where his pursuers might find the treasure which might secure to him Lis liberty. At a league s distance, to the e. of the city, are seen the term as 
 or baths, as they are called, of the Inca ; the waters of which are not so plentiful as they were formerly, although so hot as to boil an egg ; but the egg, although it ap pears completely done, will, if put on a common fire to boil, take just as much time as an egg which is perfectly cold ; if kept a day or more it breaks, and the smell and flavour of it, when eaten, is like mud ; but if it be not eaten until it be cold, then its flavour is similar to that of any. other egg. On the banks of the stream from whence these waters flow, and in the pools formed by them, there is found a multitude of animalcule, which looked at through a microscope appear like shrimps. Lat. 6 54 s. 
|CAXAMARQUILLA Y COLLAOS, a pro vince and corfegiwiento of Peru, called also Pataz ; bounded c. by the mountains of the infidel Indians, n. e. and ;?. by the province of Chachapoyas, n.w. by that of Caxamarca, the river Maranon flowing between the two, w. by part of the province of Conchucos, and s. by that of Huaimalics. It is 26 leagues long from n. to s. and six wide, where it extends itself farthest along the e. shore of the river Maranon, which divides this province from those of Conchncos and Iluamachnco. Its temperature is various : in the hol lows and uneven places it is mild ; in the parts lying upon the above river it is hot, and in the very lofty parts it is cold. The territory is rugged and uneven, and a level spot of ground, or llamtra, is scarcely to be seen throughout the whole. On the e. side it is as it were walled in by veiy 
lofty and craggy mountains, increasing in height until they gradually reach the loftiest summit : but these are the provident sources of streams which flow down from them into the Maranon, and which, together with the rains, fertilize several spots of land, producing maize, wheat, potatoes, ocas, bark, French beans, herbs, and sugar-cane, for the working of which there are mills ou the spot. Every kind of cattle is found here in moderation, and the Maranon abounds in fish. Almost all the mountains of this province have iu them veins of silver and gold ore : but these are very deceitful, and as well upon this account as from the want of hands, they are for the most part abandoned. The gold mines, however, have always been worked, though the silver mines not more than 20 years back up to now, in which time some riches have been discovered ; and even at the present day the gold mines would produce 600 marks, and those of silver 3000. The trade of the mines is certainly the principal commerce of the place, and it is faci litated by four ports in the Maranon, which afford a convenient opening and communication with the other provinces. The inhabitants of this place scarcely amount to 8000, who live in J7 settle ments. Its repartimicnto used to amount to 50,000 dollars, and its alcavala to 400 dollars per annum. 
The settlements are, 
Caxamarquilla, the Buldibuyo, 
capital, Santa Magda Ie* 
Bambamarca, de Huayo, 
Cundarmarca, l*ataz, 
Caleraan, La Soledad, 
Asiento de Saru- Porcos, 
milla, Challas, 
Chiii;i, Tayabamba, 
Santa Isabel de Uchos, 
Pias, Uchumarca. 
Quero, 
The settlement, the capital of this province, is of the same name. Lat. 7 36 s. 
|CAXAMARQUILLA, another settlement of the province and corregimiento of Caxatambo in Peru. 
|CAXAMAHQUJLLA, another, with the surname of Gongor, in the same province and corregimicnto as the former ; and thus called to dis tinguish it, being annexed to the cuacy of Gongor. 
|CAXAMARQUILLA, another, of ttie province and corregimiento of Huailas in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Pampas. 
|CAXAMAHQUILLA, another, of the province and corregimiento of Tarma in the same king;
345 
dom ; annexed to the curacy of Pasco ; in which is the celebrated mountain and mine of Lauricocha. 
|CAXAMARQUILLA Y COLLAOS, the territory of the missions which forms part of the former pro vince, and which is a reduction of the infidel moun tain Indians, who have been converted by the monks of St. Francis : these Indians are main tained by a portion paid by the king s procurator out of the royal coffers at Lima. They dwell to the e. of the province, and are reduced to four settlements ; two of the Ibita, and two of the Cholona nation. It is now 90 years since their foun dation, and the number of Indians may at present amount to 2000. These settlements are situate upon mountains covered with trees and thick woods ; from whence the natives procure incense, cacao, resinous gums, oil of Maria, dragon s blood, the reed called bejuco, dried fish, honey, wax, monkeys, parrots, and macaws, which are the branches or its commerce ; though not less so is the coca plant, which they pack up in measures of four bushels each, and carry in abundance to different parts, for the consumption of the whole province. The missionaries of the above order have made various attempts, and have spared neither pains nor labour in penetrating into the interior parts of the mountains ; having repeatedly discovered other barbarous nations, whom they would fain have re duced to the divine knowledge of the gospel. 
The aforesaid settlements are, Jesus de Sion, San Buenaventura, 
Jesus de Ochonache, Pisano. 
C AX ATA M BO, a province and corregimiento of Peru, bounded n. by that of Huailas, n. e. by that of Conchuios, e. by that of Huamalies, s. e. by that of Tarma, s. by the part of Chancay called Checras, s. e. by the low part of Chancay, and n. w. by that of Santa. It is in length 34 leagues n. e. 5. w. and 32 in width n. w. s. e. ; the greater part of it is situate in a serrania. Its temperature is consequently cold, except in the broken and un even spots and in the low lands. Besides the pro ductions peculiar to the serrania, this province abounds in all sorts of seeds and fruits; in all species of cattle, especially of the sheep kind, from the fleece of which its inhabitants manufacture much cloth peculiar to the country ; this being the principal source of its commerce. It produces some grain and cochineal, used for dyes ; and if this latter article were cultivated, it would bring great profit. Amongst the mountains of this province there is one called Huilagirea of fine flint, and two mines of sulphur and alcaparrosa, articles employed in the colouring of wools, not only in this province, 
|VOL. I. 
but in those of Huanuco, Huamalies, and Janja: It lias also mines of good yeso or gypsum. The principal rivers by which it is irrigated, are two which rise in the same soil, and both of which enter the S. sea, after having laved the contiguous pro vinces : in former times there were fine silver mines, which are still worked, but for some reason or other, to very little profit. On the w. e. part, on some emi nences, is a spot called Las Tres Cruces, (The Three Crosses), there being as many of these fixed up here to determine its boundaries, and that of the pro vince of Santa Uuailas. Its population consists of the 69 following settlements : its repartimicnto used to amount to 130,000 dollars, and the alcaiala to 1046 dollars per annum. 
Caxatambo, the ca- Cochas, 
pital, Jluanchai, 
Astobambas, Gorgor, 
Uicas, Huncahon, 
Mangas, Palpay, 
Puequian, Chingos, 
Copa, Caxamarquilia dft 
Gorgorillo, Gorgor, 
Paellon, Churin, 
Chamas, H uacho, 
Nam s, Curay, 
Chiquian, Tancur, 
liuasttt, Acaya, 
Acquia, Rapas, 
Matara, Pachangara, 
Ticllos, Palpas, distinct from 
Roca, the other, 
Corpariqui, Naba, 
Llaclla, Oyon, 
Canis, Tinta, 
Caxamarquilia, Mallay, 
Rajan, Andajes, 
Hacas, Chimba, 
Carhuapampa, Cants, 
Pimachi, Larcha, 
Machaca, Mani, 
Chilcas, Calpa, 
Ocros, Caujul, 
Cheque, Naban, 
Congay, Conchas, 
Copa, Ayndeo, 
Caxacay, Amb ir, 
Huaillacayan, Cochamarca, 
Yamor, YarocaUa, 
Haclla, Huaca, 
Colquios, Quintal 
|CAXATAMBO, a settlement and the capital of the former province. Lat. 10 27 s. 
|CAXHUACAN, S. FKANCISCO DF, a settle ment of the head settlement of Teutalpan, aud af~ 
Y Y 
346 
|CAY 
ca/dia mayor of Zacatlan, in Nucva Espaiia, five leagues from i(s head settlement. 
|CAXIBARI, a settlement of the province and captainship of Itamaraca in Brazil, situate near the *. side of the town of La Concepcion. 
|CAXICA, or Bcso.vr.oTF,, a settlement of the corre%imien(o of Zipnquira in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, is oL a moderately cold temperature, being agreeable and healthy, and producing much wheat, maize, barley, and other productions inci dental to a cold climate. Its population amounts to 150 families, and as many families of Indians, who had in it a capital fortress, in which the Zipa or king of Bogota shut himself up in order to de fend the entrance into his kingdom against the Spaniards : he was, however, routed and taken by Gonzalo Ximcnez de Quesada in 1537. is five leagues to the n. of Santa Fe. 
|CAXITITLAN, the alcaldia mayor and dis trict or jurisdiction of the kingdom of Nucva Galicia, and bishopric of Guadalaxara : in its district is a large, fertile valley, abounding in every kind of seed, as maize, wheat, French beans, and various sorts of pulse : is of a mild temperature, and the district of its jurisdiction consists of six settlements : in it is the great lake or sea of Chapala : it is seven leagues s. e. of Guadalaxara. Long. 102 43 . Lat.* 20 35 . 
San Luis, Istahuacan, 
Cuyatan, Santa Cruz, 
Coscomatitlan, Axixiqui. 
|CAXITLAN, a settlement of the head settle ment of Almololoyan, and alcaldia mayor of Colina, in Nueva Espaiia : it contains 30 families of Spa niards, 20 of Mustees, and five of Mulattoes : in its district are various estates of palms of Cocos, (palmasde Cocos), and some herds of large cattle : is seven leagues to the w. of its head settlement. 
|CAYAIIAGA, or CAYUGA, sometimes called the Great River, empties in at the s. bank of lake Erie, 40 miles e. of the mouth of Huron ; having an Indian town of the same name on its banks. It is navigable for boats ; and its mouth is wide, and deep enough to receive large sloops from the lake. Near this are the celebrated rocks which project over the lake. They are several miles in length, and rise 40 or 50 feet perpendicular out of the water. Some parts of them consist of several strata of different colours, lying in a horizontal direction, and so exactly parallel, that they resemble the work of art. The view from the land is grand, but the water presents the most magnificent pros pect of this sublime work of nature ; it is attended, however, with great danger ; for if the least storm arises, the force of the surf is such that no vessel 
|CAY 
can escape being dashed to pieces against the rocks. Colonel Broadshead suffered shipwreck here in the late war, and lost a number of his men, when a strong wind arose, so that the last canoe narrowly escaped. The heathen Indians, when they pass this impending danger, offer a sacrifice of tobacco to the water. Part of the boundary line between the United States of America and the Indians begins at the mouth of Cayahaga, and runs up the same to the portage between that and the Tuscarawa branch of the Muskingum. The Cayuga nation, consisting of 500 Indians, 40 of whom reside in the United States, the rest in Canada, receive of the state of New York an annuity of 2300 dollars, be sides 50 dollars granted to one of their chiefs, as a consideration for lands sold by them to the state, and 500 dollars from the United States, agreeably to the treaty of 1794. See Six NATIONS. 
|CAYENNE, a large island of the province and government of Guayana : it is six leagues in length from n. to s. and three quarters of a league in its broadest part. On the n. side it has the sea, on the w. the river Cayenne, on the e. the Ouya, and on the s. an arm which is formed by this and the Orapu. The soil is excellent, fertile, and irrigated by many streams. That part which looks to the n. is the most pleasant and healthy ; and in it are many mountains well cultivated and covered with country seats. The part facing the s. is much lower, and abounds in meadows, called sabanas, and which are inundated in the rainy seasons. The point of the island formed by the mouth of the river Cayenne, is called Caperoux, where there is a fortress with a French garrison, and below this a convenient and large port, capable of containing in security 100 ships. The French established themselves in this island in the year 1625, and abandoned it in J654, when the English entered it, and were routed by .Mr. de lu Barre, in the year 1664. The Dutch had their revenge in 1676 : but the year following it was recovered by the French, under the command of D Estrees, on whom the ce lebrated Jesuit Carlos de la Rue made the following inscription : 
Joanni 
Comiti EstrcEo 
Vice AmeraHo 
Cayanfi. Tabaco 
PI. Caplis 
Batavorum 
" Americana classe 
deltta Colon ii. excisis. 
The capitulation of Cayenne to the English arms, in conjunction with the Portuguese, took 
|CAY 
place on the 12th of January 1809 ; the English in this brave contest having been commanded by Lieutenant-colonel Marques, and Captain Yeo. Besides the capital there are in this island the towns of Armire, inhabited by Jews, as likewise those of Matuiri, Matahuri, Courrou, and Conanama, inhabited by French, Negroes, Mustees, and Mulattoes ; but few by Indians, these living for the most part retired in the mountains and woods to the s. These towns were converted to the faith by the society of the Jesuits, who had here established a mission, which afterwards fell to decay. 
The province of Cayenne is bounded on the n. by the Dutch colony of Surinam ; w. by the woods and mountains inhabited by barbarians, and s. by the country of the Portuguese on the borders of the Marailon.1 The principal rivers which water it, and which empty themselves into the Atlantic ocean, are the Cabo, Apurvaca, Cayenne, Vuya, and Barca. Its chief commerce is in sugar, which is manufactured in various mills by the Negroes. In 1752 the exports of the colony were 260,541 Ibs. of arnotto, 80,365 Ibs. sugar, 17,919 Ibs. cotton, 26,881 Ibs. coffee, 91,916 Ibs. cacao, beside timber and planks. 
|CAYENNE, the capital of the above island, is small, well built, and populous. It is at the n. point of the island, at the foot of the castle of San Luis, and defended by two other redoubts, the one called Courrow, and the other Sinarari, with a handsome, convenient, and large port ; the greater part of the houses, which amount to about 200, are built of wood. Besides the parish called San Sal vador, there is a fine one which belonged to the Je suits, as also an excellent house for the governor. The form of the city is an irregular hexagon, well fortified ; in Lat. 5 n. Long. 52 16 w. 
|CAYENNE, ariver of the above province, [which rises in the mountains near the lake of Parime, runs through the country of the Galibis, a nation of Caribe Indians, and is 100 leagues long; the island which it environs being 18 leagues in circuit. 
|CAYES, LES, a sea-port town on the s. side of the s. peninsula of the island of St. Domingo, 13 leagues w. by s. of St. Louis. Lat. 18 12 ??. 
|CAYETANO,SAN, a settlement of the province and government of Cartajjcna in the kingdom of Tierra Firme ; situate on the mountain of the di vision of Maria ; six leagues to tlfe n. n. e. of the swamp which takes the name of tins town. It is one of those new establishments founded in the year 1776 by the Governor Don Juan Pimienta. 
|CAYETA\O SAN, another settlement of the pro vince and government of La Sonora in Nneva Espaiia; situate in the country of the Sobaipuris 
Indians, on the banks of a river between the settle ments of San Louis, and San Francisco Xavier. 
|CAYETANO SAN, another settlement of the pro vince and captainship of Key in Brazil ; situate on the shore of the Rio Grande. 
|CAYLOMA, a jurisdiction under the bishop of Arequipa, 32 leagues e. of that city, in S. America, in Peru, famous for the silver mines in the moun tains of the same name, which are very rich, though they have been worked for a long time. The country round it is cold and barren. There is an office here for receiving the king s fifths and vending quicksilver. See CAILLOMA. 
|CAYMANS, three small islands, 55 leagues n.n.w. of the island of Jamaica, in the West Indies : the most s. of which is called the Great Caymans, which is inhabited by 160 people, who are descend ants of the old Buccaniers. It has no harbour tor ships of burden, only a tolerable anchoring place on the s. w. The climate and soil are singularly salubrious, and the people are vigorous, and com monly live to a great age. They raise all kinds of produce for their own use and to spare. Their chief employment is to pilot vessels to the adjacent islands, and to fish for turtle ; with which last they supply Port Royal and other places in great quan tities. Great Caymans lies in Lat. 19 15 n. Lori*?. 8133 a&gt;. 
|CAYMITE, GJRAND-, an island on the n. side of the s. peninsula of the island of St. Domingo, two leagues long and one broad. 
|CAYUGA, a beautiful lake in Onondaga county, New York, from 35 to 40 miles long, about two miles Avide, in some places three, and abounds with salmon, bass, cat-fish, eels, &c. It lies between Seneca and Owasco lake, and at the n. end empties into Scayace river, which is the .?. e. part of Seneca river, whose waters run to lake On tario. On each side of the lake is a ferry-house, where good attendance is given. The reservation lands of the Cayuga Indians lie on both sides of the lake, at its n. end. 
|CAZAPE, or CAZAPA, a settlement of the pro vince and government of Paraguay; situate to the s. of the town of Espiritu Santo. 
|CAZARES, a town of Mexico. See ANGELO. 
|CAZAUTAS, a settlement of the province and government of Antioquia ; situate in the sierra Morena, on the shore of an arm of the river Sail Jorge. 
|CAZENOVIA, a new and thriving township in Ilerkemer county, New York, 40 mill s w. of Whitestown. By the state census of 1796, 274 of its inhabitants are electors. 
|CAZERES, SAN AUGUSTI NDE,or SAN MARTIN Y y 2 
|DLL PITER TO, a city of the province and go vernment of Antioquia in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada; founded by Gaspar do Rodas, on the spot of the Matanza of Valdivia, in 1576. It has changed its place several times, on account of the badness of its temperature : and, lastly, in the year 1.588, it was removed by Francisco Iledondo to the spot where it now stands : is one league froin the river Cauca, on a very steep declivity, which is also of an unhealthy temperature, although abounding greatly in gold mines, which air, however, but little worked. Jt is the native place of, 
Fr. Marcos Vetancur, provincial of St. Domingo in Santa Fe : 
Fr. Lorenzo de Figueroa, of the province of San Francisco : 
Don Andres de Vetancur, elected bishop of, La Concepcion in Chile: 
Fr. Diego de Figueroa, provincial of San Angustin in Santa Ke : and 
Don Luis de Vetancur, , precentor of Quito, in quisitor of Lima, and bishop-elect of Popayan : all brothers, and men of singular virtue and learning. 
|CEAPA, a settlement of the province and corrcgtDiiento of Chilques and Marques in Peru ; an nexed to the curacy of Pampacucho. 
|CEBACO, a settlement of the province and akaldia mat/or of Matagalpa in the kingdom of (iuatemala. 
|CECIL, a county, being one of the ten which compose the colony and province of Maryland. 
|CECIL, a township in Washington county, Pennsylvania. 
|CECILIA, DONA, a settlement of the province and government of Santa Marta in the kingdom of Tierra Firme ; situate on the shore of the large river Magdalena, opposite the lake Zapatosa, three leagues from the town of Mompox. 
|CECONTEPEC, a settlement of the province and alcaldia mat/or of San Salvador in the kuigdom of Guatemala. 
|CEDAIl Point, a port of entry in Charles county, Maryland, on the e. side ofPotowmac river, abo tt 12 miles below port Tobacco, and 96 s. by w. of Baltimore. Its exports are chiefly to bacco and Indian corn, and in 1794 amounted in value to 18,593 dollars. 
|CEDAR Point, a cape on the w. side of Dela ware bay, in St. Mary s county, Maryland. Ct-DAR Lick, a salt spring in the state of Tenssee, 19 miles from Nashville, four from Big 
ware 
ncssee 
spring, and six from Little spring. 
|CEDAR, a river of the province and colony of 
Pennsylvania, which traverses New Jersey, and enters the sea. 
|CLDAU, another small river of the province and colony of Delaware, which runs e. and enters the sea in the bay of its name. 
|CEDAR, a small island of South Carolina; situate within the strait of Pampticoe. 
|CEDAR, another island of the province and co lony of Maryland, between that of Chingoteag and that of Little Matompkin. 
|CEDAZOS, a settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Zapopan in Nueva Espafia, in which dwell some Mtistecs, Mulattoes, and Indians, who live by cultivating seeds. 
|CEDROS, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Paucartambo in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Challabamba. 
|CEDROS, another settlement in the province and government of Cinaloa ; situate on the shore of the river Mayo, on the confines of the province of Astimuri. 
CJ:DUOS, a river of New France or Canada. It runs .?. e. and enters the lake Erie near the mouth of the strait of Misigagues. 
C EG U EH LIE, a small river of the province and government of Quijos y Macas in the king dom of Quito. It enters, a little way from its source, into the Azuela. 
|CELAYA, a town of the intcndancy of Guanaxuato in the kingdom of Nueva Espaiia. Sumptuous edifices have been recently constructed here, as also at Querctaro and Guanaxuato. The church of the Carmelites of Celaya has a fine appearance ; it is adorned with Corinthian and Ionic columns. Its height is 1835 metres, or 6618 feet. 
|CELEDIN, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Caxamarca in Peru. 
|CLLLACACA, a settlement of the province and corrrgimiento of Chichas and Tarija in Peru. 
|CENDRE, a cape or point of land of the coast of Acadia. 
|CENEGUANGA, a settlement of the province and government of Santa Marta in the kingdom of Tierra Firme; situate on the coast near the river Piedras. 
|CENEGUETAS, a settlement of the province and government of Guayaquil in the kingdom of Quito. 
|CENGUYO, SAN PEDRO DE, a settlement of the head settlement of Yrimbo, and alcaldia mayor of Maravatio, in the bishopric of Mechoacan, and kingdom of Nueva Espaua. It contains 60 families of Indians, and is two leagues to the n. TH. of its head settlement. 
|CENEWINI, a port of the river Poumaron, in tli c part of the province and government of Guayana in the possession of the Dutch. 
|CENIS, a settlement of Indians of the province and government of Louisiana, situate in the road which leads to Mexico. It has a fort which was built by the French when they had possession of the province. 
|CENO MANAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, descended from the Naunas, who live in the woods, and without any fixed abode, along the banks of the great river Magdalena. 
|CENOS, a barbarous nation of Indians, to the n. of the river Maranon, who inhabit the woods near the river Aguarico. They are at continual war with that of the Ericabellados. 
|CENTA, a small river of the province and go vernment of Tncuina:i. It runs from the to. to e. and enters the Bermejo. The Fathers Antonio Salinis and Pedro Ortiz de Zarate, of the extin guished company, suffered martyrdom upon its shores whilst preach ing to- the baibarian Indians. 
|CENTEUVlLLEj, the chief town of Queen Anne s county, and on the e. side of Chesapeak bay, in Maryland. It lies between the lorks of Corsica creek, which runs into Chester river, and lias been lately laid out; 18 miles s. of Ches ter, 34 s. e. by e. of Baltimore, and 95 s. w. by s. of Philadelphia. Lat. 39 6 w. 
|CEPEE, a small river of Nova Scotia, which runs s. and enters the Miamis. 
|CEPEROUX, a French fort, called also San Louis, in Cayenne; situate at the mouth of the river, and on a lofty spot commanding the en trance of the same. It was taken by the Dutch in 1076 ; and in the following year it was recovered by the French ; which date has been mistaken by Mons. Martin iere, who mentions it as Laving been lost the year preceding. 
|CEPITA, a small settlement of the province and corregimiento of Charcas in Peru, above the channel of the great lake Titicaca, near the fa mous bridge that was built by the Emperor Capac Yupanqui over the channel, and which is 160 yards in length. The Indians of this settlement are diligent in keeping this bridge in repair, and assist in helping and directing the cavalcades which are continu dly passing it. 
|CEQUER, a small settlement of the province and corregimiento of Pastos in the kingdom of Quito, to the n. of this city, and on the shore of the river Telembi. Its temperature is cold, and it is the direct road for such as are going to the pro vince of Barbacoas. 
|CEQUJN, a mountain of the province of Los 
34 9 
Canelos in the kingdom of Quito. Us skirts are washed by the river Puyuc, arid on the other side by the Bobonasa : from it rfce the rivers Tinguisa and Paba-yaeu, which run from w. to e. until they enter the Bobonasa. It is entirely covered witli thick woods, save upon the top, where there is neither tree nor plant. 
CI jRCADO, a province and corregimiento of Peru, bounded n. by that of Chancay, n.e. by that of Canta, e. by that of Huarochiri, s. by that of Canete, and w. by the S. sea ; is 13 leagues long n. s. and eight wide at the widest part ; is of a very mild and kind temperature, but somewhat sickly ; and is neither subject to tempests nor high winds, although it is often visited by earthquakes. It only rains in the winter, and this is a species of small sprinkling shower which they call garua; so that they have no necessity for houses with roofs, and they are covered only with clay or mortar. The whole of its territory is fertile, and abounds in seeds and fruits. The herb alfalfa, which is good forage for horses, is particularly cultivated, there being a great demand for it at Lima. Here are many estates of sugar-cane, from which sugar is manufactured, as well as honey, and a kind of drink called guarupe. Chica is also made here ; this being the common drink of the Indians throughout the whole kingdom. It is irrigated by the rivers Rinac and Lurin, which run down from the province of Guarochiri, and by the Carrabayllo, which runs from the province of Canta : all three of them are small ; but in the months of December, January and February, which is the rainy season in the sierra, they swell greatly. Its population, consists of seven parochial settlements, and as many others thereunto annexed. Its repurtimienlo used to amount to 10,000 dollars, and it paid an alcaxala of 80 dollars per annum. The capital is of the same name, and the other 14 settlements are, 
Lurin, Huachipa, 
Pachacamac, Late, 
Surco, Rinconada, 
Chorrillos, Carabayllo, 
Magdalena, Laucon, 
Miraflores, San Joseph de Bel
l/urigancho, 
lavista. 
|CERCADO, SA CHISTOVAL DE, a settlement to the s. of the city of Lima, to which it is as a suburb. It is inhabited only by Indians, who are governed by a cazique ; and until 1776, it was a cure of the regulars of the company of Jesuits, who had in it a college. 
|CERCELLES, a river of "the island of Guadulupe. It rises in the mountains, runs e. and en
350 
ters the sea between the river Rosa and the settle ment and parish of Cul de Sac. 
|CERICUNCUA, a bay of the coast of Brazil, in the province and captainship of Seara, between the port of Tortuga and the settlement of Nuestra Se flora del Rosario. 
|CERINZA, a settlement of the rorregimiento of Tnnja in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, is of a cold temperature, and abounds in cattle and the productions peculiar to the climate. It contains 300 families, and lies in a valley, from which it takes its name. 
|CERMEN, a settlement of the province and government of .Venezuela; situate on the side of the town of San Felipe, towards the e. between this town and the settlement of Agua Culebras, on the shore of the river Iruqui. 
|CERRALUO, a town and presidency of the Nuevo Reyno de Leon, garrisoned by a squadron of 12 soldiers and a captain, who is governor of this district, for the purpose of restraining the bor dering infidel Indians. Between the e. and n. is the large river of this name; and from this begins a tract of extensive country, inhabited by barba rous nations, who impede the communication and commerce with regard to this part and the pro vinces of Tejas and Nuevas Felipinas. Is 35 leagues to the e. of its capital. 
|CERRALUO, a bay of the coast and gulf of Ca lifornia, or Mar Roxo de Cortes, opposite an island which is also thus called ; the one and the other hav ing been named out of compliment to the Marquis of Cerraluo, viceroy of Nueva Espaila. The afore said island is large, and lies between the former bay and the coast of Nueva Espana. 
|CERRITO, a settlement of the island and go vernment of Trinidad, near the n. coast, and to the e. of the capital of San Joseph de Oruna. 
|CRRRITO VF.RDE, an open and insecure port in the bay of La Concepcion, of the kingdom of Chile, and Pacific sea. 
|CLRIIITO, another, with the surname of Santa Ana. See GUAYAQUIL. 
|CERRIT0S, a small settlement of the jurisdic tion of Orizava, and alcaldia mayor of Ixrniquilpan, in Nneva Espaiia. 
CE:RHIT;&gt;S, another settlement in the province and government of Popayan. 
|CERRO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Angaraes in Peru. 
|CERHO, another, in the province and corregi miento of Porco in the same kingdom. 
|CEURO, another, with the surname of Negro, in the province and corregimienlo of Rede, and king dom of Chile; situate at the source of the river Han. 
|CERRO, another, called San Miguel dc Cerro Gordo, which is a garrison of the province of Tepeguana in the kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya. Its situation is similar to the road which leads to it, namely, a plain level surface ; although, indeed, it is divided by a declivity, in which there is a pool of water, and by which passengers usually pass. This garrison is the residence of a captain, a serjeant , and 28 soldiers, who are appointed to suppress the sallies of the infidel Indians. In its vicinity is a cultivated estate, having a beautiful orchard, abounding in fruit-trees and in zepas, which also produce fruit of a delicious flavour. The garrison lies 50 leagues n. w. of the capital Guadiana. 
|CERROS, SAN FELIPE DE LOS, a settlement of the head settlement of Uruapa, and alcaldia mayor of Valladolid, in the province and bishopric of Mcchoacan. It contains 26 families of Indians, and lies eight leagues to the e. of its head settle ment, and 10 from the capital. 
|CERROS, another, in the province and corregi miento of Castro- Vireyna in Peru. 
|CESARA, a large and copious river of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, which was called by the Indians Pompatao, meaning in their idiom, " the lord of all rivers," is formed of several small rivers, which flow down from the snowy siewas of Santa Marta. It runs s. leaving the ex tensive llanuras of Upar until it reaches the lake Za| atosa, from whence it) issues, divided into four arms, which afterwards unite, and so, following a course of 70 leagues to the w. enters the Magdalena on the e. side, and to the s. of the little settle ment called Banco. 
|CESARES, a barbarous nation of Indians of the kingdom of Chile towards the s. Of them are told many fabulous accounts, although they arc, in fact, but little known. Some believe them to be formed of Spaniards and Indians, being those who were lost in the straits of Magellan, and be longed to the armada which, at the beginning of the conquest of America, was sent by the bishop of Placencia to discover the Malucas. Others pre tend that the Arucanos, after they had destroyed the city of Osorno, in 1599, took away with them the Spanish women ; and that it was from the pro duction of these women and the Indians that this nation of the Cesares arose. Certain it is, that they are of an agreeable colour, of a pleasing aspect, and of good dispositions. They have some light of Christianity, live without any fixed abode ; and some have affirmed that they have heard the sound of bells in their territory. It was attempted in 16-58, by the governor of Tucuman, Don Geronimo 
Luis de Cabrera, to make an effectual discovery of this nation, but lie did not succeed. In 1662 the innermost part of this country was penetrated by Father Geronimo Montemayor, of the extin guished company of Jesuits. He discovered a nation of Indians, whose manners corresponded with this ; but he did not succeed in establishing missions, for want of labourers, and from other ob stacles which arose. 
|CEUADAS, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Riobamba in the kingdom of Quito. On its n. side is a large estate called Zeogun. 
|CEUADAS, a very abundant river of the same province and kingdom, from which the above settlement borrowed its title. It rises from the lake of Coraycocha, which is in the desert mountain or paramo of Tioloma. It runs n. and passing by the former settlement, becomes united with another river, formed by two streams flowing down from the paramo of Lalanguso, and from the waste waters of the hke Colta ; . then passes through the settlement of Pungala, its course inclining slightly to the e . and at a league s distance from the settlement of Puni, is entered by the Riobamba near the Cubigies, another river which flows down from the mountain of Chirnborazo, and following its course to thew. for some distance, turns to the e.as soon as it reaches the zs. of the mountain of Tungaragua, and at last empties itself into the Maraiion: when it passes through the settlement of Penipe, it flows in so larare a body that it can be passed only by means of a bridge, which is built there of reeds ; and before it reaches the banns or baths, it col lects the waters of the Tacnnga, Arnbato, and other rivers, which flowing down from the one and the other cordillerct, have their rise in the s. summit of Elinisa, and in the s. part of Ruminambi and Cotopasci. 
|CEUALLOS, MORRO DE LOS, an island of the river Taquari, formed by this dividing itself into two arms to enter the river Paraguay, in the province and government of this name. 
|CEUICO, a small river of the island of St. Domingo. It rises in the mountains of the e. head, runs n. n. e. and enters the grand river Juna, a little before it runs into the sea. 
|CHABACONDE, a settlement of the province and eorregimitnto of Callahuas in Peru. 
|CHABAQUJDDICK Isle belongs to Duke s county, Massachusetts. It lies near to, and extends across the e. end of Martha s Vineyard island. 
|CHABIN. a river of the province and corregin.ienfo of Valdivia in the kingdom of Chile. It 
runs from &. to e. being navigable by small vessels till it enters the S. sea. 
|CIIABUCO, a settlement of the province arid corregimiento of Valdivia in the kingdom of Chile. 
|CHACAIAM, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Tarma in Peru. 
|CHACAICO, a settlement of Indians of the island of Laxa in the kingdom of Chile ; situate at the source and on the shore of the river Renayco. 
|CHACALTANGUIS, a settlement and head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Cozarnaloapan in Nueva Espaiia, is of a moist temperature, and situate on the shore of the large river Alvarado. It contains seven families of Spa niards, 18 of Mulattoes and Negroes, and 75 of Popolucos Indians. Within its district are 19 en gines or mills for making refined sugar ; and its territory produces maize and cotton in abundance ; is three leagues to the &lt;". of its capital. 
CH ACALTONGO, NAT i VIDADDE, a settlement and head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Tepozcolula, is of a cold temperature, and surrounded by eight wards within its district ; in all of which there are 160 families of Indians, who cultivate much maize and wheat ; is seven leagues between the e. and s. of its capital. 
|CHACANORA, a settlement of the province and tdrrcghntcnto of Caxamarca in the same kingdom. 
|CHACAO, a city of the island of Chiloe in the kingdom of Chile. It is the residence of the go vernor, is garrisoned with a small guard, and has the best port in the island. Lat. 41 50 s. 
|CHACAPA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Larecaja in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Challana. 
|CHACAPA, another settlement of the province and corregimiento of Chicas and Tarija, in the dis trict of the former ; annexed to the curacy of Tupisa. 
|CHACAPALAPA, a settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Ygualapa in Nueva Espana, is three leagues to the n. of that place. 
|CHACAPA LPA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Guarochiri in Peru ; an nexed to the curacy of Santa Olaya. 
|CHACAPOYAS. See CIIACHAPOYAS. 
|CHACARACUIAN, a settlement of the proprovince and government of Cumana in the kingdom of Tierra Firme ; situate in the mid dle of the serrania of that province. It is under the care of the Catalanian Capuchin fa thers ; and, according to Cruz, on the coast of the sea of Paria. 
|CIIACARMARCA, a settlement of the province and corregimunto of Vilcas Huaman in Peru. 
|CHACARO, a settlement of the province and corregi "icnto of Cotabambas in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Tambobamba. 
CflACAS, a settlement of the province and corre*hnienlo of Conchucos in Peru. 
|CHACAYACU, a river of the province of Quixos in the kingdom of Quito. It runs from e. to w. then turns its course to s. w. and shortly after, passing through the settlement of Loreto, enters the river Suno on its a?, shore. 
C II A CCU MAS, a settlement of South Caro lina, situate on the shore of a small river. The English have a fort and establishment in it. 
|OIIACIIAGUI. SeeTAMBo PINTADO; 
|CFIACIIAPOIAS, a province and corrrgimiento of Peru ; bounded e. and s. by the mountains of the infidel Indians, n. w. by the provinces of Luya and Chillaos, and w. by Caxamarca. Its greatest length is 38 leagues from n. to. to s. e. and its breadth is nearly as great. Its temperatuse is for the most part mild, though in some places ex ceedingly hot, and in others equally cold, since a branch of the cordiUera intersects it. Upon this account also it abounds greatly in all productions, such as wheat, maize, and other seeds, and in all kinds of herbs and fruits. It produces a good pro portion of sugar : but the principal sources of its commerce are cotton and tobacco; these produc tions belonging peculiarly to the district of Mayobamba, three leagues distant &lt;o the 5. e. and being held in great estimation. The women spin cot ton, of which they manufacture canvass for the sails of ships, also for bags : they spin likewise another sort of delicate thread, of which they make linen for garments ; the men employing themselves in the looms and in the cultivation of cotton and tobacco: of this they used to gather yearly b OO measures, consisting of 
00 nuizos or ro/hs each, each ntazo being valued at one real. At present less is cultivated, from the prohibition of commerce, so that the settlement has become much poorer, and the price of the cotton for mak ing sails is now at two reals per Ib. ; though that which is very fine, at a dollar. As there is no cur rent coin, the inhabitants make barters in kind for the necessaries they want. Thus also they pay their tributes, duties, and taxes ; and the treaties amongst them for canvass and linen cloths are consequently very large, the prices being regulated amongst themselves. They cultivate rora, and with this they supply some of the neighbouring provinces. 
C II A 
They breed cattle of every sort, horses, sheep, and cows ; of whose hides, when tanned and dried by the fire, they manufacture trunks, saddles, chests, &c. It has but a few mines, and of these, one only is gold, and a few of salt are worked. It is watered by several rivers ; but the principal are the Moyobamba and the Uccubamba. Its inha bitants amount to 10,000, and are divided into 43 settlements. Its rrpartimiento amounted to 32,000 dollars ; and it paid nearly 256 for alcavala. San Juan de la Fron- Nixaque, 
tera, Corobamba, 
Santa Ana, Pornacocha, 
San Lazaro, Quispis, 
El Santo Christo de Bur- Santo Tomas, 
gos, Chisquilla, 
San Christoval de las Junvilla, 
Balzas, Tiata, 
Chuquibamba, Mitmas, 
San Pedro de Utac, Yambrasbamba, 
Santo Tomas deGuillai, Chirta, San lldefonso, Yapa, 
Tingo, Chiliquin, 
Pouaya, Goncha, 
La Magdalena, San Miguel dc los OI
Taupa, leros, 
Yurmanca, Diosan, 
Quinjalc i, Yambajalca, 
Coellcho, Tauli, 
Vilaga, Casmal, 
Moyobamba, city, Palanca, 
Yrinari, Thoe, 
Yantala, Huambo. 
A visada, 
|CHACHAPOIAS, a river of the above province, which runs n. v). and enters the Maraiion. 
|CIIACAS, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Condesuyos of Arequipa in Peru. 
|CHACHICHILCO, a settlement of the head settlement of Aytitlan, and n/caldia mayor of Amola, in Nueva Espafia. It has very few inha bitants, and lies 11 leagues to the w. of its head settlement. 
|CHACHOPO, a small settlement of the go vernment and jurisdiction of Maracaibo, is of a mild temperature, and produces wheat, maize papas, and fruits peculiar to the climate. 
|CHACIIUAPA, a settlement and head settle ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Nochiztlan in Nueva Espafia. It contains 78 families of Indians, and is one league n. w. of its capital. 
|CHACILATACANA, SAN FRANCISCO 
|BROCAL DC LA MINA DE, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Angaraes in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Sairta Barbara. 
|CHACJLAIA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Larccaja in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Arnbana. 
|CHACLIA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Huarochiri in the same kingdom ; annexed to the curacy of Santa Olaya. 
|CHACMA, or CHAMACA, a valley of the pro vince of Cuzco and kingdom of Peru, near the coast of the S. sea. It was well peopled in former times, and abounds now in sugar-cane, from which sugar is made. It was conquered and united to the empire bylluaina Capac, thirteenth Emperor. 
|CHACNA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Aimaraez in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Colcabamba. 
|CHACO, a province of the kingdom of Peru, called the Gran Chaco, is an extensive country ; having as its boundary to the e. the river Para guay, and being bounded on the [n.e. by the pro vince of the Chiquitos Indians ; on the . by that of Santa Cruz de la Sierra ; on the w. it touches upon the provinces of Mizque, Tomina, Pomabamba, Pilaya, Paspaya, Tarija, and Tucumun. On the s. it extends as far as the jurisdiction of the government of Buenos Ayres, which is its farthest limits. Towards the n. it is 150 leagues wide from e. to w. and 250 leagues long from n. to s. but to make these distances, it requires many months, owing to the unevenness and roughness of the territory. It is called Chaco, or, with more propriety, Chacu, which, in the Quechuan lan guage, signifies junta, or company, from the cir cumstance 6f its having been formed of Indians of several countries, who had fled from the conquer ing arms of the Incas, and afterwards from those of the Spaniards. Towards the w. it has some serranias, which are branches of the cordi lera ; where, on account of their immense height, the cold is very great ; but in the low grounds, Avhich are for the most part plains, the temperature is hot. It is full of thick woods, and in many parts is swampy and wet ; particularly in the part lying towards the e. on the road to Paraguay. In the wet season, which la.
ts from the month of Novem ber to April, the rivers leave their beds and form various lakes, some of Avhich dry tip, and some remain. This province has some rivers or note ; such are the Salado an-,1 the Bermejo ; i? one r.f the most fertile provinces in America, and would, if it were cultivate .!, afford, in the greatest abun dance, those jvoduc?ions wnich are now thrown away upon the infinite number of barbarous na
|VOL. I. 
353 
tions who inhabit it. It produces a great variety of fine woods and fruit-trees ; such as walnuts and nuts, although different from those of Europe, but which are extremely well tasted ; beautiful cedars ; quebrachos, thus called on account of their hard ness ; guayacanes, carob-trees, balsams, in arias 
 palms, some of which are more than 30 yards in height; almonds, cacaos, ceibas, which are very large trees, bearing in the pods a remarkable soft wool, used for quilts, since it cannot be spun : cot ton-trees, mistoles, of the heart of which the Indians make darts and citneters ; myrrh, sarzafraztrees, bark, and others, which have the interior bark so delicate and white as occasionally to serve instead of writing paper; others there are, which, at one or two yards up their stems, form a kind of barrel or pipe, and being of a very tough bark, are accustomed to be ripped open by the Indians, and thus s
rve as vessels, in which these keep their liquor called chicha ; it is from this that they whimsically call this plant pah borracho, or drunken tree. In this province are found also canes for walking Micks, as fine as those of Asia ; and in the trunks of trees, in holes of the rocks and below the ground, are quantities of honey and wax wrought by be
s, of which there are reckoned to be more than li 
orts : some of the wax, besides being transparent, is extremely fragrant and deli cious to the taste, whilst some is so sour as to re semble the juice of boiled lemons. One sort of these bees fabricate, with great skill, excellent hives of mud upon the branches of trees, and of the shape of a decanter, which are so hard that they will not break in falling down upon the ground ; they, morever, are filled with exquisite wax and we 11 -flavoured honey. The fruit-trees which this province produces, are oranges, cedars, lemons, apples, pears, metocotones, (or peaches en grafted on quinces), figs, nuts, prunes, and olives, also passion-flowers ; all of which have been brought hither from the city of Santiago de Guadalcazar. Here are palms which have cups con taining 25 kernels each, differing only slightly from the palms of Europe by having a flavour of the cocoa, and being somewhat larger. Here is also a plant called chahuar, having prickles like the savine, of which are made threads similar to hemp, for the manufacture of nets, bags, and some sorts of coarse garments : its root serves as food for the Indians, as do also
wcav, potatoes, and others. It has an innumerable quantity of birds, namely, wild pigeons, ducks, herons, mountain-peacocks, pheasants, crows, condors, partridges, falcons, swans, periguanaSy ostriches, parrots, and one kind of bird which exactly imitates an organ, ami 
7 Z 
354 
another whose note resembles a trumpet. It abounds in quadrupeds, as mules, horses, and cattle of the large and small kind, the antas, which is called here gran bestin y (great beast), huanacos, vicunas, llamas, or native sheep, stags, bears, ant-eaters, wild bears, otters, tigers, mountain cats, viscachas, (or large hares), large and small foxes, tor toises, higuanosj and others; all of which afford food to the voracious Indians. In this province are also found many insects, such as scorpions, vipers, snakes of several kinds, some of two heads, and some with rattles, squirrels, mocamucas, ampalabaS) or what are called in other countries owls, which are extremely deformed, and attract small animals to them by their screeching, quiriquinchos of various sorts, glow-worms, a great variety of flies and spiders, and of these a large kind very venomous, silk-worms, which, if taken care of, would yield an abundance of silk, locusts, which are eaten by the Indians both dry and fresh ; also ants, the beds of which are so deep as to render the road dangerous for men and for horses to pass, these insects being of such an undaunted and trouble some nature as often to attack a viper or locust in large bodies, and in some settlements to enter a house like a plundering army, devouring every in sect and worm in their way, not leaving a single eatable thing untouched ; scarcely shall these have finished their operations, but they are succeeded by another band, and indeed it is very hazardous to disturb them, since they bite very fiercely and cause much pain. This province has no mines, although it is said that formerly some were worked by the Indians ; some little time since, however, one of iron was discovered, when it was thought to have been of gold. This extensive and pleasant country is inhabited by a multitude of infidel Indians, of different nations and of various barbarous customs. It was casually discovered in 1586 by Juan de Baiios, a native of Chuquisaca, a factor of the settlement of Yala ; he had an Indian slave who used frequently to run away from his master for a time and return again, and who being asked once whither he went, replied to Chacu ; this it was that led to its discovery, and to the subse quent attempts at several times made to conquer it; first by Martin de Ledesma, afterwards by Juan Manso, Don Pedro Lasarte, and lastly by DJII Christoval de Sanabri, all of which were in effectual. San Francisco Solano entered the coun try, and succeeded in reducing some of the natives to the Christian faith ; these, however, soon re turned to their idolatry. The regulars of the com pany of Jesuits likewise engaged themselves in the reduction of this country iu 1587, the first of their 
preacher! here being Father Alonzo Barzana, called the apostle of Peru ; they continued here for a number of years, and during their stajr founded seven settlements. The inhabitants of the whole province are computed at 100,000. Catalogue of the nations which inhabit CUaco. Chiriguanas, Abayas, 
Churumutas, Yapayaes, 
Mataguayos, Niguaraas, 
Tobas, Ivirayaras, 
Macobies, Socondues, 
Aquilotes, Marapanos, 
Malbalaes, Cipores, 
Agoyas, Ayusequeteres, 
Amulalaes, Corometes, 
Palomos, .Taparunas, 
Lules, Bayatuis, 
Toconotes, Layanos, 
Toquistineses, Payaguas, 
Tanuyes, Poreromos, 
Chunipies, Chilacutiquies, 
Bilelas, Chiquinos, 
Yxistineses, Gortonos, 
Oristineses, Humayonos, 
Guamalcas, Tainuyes, 
Zapitalaguas, Tracanos, 
Ojotaes, Tobotionos, 
Chichas, Pildoris 
Orejones, Caramais, 
Guaicurues, Perequanos, 
Callagaes, Cucroyenos, 
Calchaquics, Bocaracanas, 
Abipones, Xolotas, 
Teutas, Curetes, 
Palalis, Upionos, 
Huarpas, Morionos, 
Tafios, Bocoos, 
Mogosnas, Motitis, 
Choroties, Corotonos, 
ISaparus, Chiribionos. 
Guanas, 
|CILACO, a large plain of the above province, in which Azara noticed a singular phenomenon, which he calls a large piece of pure iron, flexible and malleable in the forge, but at the same time so hard as not to be cut, though obedient to the file. It contains about 468 cubic feet, and lies on the surface of the large plain of Chaco, on which not a single stone excepting tin s is to be found ; and what is still more curious, there is no volcano within 300 leagues, nor any iron mine to be heard of in that part of tha country. 
CliACOCHE, a settlement of the province and correghniento of Ainiaraez in Peru j annexed to the curacy of Sirca. 
|CHACOS, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Tarma in Peru \ annexed to the curacy of Huariaca. 
|CHACOTA,a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Arica in Peru ; situate close to the Quebrada de Victor. 
|CHACRALLA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Lucanas in Peru ; annexed to (he curacy of Abucara. 
|CHACRAPAMPA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Andahuailas in Peru ; annex ed to the curacy of Huayama. 
|CHACTAHATCHE, a river of S. Carolina, which runs s. and enters the Chicachas. 
|CHACTAW, a settlement and capital of the Indian district of this name in Louisiana, in which the French had a fort and establishment. [The Chactaws, or Flat-heads, are a powerful, hardy, subtle, and intrepid race of Indians, who inhabit a very fine and extensive tract of hilly country, with large and fertile plains intervening, between the Alabama and Mississippi rivers, and in the &lt;x\ part of the state of Georgia. This nation had, not many years- ago, 43 towns and villages, in three divisions, containing 12,123 souls, of which 4041 were fighting men. They are called by the traders Flat-heads, all the males having the fore and hind part of their skulls artificially flattened when young. These men, unlike the Muscogulges, are slovenly and negligent in- every part of their dress, but otherwise arc said to be ingenious, sensible, and virtuous men, bold and intrepid, yet quiet and peaceable. Some late travellers, how ever, have observed that they pay little attention to the most necessary rules of moral conduct, at least that unnatural crimes were too frequent among them. Different from most of the Indian nations bordering on the United States, they have large plantations or country farms, where they employ much of their time in agricultural improvements, after the manner of the white people. Although their territories are not one-fourth so large as those of the Muscogulge confedracy, the number of in habitants is greater. The Chactaws and Creeks are inveterate enemies to each other. There are a considerable number of these Indians on the w. side of the Mississippi, who have not been home for several years. About 12 miles above the post at Oachcta on that river, there is a small village of them of about 30 men, who have lived there for several years, and made corn ; and likewise on Bayau Chico, in the n. part of the district of Appalousa, there is another village of them of about fifty men, who have been there for about uine years, and say they have the governor of 
355 
Louisiana s permission to settle there. Besides these, there are rambling hunting parties of them to be met with all over Lower Louisiana. They are at war with the Caddoques, and liked by neither red nor white people. 
|CHACTAW Hills, in the n. w. corner of Georgia river. 1 
|CHACTOOS, Indians of N. America, who live on Bayau Beeuf, about 10 miles to the .?. of Bayau Rapide, on Red river, towards Appalou-a ; a small, honest people ; are aborigines of tlve country where they live; of men about 30 ; di minishing ; have their own peculiar tongue ; speak Mobilian. The lands they claim on Bayau Bceuf are inferior to no part of Louisiana in depth and richness of soil, growth of timber, pleasant ness of surface, and goodness of water. The Bayau Bceuf fulls into the Chaffeli, and discharges through Appalousa and Attakapa into Vermilion bay. 
|CHACURIES, a settlement of the jurisdiction of the city of Pedro go, in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, is of the missions which were held there of the order of St. Domingo. It is but small, and its climate is hot. 
|CHADBOURNE S River, district of Maine, called by some Great Works river, about 30 miles from the mouth of the Bonnebeag pond, from which it flows. It is said to have taken its latter name from a mill with 18 saws, moved by one wheel, erected by one Lodors. But the project was soon laid aside. The former name is derived from Mr. Chadbourne, one of the first settlers,, who purchased the land on the mouth of it, of the natives, and whose posterity possess it at this day. 
|CHAGONAMIGON, a point on the s. coast of lake Superior, in New France. 
|CHAGRE, a large and navigable river of the province and government of Panama in the king dom of Tierra Firme, has its origin and source in the mountains near the valley of Pacora, and takes its course in various directions, making many windings, which are called raudules, until it enters the N. sea. It is navigated by large vessels called chatas, (having no keels), up as far as the settlement of Cruces, where is the wharf for un lading, and the royal custom-houses ; the greater part of the commerce being conducted by this means, to avoid the obstacles occurring from a bad and rocky road from Portobeloto Panama. It has different forts for the defence of its entrance; the first is the castle of its name, at the entrance or mouth : the second is that of Gatun, situate upon a long strip of land formed by a river of this name ; and the third is that of Trinidad, situate in u simU 
7 Z 2 
35(5 
lar way by a river of its name. It abounds in largo alligators and mosquitoes, which render its navigation very trouble.some. Its shores are co vered with beautiful trees, which are inhabited by a variety of birds and apes of several species, which make an incredible chattering and noise. It was by this river that the pirate John Morgan came when he took and sacked Panama in 1670. It was discovered by Hernando de la. Serma in 1527, when he called it the river of Lagartos, but its mouth was before discovered by Lope de Olano in 1510. Here are found, at certain seasons, a very small fish of the size of a pin, called titles, and these are so abundant, that putting into the water a large basket, it is certain to be drawn out full ; they are fried, and make very savoury fritters. 
|CHAGKF,, with the dedicatory title of San Lo renzo, a settlement of the same province and king dom ; situate upon the top of a mountain at the entrance or mouth of the former river. It has for its defence a strong castle, which was built by the order of Philip 11. by the famous engineer Juan Bantista Antoneli. This was taken by the pirate John Morgan, after having made a glorious de fence, in 1668, when the settlement was burnt and sacked ; and in 1710 it was taken by the English, commanded by Admiral Vernon, who entirely destroyed it ; its loss in that war being supplied by t\vo strong batteries, which hindered the English from making a breach, for the third time, when they cane with three frigates of war; but they were driven back by Captain Don Juan de Hermida, who was formerly captain of the regiment of Granada. In 1752this castle was rebuilt, in the most perfect manner, by the lieutenant-general and engineer Don Ignatio de Sala, governor of Cartagena, who came hither for this purpose by order of the king. In this fortress several pervsonauvs of distinction have been held prisoners, and amongst others the Marquis of La Mina, pn-su ent, governor, and captain-general of the kingdom in 16 91. Is 13 leagues from Portobelo. 
|CITAGUANES, an island of the river Orinoco, farmed at its entrance into the sea by various 
&lt;i !s or arms, is large and inhabited by Indians of the Mariussa nation. 
Cl 1 A GUARAM A , a settlement of the province and government of Venezuela, situate on the conlines of the province of Cumuna, near the river Maria pire. 
CH AC.L- ,v AM A, a bay on the coast of the pro vince of Cumana, on the n. e, side : being formed by the island of Trinidad, and by the mouths of 
the channels of the Orinoco as far as the gulf Triste. 
|CHAGUAREM, a small river of the province and government of Venezuela, which runs s. and enters that of Los Aceytes. 
|CHAHUALTEPEQUE, SANTIAGO DE, a settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Mexilcaltzingo in Nueva Espaiia. It contains 138 families of Indians, and is three leagues from its capital. 
|CHAHUANTLA, a small settlement or ward of the alculdia mayor of Guauchinango in Nueva Espaiia ; annexed to the curacy of Naupan. 
|CIIAIALA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Chayanta or Charcas in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Pocoata. 
|CHAILLON, GABO DE, a cape on the e. coast of lake Superior, in New France. 
|CHAINAR, a settlement of the province and government oi Tucuman ; situate on the shore of the river San Miguel. 
|CHAIPI, a settlement of the province and cor* regimiento of Parinacochas in Peru, annexed to the curacy of the corregimiento of Pullo ; in which, was venerated, ever since the time of the conquest, a beautiful image of the Virgen del Rosario, which, with the temple, was burnt a few years since, and the parishioners being much afflicted at their loss, the Marquis of Selva Alegre, president of Quito, sent them another equal to the first : at the cele bration of the festival people assemble from all the neighbouring districts. 
|CHAIUIN, a river of the province and govern ment of Valdivia in the kingdom of Chile, which runs s. e. and enters Valdivia near its entrance into the sea. 
|CHALA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Cumana in Peru. 
|CHALA, with the distinction of Alta, another settlement of the province and corregimiento of Sana in the same kingdom ; situate on the shore of the river Chicama. 
|CHALA, another, with the addition of Baxa, in the same kingdom and province ; situate near the former. 
|CHALA, a large and beautiful valley on the sea shore, in the province and corregimiento of Cuinana. 
|CHALA, a small port, frequented only by fisher men, in the same province and corregimiento. 
|CIIALACOS, a settlement and asiento of the silver mines of the province and corregimiento of Piura in Peru; annexed to the curacy of Huancabamba. 
|CHALALA, a large river of the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada, rises in the valley of Cerinza, runs 77. and passing tli rough the city of San Gil, turns to the w. and enters the Suarez or Sabandija. 
|CHALCAXINGO, a settlement of the head settlement of Xonacatepec, and ulcaldia mayor of Cuernavaca, in Nneva Espana. 
|CHALCHILGUITES, a settlement of the pro vince and government of Nueva Vizcaya ; situate close to that of Sombrerete. 
|CHALCHITLAN, a settlement of the province and ulcaldia mayor of Capanabastla in the king dom of Guatemala. 
|CHALCO, HAMANALCO, a district and alcal dia mayor of Nueva Espana ; situate between the n. and s. of the city of Mexico, at eight leagues distance ; is very fertile, and abounds in produc tions and the necessaries of life, especially in wheat and maize; the crops of the former usually amount to 30,000 car gas (a measure containing four bushels) yearly, and of the latter to 25,000. Besides this it produces great quantities of seeds, woods, sugar, honey, and the fruits of a hot climate, all of which are carried to Mexico, as well by land car riage as by the lake, which is so favourable to its commerce. In the sierra of the volcano of this jurisdiction, there are silver mines, but they are not worked, on account of the great expence. The population consists of 46 settlements, of which 16 are head settlements of districts, and in 15 of these there are parish churches. The capital is of the same name, and it is situate on the shore of a lake enjoying a mild temperature, arid well known from the fair which it celebrates every Friday throughout the year, to which flock a great num ber of people from the neighbouring provinces with merchandize ; some even coming from the most distant parts in canoes by the lake, or with droves of mules on land. It lies between the rivers Flamanalco and Tenango, which run into the lake, and the waters of this serve, when it is ne cessary, to replenish the lake of Mexico, for which purpose there are proper sluices provided. It contains 350 families of Indians, and some Spaniards and Mustccs ; is seven leagues from Mexico. The other settlements are, Flamanalco, Atlautla, 
San Pedro de Ecazingo, Ayapango, Tepozozolco, 1 xtapalucan, 
San Juan Tenango, Ayozingo, Amecarneca, Mexquique, 
Zcntlalpan, Tfahuac, 
Chimalhuacan, Thcmamatla, 
Tepetuxpan, Ozumba. 
|CHALCO, with the dedicatory title of San Affustin, another settlement of the head settle
357 
ment of Coxcotlan, and the alcaldia mayor of Valles, in the same kingdom ; annexed to the curacy of Aquismon ; is of an extremely hot and moist temperature, on account of which it has been abandoned by several Indian families who resided in it formerly ; 12 of these families only are now remaining ; is 23 leagues from its capital. 
|CHALCO, another, of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Zochicoatlan ; situate in the plain of a deep break or hole made by mountain floods ; is of a hot temperature, and contains 35 families of Indians; lies 12 leagues to the n. of its capital. 
|CHALCO Lake. See MEXICO. 
|CHALCOS, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Lucanas in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Cahuanca. 
|CIIALEUAPAN, a settlement of the province and government of Nicaragua in the kingdom of Guatemala. 
|CHALEURS, a bay on the coast of the pro vince of Nova Scotia or Acadia, and gulf of St. Lawrence. It is large and convenient. 
|CHALEURS, another bay on the s. coast of the island of Newfoundland, near the point which looks to the w. 
|CHALEURS, a deep and broad bay on the w. side of the gulf of St. Lawrence. From this bay to that of Verte, on the s. in the s. e. corner of the gulf, is the n. e. sea line of the British province of New Brunswick. 
|CHALINGA, a settlement of Indians of the province and corregimiento of Coquimbo in the kingdom of Chile. 
|CHALIQUE, SAN PABLO DE, a settlement of the province and corrcgimenlo of Caxamarca ia Peru. 
|CHALLABAMBA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Paucartambo in Peru. 
|CHALLACATA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Paria in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Gam Mendoza. 
|CHALLACOLLO, a settlement of the same province and corregimiento as the former, belong ing to the archbishopric of Charcas. It has a con vent of monks ot the order of St. Augustin. 
|CIIALLAHUACHO, a river of the province and corregimiento of Chilques y Masques in Peru. It rises near the settlement of Capi, runs m a ser pentine course to the n. n. w. and enters the Apurimac. 
|CIIALLANA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Larccaja in Peru. 
|CHALLAPAMPA, an ancient province of Peru, of small extent, and to the e. of Cuzco. It 
358 
It vras conquered and united to the empire by Inca Koca, the sixth Emperor. 
|CHALLAPATA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Paria in Peru. 
|CHALLAS, a settlement of the province and corregitniento of Caxamarquilla or Pataz in Peru, in the district of which is an estate called Huasillas, where there is a house of entertainment be longing to the religion of St. Francis, in which reside the missionaries who assist in the conversion of the infidel Indians of the mountains. 
|CHALOUPES, PUERTO DE LAS, a port in the island of Guadalupe, and on the n. coast, is small, and lies between the Punta Antigua (Old Point) and the Mole bay. 
|CHALUANCA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Amaraez in Peru ; situate on the shore of the river Pachachaca. 
|CHALUANI, a settlement of the same province and corregimiento as the former ; annexed to the curacy of Sirca. 
|CHAM A, a river of the province and govern ment of Maracaibo. It rises at the foot of the snowy sierra, runs, making the form of two SS, to the e. and u). and passing by to the s. of the city of Merida, returns n. and enters the great lake of Maracaibo at the side opposite its mouth. 
|CHAM A, a large and fertile valley of the same province and government, to the s. of the lake. 
|CHAMACA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Chumbivilcas in Peru. 
|CHAMACON, a river of the province and go vernment of Darien in the kingdom of Tierra Firme ; it rises in the mountains of the e. coast, and runs from s. e. to n. w. until it enters the large river Atrato near its mouth. 
|CIIAMACUERO, SAN FRANCISCO DE, a settlement and head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Zelaya in the province and bi shopric of Meehoacan. It contains 690 families of Indians, and more than 30 of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattoes, with a convent of the order of St. Francis ; is five leagues to the n. of its capital. 
|CHAMAL, a settlement of Indians of the Chichimeca nation, in the head settlement of the districtof Tamazunchale,and alcaldia mayor of Valles, in Nueva Espana : situate in a valley of the same name. Its inhabitants having been reduced at the beginning of the 18th century, and having re quested a priest, one was sent them of the religion of St. Francis ; but no sooner did he arrive amongst them than they put him to death, eating his body, and at the same time destroying the settlement. They were, however, afterwards reduced to the faUb, rather through the hostilities practised against 
them by their neighbours than a desire of embrac ing it. It is five leagues from Nue
tra Senora dela Soledad. 
|CII A MANQUE, a river of the province and government of Quixos y Macas in the kingdom of Quito. It runs through the territory of the city of Avila from n. w. to s. e. and enters the river Coca, on Ihe a), side, in lat. 46 s. 
|CHAMARI, a small river of the province and country of the Amazonas, which runs s. s. e. and enters the river Madera opposite that of Guayaparanna. 
|CIIAMAIUAPA, a settlement of the province of Barcelona, and government of Cumana, in the kingdom of Tierra Firme ; one of those which are under the care of the religious observers of St. Francis, the missionaries of Piritu. It is to the zo. of the mesa (table land) of Guanipa. 
|CHAM AS, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Caxatambo in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Mangas. 
|CHAMAYA, a settlement of the province and government of Jaende Bracamoros in the kingdom of Quito ; situate on the shore of the river Ma ra fion. 
|CHAMBA, a river of the province and corregimienlo of Loxa in the kingdom of Quito, towards the s. It runs from e. to w. passes near the settle. mentof Vilcabamba, and then enters the river Ma
|CIIAMBERSBURG, a post town in Pennsyl vania, and the chief of Franklin county. It is situated on the e. branch of Conogocheague creek, a water of Potowmac river, in a rich and highly cultivated country and healthy situation. Here are about 200 houses, two Presbyterian churches, a stone gaol, a handsome court-house built of brick, a paper and merchant mill. It is 58 miles e. by s. of Bedford, 11 n. w. of Shippcnsbur&lt;r, and 157 w. of Philadelphia. Lat. 39 5? n. Long. 77 40 a?. 
|CIIAMBIRA, a settlement of the province and government of Maynas in the kingdom of Quito ; situate at the source of the river of its name. It rises to the e. of the settlement of Pinches, between the rivers Tigre and Pastaza, and runs nearly pa rallel to the former, where it enters, with a much increased body, into the Maraiion. 
|CIIAMBLEE River, or SORELT.-, a water of the St. Lawrence, issuing from lake Champlain, 300 yards wide when lowest. It is shoal in dry seasons, but of sufficient breadth for rafting lumber, &c. spring and fall. It was called botli Sorell ami Richlieu when the French held Canada. 
|CHAMBLI, a French fort in the province and 
country of the Iroquees Indians. It is handsome and well built, on the margin of the river of the same name, about 12 or 15 miles s. w. from Mont real, and n. of St. John s fort. It was taken by the Americans, Oct. 20, 1775, and retaken by the British, Jan. 18, 1776. Lat. 45 26 n.~ 
|CHAMBO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Riobamba in the kingdom of Quito. 
|CHAMBO, a very large river, which rises near the former settlement, and runs with such rapidity that it cannot be forded ; is consequently passed over by means of various bridges made of osiers. 
|CHAME, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Nata in the province and kingdom of Tierra Firme ; situate near a river, and two leagues from the coast of the S. sea. It produces maize, plan tains, and other fruits ; swine, fowl, turkeys, and other birds, with which it supplies, by means of canoes, the markets of the city of Panama, from whence it is nine leagues distant. 
|CIIAMELUCON, or CHAMALETOIV, a river of the province and government of Honduras. It runs n. and enters the sea in the gulf of this name, between La Caldera and the river Ulua. 
|CHAMETLA, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Guajuaha in Nueva Espana. It con tains ISO families of Indians. 
|CHAMETLAN, a province and alcaldia mayor of Nueva Espana, also called Del Rosario ; bound ed n. by the province of Culiacan, s. by that of Xalisco or Seritipac, e. and n. e. by that of Zacatecas and Nueva Galicia, and w. by the S. sea ; is 30 leagues long from e. to w. and 25 wide n. s. ; is of a very hot temperature, and the greater part of it is a mountainous and rugged country, abound ing in noxious animals and insects, and on this account uninhabitable in the summer and in the rainy season. It was conquered by Don Juan de Ibarra in 1554, has many mines of silver and gold, which were formerly worked, but which at present are all abandoned, as well from their having filled with water, as from the scantiness of the means of the inhabitants to work them. The royal mines, however, are productive of some emolument, and are in fact the support of the place. It produces some maize, and much tobacco and cotton, to which article (lie soil is exactly suited, though not so to wheat, which yields here but sparingly. On the banks of the lakes formed by the sea, is left a thk k incrustation of salt in the month of April ; and although the inhabitants spare no pains to col lect this valuable commodity, yet abundance of it is lost from the want of hands to collect it ere the heats cojne on, when it very quickly disappears. 
359 
Some large cattle are bred here. It is very badly peopled, or, to speak more truly, it is as it were desert, having only three settlements and some estates. It is irrigated by a river which flows down from the sierra Madre, and passes through the capital, the waters of which are made useful for the working of the mines. The same river enters the sea two leagues from the settlement of Chametlan, and has abundance of fish, which are caught with ease, as well upon its shores as in marshes which it forms. The capital, which is the resi dence of the alcalde mayor, is the real del Ro sario. 
|CHAMETLAX, a settlement of the former alcaldia mayor ; from thence taking its name, It contains only five or six Indians, and some Spaniards, Mus~ tees, and Muluttoes, who, the greater part of the year, live in the estates which they have for the breeding of large cattle, and on the farms for the cultivation of maize and cotton. 
|CIIAMESA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Rcyno de Granada ; annexed to the curacy of Nopsa. It is of a cold temperature, and produces the fruits corresponding to such a climate, particularly wheat, which is of the best quality. It contains 100 white inhabitants, and as many Indian*, and is a little more than eight leagues from its ca pital. 
|CHAMI, SAN JUAN DE, a settlement of the province and government of Choco ; situate in the district of Thatama, near the ruins of the city of San Juan de Rodas, to the w. of the city of San tiago de Anna. 
|CHAMIANOS, a settlement of the province and government of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito ; situate on the shore of the river Guallaga. 
|CHAMICUROS, S.FRANCISCO XAVIEH DE, a settlement of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of Jesuits, in the province and government of Mainas, of the kingdom of Quito ; founded in 1670 by the Father Lorenzo Lucero. 
|CIJAMILPA, SAN LOIIF.NZO DE, a settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Cuernavaca in Nueva Espana. 
|CHAMPANCHJN, SIERRA DK, a chain of mountains in the province and government of Tucuman, running s. s. e. on the shore or the river Quarto. 
|CHAMPLAIi\,a township, the most w. in Clin ton county, New York, which takes its name from the lake on which it lies. It was granted to some Canadian and Nova Scotia refugees, who were 
360 
either in the service of the United States during the war, or fled to them for protection. The in digence or ill habits of these people occasioned the breaking up of the settlement, and a better sort of inhabitants have now taken their place. The lands are fertile, and two rivers run through it, well stored with fish. It has 575 inhabitants, and three slaves. By the state census of 1796, 76 of the in habitants are electors. 
CiiAMPLAiN, a lake of the same province, of more than 
0 leagues in length, and from 10 to 12 in width, abounding in excellent fish. It was discovered in J609 by a Frencli gentleman of the name of Champlain, who gave it his name, which it still retains. It communicates with a smaller lake called Sacrament, and the canal passing from one side to the other of these is extremely rapidand dangerous, from the inequality of its bottom. At tiie distance of 25 leagues to the s. are some very lofty mountains, which are covered with snow, and in which are found castors and a variety of ani mals of the chase ; and between these mountains and the aforesaid lake are some beautiful level meadows or llanuras
 which, when first discover ed, were well peopled with Iroquees Indians ; but these have greatly diminished in numbers, through the continual wars with the French and English. This lake is next in size to lake Ontario, and lies e. n. e. from it, forming a part of the dividing line between the states of New York and Vermont. It took its name from a French governor, who was drowned in it; it was before called Corlaer s lake. Reckoning its length from Fairhaven to St. John s, a course nearly n. it is about 200 miles ; its breadtli is from one to 18 miles, being very different in diffe rent places ; the mean width is about five miles, and it occupies about 500,000 acres : its depth is suf ficient for the largest vessels. There are in it above sixty islands of different sizes : the most consider able are North and South Hero and Motte island. North Hero, or Grand isle, is 24 miles long, and from two to four wide. It receives at Ticonderoga the waters of lake George from the s. s. w. which is said to be 100 feet higher than the waters of this lake. Half the rivers and streams which rise in Vermont fall into it. There are several which come to it from New York state, and some from Cana da ; to which last it sends its own waters a n. course, through Sorell or Charnblee river, into the St. Lawrence. This lake is well stored with fish, particularly salmon, salmon trout, sturgeon, and pickerel, and the land on its borders, and on the banks of its rivers, is good. The rocks in several places appear to be marked and stained with the former surface of the lake, many feet higher than 
C II A 
it has been since its discovery in J608. The wa ters generally rise from about the 20th of April to the 20th of June, from four to six feet ; the great est variation is not more than eight feet. It is sel dom entirely shut up with ice until the middle of January. Between the 6th and 15th of April the ice generally goes off, and it is not uncommon for many square miles of it to disappear in one day. CHAMPLE, a large unpeopled tract of the province of Taraumara, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya, in which there is a mountain abounding greatly in silver mines. Here is also a mission which was established by the regulars of the com pany for the reduction of the natives : is 12 leagues n. e. of the town of Santa Eulalia. 
|CHAMPOTON, a river of the province and government of Jucatan. It runs into the sea near the lake of Terminos. 
|CHAMUINA, a river of the province and go vernment of Costarica in the kingdom of Guate mala. It empties itself into the S. sea near the li mits of this jurisdiction, and of that of Chiriqui in the kingdom of Tierra Firrae. 
|CHAMULA, a settlement of the province and akaldia mayor of Chiapa in the kingdom of Gua temala. 
|CIIANAR-PUGlO,a settlement of the province and government of Tucuraan, in the district and jurisdiction of the city of Santiago del Estero, and eight leagues from the same. 
|CHANCAILLO, a small port of the S. sea, in the province and corregimiento of Chancay, to the n. of Lima ; little frequented, from lying ex posed, and being insecure. In lat. 12 3 s. 
|CHANCAY, a province and corregimiento of the kingdom of Peru ; bounded n. by that of San ta ; n. e. and n. by that of Caxatambo ; e. by that of Canta; and s. by the corregimiento of Cercado. It is 27 leagues in length from n. to s. and the same in width e. w. and has on its coast some ports and creeks not remarkable for their security. It comprehends in its district two territories, one of a cold temperature towards the cordillera, called De los Checras; and another of a warm tempera ture, lying in the valleys towards the sea, called De Chancay. It is irrigated by two rivers, one on the s. side, called Pasamayo, und the other Huama, on the n. The latter has an arched bridge, which was built in the time of the viceroy, the Marquis de Montes Cluros, the buttresses of which are two rocks, through which the river passes. On the e. and in the cold part of this province, are found the productions peculiar to the cli mate, such as papas, ocas, and some wheat and maize. Here are also cattle, of the fleeces of which 
361 
the natives make friezes. The low part, looking upon the coast, enjoys a temperature equal in mildness to that of Lima. It is very fertile, and in the many estates which are in it maize grows in great quantities, and it, besides" serving as food for the labourers, and independent of that which is de voured by the wild pigeons with which those fields are filled, serves to fatten numbers of pigs, which are carried to supply the markets of Lima ; those ani mals, one year with another, amounting to 22,000 head, and producing an emolument of 300,000 dollars to the proprietors of the estates. Here are also some estates of sugar-cane, and others of French beans and wheat, of which the crops were formerly very great, and used, together with the vines, to be reckoned amongst the chief produc tions of this country, though they have now made room for a more general cultivation of maize. What conduces much to render the soil fertile, is what the Indians call liiiano, and which, in their language, signifies dung, this being brought from some small islands at a little distance from the coast towards the n. It is thought to be the excre ment of some birds called huanaes, w ho have been accustomed to deposit it in the above places from time immemorial. Some of it has also been found in various other islands of the coast of Canete, Arica, and others. Of this it is certain, that a handful being put at the root of a plant of maize, it becomes so invigorated as to produce upwards of 200 for one, and that not less than 90,000 bushels of this valuable manure is used yearly. In the centre of the province, and upon the coast, are some fine salines, which supply some of the neighbouring districts ; and amongst the rest, those ofCanta, Tarma, Caxatambo, Huamalies, Huanuco, Conchuco, and Huailas, are the most noted. The salt is not only used in the working of the me tals, but for preserving the cattle from a venomous insect called alicui/a, which preys upon their entrails until it destroys them. The population consists of 37 settlements ; the capital of which is the town of Arnedo or Chancay. Its repartimiento amounted to 122,000 dollars, and its alravala to 976 dol lars per annum. 
Arnedo or Chancay, Cauchaz or Maraz, S. Juan de Huaral, Yurayaco, Huaura, Picoy, 
Mazo, Parquin, 
Vegneta, Yucul, 
Huacho, Canin, 
Barraste, Mollobamba, 
Auccayama, Paiiun, 
Sayan, Turpay, 
Tapaya, Tongos, 
|VOL. i. 
Chiuchiu, Auquimarca, 
Paccho, Yguari, 
Ayaranga, Yancay, 
Iluacar, Otoquet, 
Muca. Huachinga, 
Yacsanga, Yunqui, 
Apache, Acotama, 
Santa Cruz, Ilunycho. 
Huanangui, 
|CHANCAY, the capital of the above province, founded in a beautiful and very healthy valley, at a league and a half s distance from the river Pasamayo, by order of the viceroy Count of Nieva, in 1563 ; who destined it for the honour of being an university, at which however it never attained. It has a tolerable port, frequented by trading vessels, a convent of monks of the order of St. Francis, and a good hospital. It is well peopled, and its inha bitants consist of several noble and rich families. One league from the sea, and 15 from Lima. Lat. 1 1 30 s. 
|CHANCEFORD, a township in York county, Pennsylvania. 
|CHANCHAMAIU, a settlement of the province and government of Tarma in Peru, with a fort upon the river Tapo, in the part washed by this river, called El Balseadero de Chanchamaiu. The Chunchos Indians of this province took possession of it in 1742, and abandoned it in 1743. 
|CHANCHAMAIU, a river of the province of Caxarnarquilla. It rises in the province of Tarma, to the n. of the capital, runs n. and enters the large river Perene, in the country of the Campas Indians. 
|CHANCO, CAPIT,L,A DE, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Itata in the king dom of Chile ; situate near the coast. 
C HA .NDUI, a settlement of the district of Santa Elena in the province and government of Guaya quil ; situate on the sea-shore, with a port which is frequented by vessels only in stress ; it having some extensive shoals which lie just at its entrance. Here it was that the admiral s ship of the Armada del Sur foundered and was wrecked in 1654, as it was dropping down to Panama, for the purpose of dispatching the galleons under the charge of the Marquis de Villarubia ; although, through the op portune assistance of the viceroy of Peru, Count de Salvatierra, and of the president of Quito, Don Pedro Vazquez de Velasco, the greater part of the property on board was saved. Likewise, in 1721, another ship was lost here, carrying the salaries to the Plaza of Panama, without a single thing on board being saved ; until, in 1728, a furious wind from the s. w. blew ashore several fragments of the 3 A 
362 
wreck, and amongst these many valuables of gold and silver, which had grown quite discoloured, to the amount of 40,000 dollars. Lat. 2 2 1 s. 
|CHANEL, some islands near the coast of the country of Labrador, in the gulf of St. Lawrence. They are numerous and very small, one of them being very long and narrow ; forming a channel with the coast, and giving its name to the rest. 
|CHANESES, a barbarous nation of Indians, of the province and government of Paraguay ; dwell ing to the n. of the Rio de la Plata, and bounded by the Xarayes and Xacoces. They have their houses near the lakes, and maintain themselves by fishing. 
|CHANGAME, some small islands of the S. sea, and of the bay of Panama, in the province and go vernment of Tierra Firme. They are two in num ber, being situate near the coast, and having be tween them a shallow or quicksand, by which they are communicated. They abound in a species of birds, from which they take their name. 
|CHANGO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Tarma in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Chacayan. 
|CHANQUI, or ACHANQUI, a promontory or cape of the province and corregimiento of Valdivia in the kingdom of Chile ; being eight leagues to the s. of San Marcelo. It forms and covers the mouth or entrance of the gulf of Los Coronados, with the other cape, which is to the s. called De la Ballena. 
|CHANTACO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Loxa in the kingdom of Quito, to the w. of Chuquri-bamba, and to the s. of San Pedro, consists entirely of Indians, and lies upon the bank of a small river, being of an excellent climate. 
|CHAN TALI, a settlement of the province and government of Jaen de Bracamoros in the king dom of Quito ; situate on the shore of the river of its name. 
|CHANUSSI, a river of the country of Las Amazonas, which runs from e. to w. through the woods lying towards the w. and enters the Guallaga on its e. side. 
|CHANXEWATER, an English settlement in the province and colony of New York ; situate near the e. arm of the river Delaware. 
|CHAO, FARALLONES DE, two small islands of the S. sea, near the coast of the province and cor. regtmiento of Truxillo in Peru. 
|CHAO, MORRO DE, a mountain of the coast of the same corregimiento. 
|CHAPA, PUERTO DE, a settlement of the
 pro vince and government of Tucuman, in the juris
diction of the city of Cordoba ; situate near the rivers Segundo and Tercero, at the foot of the Montana Nevada, or Snowy mountain. 
|CHAPACOTO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Chimbo in the kingdom of Quito; situate at the skirt of the Gran Cuesta, or mountain of San Antonio. Throrgh it passes a small river, which runs down from this mountain, and empties itself in the river of Chirnbo ; is of a very cold temperature, and lies in the middle of a wood. Lat. l40 s. 
|CHAPADA, SIERRA, mountains of the king dom of Brazil, in the province and captainship of Todos Santos. They run from e. to w. until they reach nearly as far as the coast. 
|CHAPALA, a settlement of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Caxititlan in Nueva Espana ; situate on the shore of the great lake or sea of this name ; has a good convent of the monks of St. Francis, and in its valley, which is very fertile, there is an abundance of all kinds of seed, as wheat, maize, French beans, and many de licious fruits. 
|CHAPALA, another settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Zaiula in the same kingdom ; situate in a plain of a mild temperature. It contains 42 fa milies of Indians, who trade in seeds and other fruits, since its district abounds in garden grounds. It has a convent of the religious of St. Francis ; lies 22 leagues between the e. and n. of its capital. 
|CHAPALA, a great lake of the kingdom of Nueva Galicia, called Mar de Chapala, on ac count of its size, is navigated by many vessels, and is extremely well stocked with fish ; from which the inhabitants of the immediate settlements derive their source of commerce. 
|CHAPAMARCA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Loxa, in the kingdom of Quito; situate to the s. of the capital. CHAPANCHICA. See MADRIGAL. CHAPARE, or PARATI, a river of the province and government of Santa Cruz de la Sierra. It rises in the serrania of the Altos or Lofts of Intinuyo, from two small rivers which unite ; runs in an inclined course to the e. and enters the Marmore Grande, forming a good port. 
|CHAPARIPARI, a river of the province and government of Cumana, runs e. and enters the sea in the gulf of Triste. 
|CHAPARRA, VALLE DE, a valley of the pro vince and corregimiento of Cumana in Peru ; in the vicinity of which is a mine abounding in a metal called chumillo. 
|CHAPARRAL, a small settlement of the corregimiento of Coyaima in the Nuevo Reyno de 
363 
Granada ; situate in a beautiful and delightful country. Its temperature is hot, it abounds in cacao, maize, yucas, and plantains, and has some neat cattle and gold mines. The inhabitants amount to 100 families, and it is annexed to the curacy of its capital. 
|CHAPEL HILL, a post-town in Orange county, N. Carolina ; situated on a branch of Newhope creek, which empties into the n. w. branch of Cape Fear river. This is the spot chosen for the seat of the university of N. Carolina. Few houses are as yet erected ; but a part of the public build ings were in such forwardness, that students were admitted, and education commenced, in January 1796. The beautiful and elevated site of this town commands a pleasing and extensive view of the surrounding country : 12 miles s. by e. of Hillsborough, and 472 s. w. of Philadelphia. Lat. 35 56 n. Long. 79 2 w.l 
|CHAPEU, MORRO DEL, or DEL SOMBERO, a mountain of the kingdom of Brazil, between the rivers Preto and Tocantines, close to the gold mines of La Navidad. 
|CHAPIGANA, a fort of the province and go vernment of Darien, and kingdom of Tierra Firme, built upon a long strip of land, or point, formed by the great river of Tuira. There is also a small fort of the same name in a little gulf, and nearly closed at the entrance, behind the fort of San Mi guel, in the S. sea. 
CH API MARC A, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Aimaraez in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Ancobamba. 
|CHAPUARE, a river of the province and go vernment of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito, rises in the mountains of Cacao, which are upon the shore of the river Madera ; runs w. forming a curve, and enters the latter river, just where the Ytenes and Marmore also become united. 
|CHAPULTENANGO, a settlement of the province and alcaldia mayor of Los Zoques in the kingdom of Guatemala. 
|CHAPULTEPEC, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Corjoacan in Nueva Espana ; situate on the skirt of a mountainous eminence, on which are the castle and palace which were the residence of the viceroys until they made their public entries into Mexico. Here are beautiful saloons and charming gardens, bedecked with all sorts of deli cate flowers ; also a wood of branching savins, which was filled with stags and rabbits, and an abundant supply of water to render the soil fertile; although, independently of a large and deep pool, it is also intersected by several streams, which, through canals, are carried to supply the s. part of 
the city of Mexico. Its inhabitants amount to 40 families of Indians, in the district of the parish of a convent of St. Francis, with certain families of Spaniards and Mustees, embodied with the parish of Vera Cruz of Mexico ; from whence this is dis tant one league to the zo. s. w. 
|CHAPULTEPEC, with the dedicatory title of San Juan, another settlement of the district and head settlement of Tlacoluca, and alcaldia mayor of Xalapa, in the same kingdom ; founded between four mountains, the skirts of which form a circle round it. It contains 100 families of Indians, in cluding those of the settlement of Paztepec, close to it. Although its population was formerly thought to amount to 500 families, no cause can be assigned for the present diminution; notwith standing the elder people affirm, that this is a judg ment of God for their having caused so many sor rows and anxieties to the poor curate, who had laboured so hard and with such zeal to convert them from their idolatry : certain it is, they are now extremely humble and docile. It is two leagues n. e. of its capital. 
|CHAPULTEPEC, another, with the same dedica tory title of San Juan, in the head settlement of the town of Marquesado, and alcaldia mayor of Quatro Villas. It contains 25 families of Indians, who occupy themselves in the cultivation of cochineal, wheat, maize, fruits, woods, coal, lime-stone, and timber. It is a little more than a mile to the s. w. of its capital. 
|CHAPULTEPEC, another, with the dedicatory title of San Miguel, in the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Cuernavaca. 
|CHAPULTEPEC, another, with the same dedica tory title as the former, in the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Metepec. It contains 168 fami lies of Indians. 
|CHAPULUACAN, a settlement of the jurisdic tion and alcaldia mayor of Valles in Nueva Es pana ; situate on the skirt of a very lofty sierra ; is of a mild temperature, and produces maize, cot ton, bees-wax, and honey, and large cattle. It is annexed to the curacy of Tamzunchale, contains 58 families of Indians, and lies 38 leagues from its capital. 
|CHAPULUACAN, another settlement of the head settlement of Colotlan, and alcaldia mayor ofMextitlan, in Nueva Espana, contains 140 families of Indians, and is two leagues from its head settlement. 
|CHAQUI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Canto, in Peru ; annexed to the curacy ofits capital. 
|CHAQUI, another settlement of the province and corregimiento of Porco in the same kingdom. 3 A 2 
364 
|CHAQUIiVIINAS, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Asangaro in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Sandia in the province of Carabava. 
|CIIARABAYE, a settlement of the province and government of Venezuela ; situate on the shore of a river in the district of the city of Caracas, and to the e. of the town of Victoria. 
|CHARACATO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Arequipa in Peru. In its church is a miraculous image of Nuestra Senora de la Purificacion or Candelaria, to which singular devotion is paid. 
|CHARAI, a settlement of the province and alcaldia mayor of Cinaloa ; situate on the shore of a river of the fort which lies between the settle ments of Ziribiioa and Mochicauchi. CHARAIBES. See CARIBE. CHARALA, a settlement of the jurisdiction of the town of San Gil, in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra nada, is, at it were, a suburb to the settlement of Mongui, and it is (being very poor and reduced) annexed to the curacy of the same. Its tempera ture is mild, and abounds in pure good water, and in the productions of a hot climate. 
|CHAR AN DO, a settlement of the head settle ment of Guimeo, and alcaldia mayor of Cirandaro, in Nueva Espana ; annexed to the curacy of Turicato. 
|CHARAPA, a settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Periban in Nueva Espana ; situate in the loftiest part of the sierra, from whence its temperature is so cold that it is seldom any crops can be gathered from the seeds that are sown. It contains 209 families of Indians, 80 in the wards of its district, and a convent of the reli gious order of St. Francis : lies e. of its head settle ment. 
|CHARAPE, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Jaen de Bracamoros in the king dom of Quito. 
|CHARAPOTO, a settlement of the district of Puerto Viejo, and government of Guayaquil, in the kingdom of Quito, at a small distance from the sea-coast and bay of its name ; this title being also applied to the point which forms the same bay. 
|CHARAZANI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Larecaja in Peru. 
|CHARBON, Rio DEL, a river of N. Carolina, which runs n. and enters the Conhaway. The whole of it abounds in cataracts, and its waters throw up immense quantities of coal, which was the cause of its being thus named. 
|CHARCA, a settlement of the province and 6 
corregimiento of Chayanta in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Sacaca. 
|CHARCANA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Parinacochas in Peru. 
|CHARCAS, an extensive province of the king dom of Peru, composed of various others. Its ju risdiction comprehends the district of this royal audience, which begins at Vilcanota, of the corregimiento of Lampa and bishopric of Cuzco, and extends as far as Buenos Ayres to the s. It is bounded on the e. by Brazil, the meridian serving as a limit ; and reaching zo. as far as the corregi miento of Atacama, which is of its district, and forms the most n. part of this province in that di rection, and being closed in on its other sides by the kingdom of Chile : is 300 leagues in length, in cluding the degrees of latitude from 20 to 28 s. : is in many parts very thinly peopled, and covered with large desert tracts, and rugged and impene trable mountains, and again by the elevated cordilleras of the Andes, and the spacious llanuras or pampas, which serve to mark its size and the relative distances of its territories. Its temperature through out is extremely cold, although there are not want ing parts which enjoy a moderate warmth. At the time that this province was in the possession of the Indians, and previous to the entrance of the Spa niards, many well-inhabited provinces went jointly under the name of Charcas ; and the conquest of these was first undertaken by Capac Yupanqui, fifth Emperor ; but he was not able to pass the ter ritory of the Tutiras Indians and of Chaqui. Here it was that his conquests terminated : nor did the subjection of these parts extend farther than Collaysuyo until after his death, when he was suc ceeded by his son the Inca Roca, sixth Emperor, who carried on still farther the victories which had been already gained, conquering all the nations as far on as that of Chuquisaca, where he afterwards founded the city of this name, called also La Plata. After that the Spaniards had reduced that part of Peru, extending from Tuinbez to Cuzco, and that the civil wars and dissensions which existed be tween these were at an end, they endeavoured to follow up their enterprise by making a conquest of the most distant nations. To this end, in 1538, Gonzalo Pizarro sallied forth with a great force, and attacking the Charcas and the Carangues, found in them such a spirited opposition, that after several battles he was brought to think this object was nearly impracticable :" this idea was strength ened by the reception he had met with from the Chuquisacas, who in many conflicts had given him convincing proofs of their valour and warlike spirit ; indeed it is thought, that had he not just 
C H A R C A S. 
365 
at that critical moment received fresh succours, that were sent from Cuzco by his brother the Mar quis Don Francisco Pizarro, he would have fallen a sacrifice, with the whole of the Spanish army, to that undertaking : but being invigorated by this assistance, he succeeded in routing the Indians, and in obliging them to surrender to the Spanish government. In 1539 the Marquis Don Fran cisco Pizarro, seeing the importance of making an establishment here, resolved upon building of a town, giving a commission to Captain Pedro Auzures to execute the same. This person actually put into effect the plan suggested, founding the town in exactly the same spot in which formerly stood the settlement of Chuquisaca. Here many of its conquerors settled and became citizens, and they gave it the name of La Plata, or Silver, from some mines of this metal which are found in the mountain of Porco, which lies at a small distance from this city, and from which the Inca Emperors were accustomed to extract immense emolument. Notwithstanding this name it has never lost its original title, Chuquisaca, although indeed it is badly pronounced by the Spaniards ; since the Indians, and with great propriety, will have it Choquezaca, Choquechaca, or Choquisacha; all of which, however pronounced, signify, thefirst, moun tains of gold ; the second, cunchos of gold, or fields of brambles with yellow twigs; and the third, bridges of gold. Although this province is exten sive, it is composed of various others, which we shall notice under their proper heads. This keeps its present name, from being the one of all the others the most abounding in minerals, seeds, and cattle ; as well as being the one best peopled with Indians. It is watered by many large rivers; and the whole of it composes an archbishopric, to which are suffragan the bishoprics of La Paz, Santa Cruz de la Sierra, Tucuman, Paraguay, and Buenos Ayres. It belongs to the viceroyalty of this latter place since the time that this was erected, and that the government was entrusted to the royal audience established in 1559. The afore said district comprehends in its jurisdiction all the following provinces and corregimientos : Tomino, Cochabamba, 
Porco, Chayanta, 
Taj-ija, Paria, 
Lipes, Carangas, 
Amparaez, Cicasica, 
Oruro, Atacama : 
Pilaya, 
In which are contained 188 settlements and cura cies, in which there were in 1651 about 100,000 Indians. The capital of the whole jurisdiction is 
the aforesaid city of Chuquisaca or La Plata. Charcas joined the new government of Buenos Ayres in 1810. See LA PLATA. Those who have been Presidents in the Royal Audience of Charcas. 
1. The Licentiate Pedro Ramirez de Quinones, first president, in 1559. 
2. The Licentiate Juan de Matienzo, a cele brated jurisconsult, in 1580. 
3. The Licentiate Zepeda, in 1588. 
4. The Licentiate Alonso Maldonado de Torres, in 1606. 
5. Don Juan de Lizarazu, knight of the order of Santiago ; he passed over to the presidency of Quito in 1612. 
6. Don Diego de Portugal, in 1614. 
7. Don Alonzo Perez de Salazar, who was pre sident of Quito, and was promoted to this, where he governed until the year 1620. 
8. Don Juan de Caravajal y Sande, promoted in 1633. 
9. Don Dionisio Perez Manrique, knight of the order of Santiago, collegiate in the college of Los Manriques de Alcala, rector of the uni versity there, oidor of Lima, and president of Quito, from whence he was removed to be pre sident of this audience of Charcas in 1646; whence, having exercised it till 1654, he was removed to that of Santa Fe. 
10. Don Pedro Vazquez de Velasco, who pre sided until the year 1661. 
11. Don Bartolome Gonzalez de Poveda, promoted in 1678; he was made archbishop of the holy church of Charcas, remaining in the presi dency until 1688. 
12. Don Diego Mesia, native of Lima, oidor of its royal audience, and formerly of that of Quito ; he was promoted to the presidency of Charcas in 1688. 
13. Don Jorge Manrique de Lara, who was oidor of Panama, afterwards of Charcas, as also president. 
14. Don Gabriel Antonio Matienzo, president in 1723. 
15. Don Francisco de Herboso, who was ap pointed in 1725, and presided until 1732. 
16. Don Agustin de Jauregui, knight of the order of Santiago, and native of Lima. 
17. Don Juan Francisco Pestana, adjutantmajor of the regiment of Spanish guards : he was nominated in 1752, and presided until 1769. 
18. Don Ambrosio de Benavides, who entered in the above year, and presided until 1777. 
19. Don Agustin de Pinedo, who succeeded the former, and governed until 1782. 
366 
20. Don Ignacio de Flores, native of Quit*, who had served as captain of cavalry in the regi ment of the volunteers of Aragon, and who was go vernor of the province of Moxos, being of the rank of colonel ; he was nominated as president by way of reward for his services, in having been instru mental to the pacification of the Indians of Peru, and to the succouring of the city of La Paz, which was besieged by rebels : he governed until 1786, when he was removed from tlie presidency. 
|CHAUCAS, a ferocious and barbarous nation of Indians of Peru, to the s. w. of the lakes of Aullaga and of Paria ; conquered by Mayta Capac, fourth monarch of the Incas. At present they are reduced to the Christian faith in the govern ment of Chuquisaca or La Plata. 
CH ARC AS, a settlement, with the dedicatory title of Santa Maria, being the real of the mines of the kingdom of Nueva Galicia, in which are marked the boundaries of its jurisdiction, and those of Nueva Espana, the last district of the bishopric of Mecboacan. It contains a convent of the religi ous order of St. Francis, and 50 families of Spa niards, Mustees, and Mulattoes, as also many of Indians dispersed in the rancherias and the estates of its district: is 130 leagues to the n. $ to the n. w. of Mexico, 75 from Guadalaxera, and 18 to the n. e. of the sierra of Pinos. Lat. 22 55 . Long. 100 40 . 
|CHARCAS, another settlement and real of the mines of the province of Copala, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya ; situate two leagues from the capital. In its vicinity are the estates of Panuco, in which they work with quicksilver the metals of the mines. To its curacy, which is adminstered by one of the Catholic clergy, are annexed two small settlements of Serranos Indians, amongst whom are found some few of the Tepeguana nation. 
|CHARIMIZA, a river of the province and go vernment of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito. It rises in the cordillcra towards the s. and enters the Maranon. 
|CHARLEMONT, a township in Hampshire county, Massachusets, 16 miles w. of Deerfield, Laving 665 inhabitants. 
|CHARLES, a cape on the s. w. part of the strait entering into Hudson s bay. Lat. 62 40 n. Long. 75 15 ze&gt;. 
|CHARLES, a small lake of New France, to the n. of the city of Quebec, which empties itself into the river St. Lawrence. 
|CHARLES, another cape or point of the coast of the country of Labrador ; one of those which form the w. entrance or mouth of the strait of Belleisle. 
|CHARLES River, in Massachusetts, called an ciently Quinobequin, is a considerable stream, the principal branch of which rises from a pond bordering on Hopkinton. It passes through Holliston and Bellingham, and divides Medway from Medfield, Wrentham, and Franklin, and thence into Dedham, where, by a curious bend, it forms a peninsula of 900 acres of land. A stream called Mother brook runs out of this river in this town, and falls into Neponsit river, forming a natural canal, uniting the two rivers, and affording a num ber of excellent mill-seats. From Dedham the course of the river is n. dividing JNewton from Needham, Weston, and Waltham, passing over romantic falls ; it then bends to the n. e. and e. through Watertown and Cambridge, and passing into Boston harbour, mingles with the waters of Mystic river, at the point of the peninsula of Charlestown. It is navigable for boats to Watertown, seven miles. The most remarkable bridges on this river are those which connect Boston with Charlestown and Cambridge. See BOSTON. Thereare seven paper mills on this river, besides other mills. 
|CHARLES County, on the w. shore of Maryland, lies between Potowmack and Patuxent rivers. Its chief town is port Tobacco, on the river of that name. Its extreme length is 28 miles, its breadth 24, and it contains 20,613 inhabitants, including 10,085 slaves. The country has few hills, is gene rally low and sandy, and produces tobacco, Indian corn, sweet potatoes, &c. 
|CHARLES CITY County, in Virginia,lies between Chickahominy and James rivers. It contained formerly part of what now forms Prince George s county. It has 5588 inhabitants, including 3141 slaves. 
|CHARLES, a cape of Virginia, in about lat. 37 15 n. It is on the n. side of the mouth of Chesapeak bay, having cape Henry opposite to it. 
|CHARLES, a promontory in IS . America, men tioned by the English captain Thomas James, in his voyage published 1663, which was made for the sake of discovering a pass to S. America. 
|CHARLES. See CARLOS, SAN. 
|CHARLESTON, a capital city of S. Carolina, is one of the best of N. America, excelling in beauty, grandeur, and commerce. It is situate upon a long strip of land between two navfgable rivers, which are Ashley and Cowper, and the greater part of it upon the latter. This forms in the city two small bays, the one to the n. and the other to the s. The town is of a regular construc tion, and well fortified both by nature and art, having six bastions and a line of entrenchment : on the side of the river Cowper it has the bastions of 
367 
Black, Granville, Craven, and a half-moon; on the . a line, and in front of the river Ashley the bastion of Coliiton, and the covered half-moon of Johnson, with a draw-bridge to pass the line, and another to pass the half-moon. Besides these works of regular fortification, it has a fort erected upon a point of land at the entrance of the river Ashley, which commands the channel and the vessels : but the bastions, the palisade, and the ditch on the land-side, having suffered much damage in an hurricane, and it being thought by the Governor Nicholson, that they were of too great an extent to defend themselves, they were by his command de stroyed. This city is, as it were, a continual fair, being the market for the fruits of the whole pro vince : the streets are well projected, and the edi fices are grand and of fine architecture, especially the church, which is magnificent, spacious, and one of the best in all N. America: there are several other churches belonging to different sects, and the French protestants have a very fine one in the prin cipal street. The town consists of 800 houses built of wood as to the greater part, although there are some of stone ; all of them having glass win dows, and manifesting a degree of elegance and or nament in their structure : is the residence of the governor of the province, and in it is held the ge neral assembly and the tribunal of judicature. Here are many rich nobles and opulent merchants, and almost all its inhabitants exhibit a costly ap pearance, and live in a state of consummate luxury. It has a public library, which owes its establishment to Doctor Thomas Bray. The liberty of con science enjoyed in this city, and which was granted to its inhabitants a short time after its foundation, caused it to become very populous. This effect was further heightened by the extensive commerce it enjoyed ; and thus has it, with many other qua lities of pre-eminence, become one of the finest settlements in America. 
Charleston, the metropolis of S. Carolina, is the most considerable town in the state; situate in the district of the same name, and on the tongue of land formed by the confluent streams of Ashley and Cowper, which are short rivers, but large and navigable. These waters unite immediately below the city, and form a spacious and convenient har bour, which communicates with the ocean just be low Sullivan s island, which it leaves on the n. seven miles s. e. of Charleston. In these rivers the tide rises in common about six feet and a half; but uni formly rises 10 or 12 inches more during a night tide. The fact is certain ; the cause unknown. The continual agitation which the tides occasion in the waters which almost surround Charleston, 
the refreshing sea-breezes which are regularly felt, and the smoke arising from so many chimneys, render this city more healthy than any part of the low country in the s. states. On this account it is the resort of great numbers of gentlemen invalids from the W. India islands, and of the rich planters from the country, who come here to spend the sickly months, as they are called, in quest of health and of the social enjoyments which the city affords ; and in no part of America are the social blessings enjoyed more rationally and liberally than here. The following statement exhibits the greatest and least height of Fahrenheit s thermometer for several years past in Charleston. 
Years. Highest. Lowest. Years. Highest. Lowest. 
1750 
96 
23 
1759 
93 
28 
1751 
94 
18 
1791 
90 
28 
1752 
101 
32 
1792 
93 
30 
1753 
91 
28 
1793 
89 
30 
1754 
93 
22 
1794 
91 
34 
1755 
90 
26 
1795 
92 
29 
1756 
96 
27 
1796 
89 
17 
1757 
90 
25 
1797 
88 
22 
1758 
94 
25 
1798 
88 
31 
mean 
State of the weather for 1807, ending Decem ber 31. 
92 30 
24 
58 15 
30 1 to 30 77 
1 to 131 42 inches 1| N.E. S.W. 67 28 
2 
Thermometer, highest Ditto lowest Ditto 
Barometer Hygrometer Fall of rain Prevailing winds Days of rain 
Do. of thunder 
Do. of snow 
Unaffected hospitality -affability ease of man ners and address and a disposition to make their guests welcome, easy, and pleased with themselves, are characteristics of the respectable people of Charleston. In speaking of the capital, it ought to be observed, for the honour of the people of Carolina in general, that when, in common with the other colonies, in the contest with Britain, they re solved against the use of certain luxuries, and even necessaries of life, those articles which improve the mind, enlarge the understanding, and correct the taste, wece excepted ; the importation of books was permitted as formerly. The land on which the town is built is flat and low, and the water brackish and unwholesome. The streets are pretty regularly cut, and open beautiful prospects, and have subterranean drains to carry off filth and keep 
368 
C II A 
the city clean and healthy ; but are too narrow for so large a place and so warm a climate. Their general breadth is from 35 to 66 feet. The houses which have been lately built are brick with tiled roofs. The buildings in general are elegant, and most of them arc neat, airy, and well furnished. The public buildings are, an exchange, a statehouse, an armoury, a poor-house, and an orphan s house. Here are several respectable academies. Part of the old barracks has been handsomely fitted up, and converted into a college, and there are a number of students ; but it can only be called as yet a respectable academy. Here are two banks ; a branch of the national bank, and the S. Carolina bank, established in 1792. The houses for public worship are, two Episcopal churches, two for In dependents, one for Scotch Presbyterians, one for Baptists, one for German Lutherans, two for Me thodists, one for French Protestants, a meeting house for Quakers, a Roman Catholic chapel, and a Jewish synagogue. Little attention is paid to the public markets ; a great proportion of the most wealthy inhabitants having plantations, from which they receive supplies of almost every article of living. The country abounds with poultry and wikTducks. Their beef, mutton, and veal are not generally of the best kind ; and few fish are found in the market. In 1787 it vyas computed that there were 1600 houses in this city, and 15,000 inhabi tants, including 5400 slaves ; and what evinces the healthiness of the place, upwards of 200 of the white inhabitants were above 60 years of age. In 1791 there were 16,359 inhabitants, of whom 7684 were slaves. This city has often suffered much by fire ; the last and most destructive happened as late as June 1796. Charleston was incorporated in 1783, and divided into three wards, which choose as many wardens, from among whom the citizens elect an intendant of the city. The intendant and wardens form the city-council, who have power to make and enforce bye-laws for the regulation of the city. The value of exports from this port, in the year ending November 1787, amounted to 505,279/. 195. 5d. sterling. The number of vessels cleared from the custom-house the same year was 947, measuring 62,118 tons; 735 of these, mea suring 41,531 tons, were American ; the others be longed to Great Britain, Ireland, Spain, France, and the United Netherlands. In the year 1794 the value of exports amounted to 3,846,392 dollars. It is 60 miles s. w. by s. of Georgetown, 150 e. by s. of Augusta, 497 s. by w. of Richmond, 630 5. a?, by s. of Washington city ; 763 s. w. by s. of Philadel phia, and 1110 s. w. of Boston. Lat. 32 48 . Long. 80 2 w. Knoxville, the capital of the state 
of Tennessee, is much nearer to this than to any sea-port town in the Atlantic ocean. A waggon road of only 15 miles is wanted to open the com munication ; and the plan is about to be executed by the state. 
|CHARLESTON, another capital city of the county of Middlesex in New England; situate on the bank of the river Charles. It is well peopled and of a good construction, occupying the whole of the space which lies between the aforesaid river and that of Mystic, the former river dividing the city from Boston, in the same manner as the Thames divides London from Southwark. It has a raft for the traffic of the river instead of a bridge, the fare or produce of which belongs to the college of Nor wood in the city of Cambridge, which is close by : this city is as it were 4he half of Boston, and its situation, as being upon a peninsula, is very ad vantageous. At certain times it has fairs, and is the meeting place for the assembly of the county. It has a very large and handsome church, and a market place, ornamentally and conveniently situate on the river side, at which there are sold all kinds of flesh, fish, and other necessaries : it has two large streets leading to it. The river is navigable, and runs through the country for many leagues. Is in Lat. 42 24 n. Long. 71 6 w. 
|CHARLESTOWN, the principal town in Middlesex county, Massachusetts, called Mishawun by the aboriginal inhabitants, lies n. of Boston, with which it is now connected by Charles river bridge. The town, properly so called, is built on a peninsula formed by Mystic river on the e. and a bay setting up from Charles river on the w. It is very advantageously situated for health, naviga tion, trade, and manufactures of almost all the va rious kinds. A dam across the mouth of the bay, which sets up from Charles river, would afford a great number of mill-seats for manufactures. Bun ker s, Breed s, and Cobble (now Barrell s) hills, are celebrated in the history of the American revo lution. The second hill has upon its summit a monument erected io the memory of Major-general Warren, near the spot where he fell, among the first sacrifices to American liberty. The brow of the hill begins to be ornamented with elegant houses. All these hills afford elegant and delight ful prospects of Boston, and its charmingly varie gated harbour, of Cambridge and its colleges, and of an extensive tract of highly cultivated country. It contains within the neck or parish about 250 houses, and about 2000 inhabitants. The only public buildings of consequence are, a handsome Congregational church, with an elegant steeple and clock, and an alms-house, very commodious 
and pleasantly situated. Before the destruction of this town by the British in 1775, several brandies of man u fact u res were carried on to great advan tage, some of which have been since revived : par ticularly the manufacture of pot and pearl ashes, ship-building, rum, leather in all its branches, silver, tin, brass, and pewter. Three rope-walks have lately been erected in this town, and the in crease of its houses, population, trade, and naviga tion, have been very great within a few years past. This town is a port of entry in conjunction with Boston. At the head of the neck there is a bridge over Mystic river, which connects Charlestown with Maiden. 
|CHARLESTOWN, another city of the island of Nevis, one of the Caribes, in the Antilles ; in which there are beautiful houses and shops well provided with every thing ; is defended by a fort called Charles. It has a market every Saturday, begin ning at sun-rise and finishing at mid-day, whither the Negroes bring maize, names, garden-herbs, fruits, &c. In the parish of San Juan is a piece of sulphureous land, in the upper extremity of an opening of the land, called Solfatara, or Sulphur gut, which is so hot as to be felt through the soles of the shoes when being trodden upon. At the foot of the declivity of this same part of the city, is a small hot stream, called the Bath, which being supposed to rise from the aforesaid spot, loses itself shortly in the sand. Towards the side lying next the sea arc two fountains, one of hot water, the other of cold, and of these two are formed the lake of Blackrock, the waters of which are of a moderate warmth, and which lies to the n. of the city, being nearly a quarter of a mile s distance from the place where are caught eels and silver-fish, resembling the cod and slimgut in flavour, the latter of which has a head disproportioned to its body. [A prodi gious piece of Nevis mountain falling down in an earthquake several years ago, left a large vacuity, which is still to be seen. The altitude of this mountain, taken by a quadrant from Charlestown bay, is said to be a mile and a half perpendicular ; and from the said bay to the top, four miles. The declivity from this mountain to the town is very steep half-way, but afterwards easy of ascent. In Lat. 17 8 n. and long. 62 40 w. 
|CHAULESTOWN, another city of the island of Barbadoes ; the situation of which is two leagues from that of San Miguel. It has a good port de fended by two castles ; the one beyond the other, and both commanding the city and the road: in the middle of them is a platform. The inhabitants carry on a great trade with the other islands. 
|CHARLESTOWN, a township in Montgomery 
|VOL. I. 
369 
county, New York, on the .?. side of Mohawk river, about 32 miles w. of Schenectady. By the sfnte census of 1796, 456 of the inhabitants are elec tors. 
|CHARLESTOAVN, a township in Mason county, Kentucky ; situate on the Ohio, at the mouth of Lauren s creek. It contains but few houses, and is six miles n. of Washington, and 60 n. e. of Lex ington. Lat. 38 28 w. 
|CHARLESTOW N,a township in Chester county, Pennsylvania. 
|CHARLESTOWN, a post town in Cheshire county, New Hampshire, on the e. side of Connecticut river, 30 miles s. of Dartmouth college, upwards of 70 . of Northampton, 116 n. of v). of Boston, 120 w. by n. of Portsmouth, and 431 n. n. e. of Phila delphia. It was incorporated in 1753, and con tains 90 or 100 houses, a Congregational church, a court-house, and an academy. The road from Boston to Quebec passes through this town. Lat. 43 16 n. Long. 72 23 ro. A small internal trade is carried on here. 
|CHAR i ESTOWN, a post town in Cecil count v, Maryland, near the head of Chesapeak bay ; six miles e. n. e. from the mouth of Snsquehannah river, 10 w. s. w. from Elktown, and 50 s. w. by re?. from Philadelphia. Here are about 20 houses, chiefly inhabited by fishermen employed in the herring fishery. Lat. 39 36 . 
CiiAHLESTowN, a district in the lower country of S. Carolina, subdivided into 14 parishes. This large district, of which the city of Charleston is the chief town, lies between Santee and Combahee rivers. It pays 21,473/. I4s. 6d. sterling, taxes. It sends to the state legislature 48 representatives and 13 senators, and one member to congress. It con tains 66,986 inhabitants, of whom only 16,352 are free. 
|CHARLESTOWN, a village in Berkley county, Virginia ; situate on the great road leading from Philadelphia to Winchester ; eight miles from Shepherdstown, and 20 from Winchester. 
|CHARLESTOWN, a township in Washington county, Rhode Island state, having the Atlantic ocean on the s. and separated from Richmond on the n. by Charles river, a water of Pawcatuck. Some of its ponds empty into Pawcatuck river, others into the sea. It is 19 miles n. w. of Newport, and contains 2022 inhabitants, including 12 slaves. A few years ago there were about 500 Indians in the state ; the greater part of them resided in this town ship. They are peaceable and well disposed to government, and speak the English language. 
|CHARLETON, an island situate near the e. coast of the country of Labrador, in the part ofN. SB 
370 
America called New South Wales. Its territory consists of a white dry sand, and it is covered witli small trees and shrubs. This island has a beauti ful appearance in the spring to those who discover it after a voyage of three or four months, and after having seen nothing but a multitude of mountains covered with frost, which lie in the bay, and in the strait of Hudson, and which are rocks petrified with eternal ice. This island appears at that sea son as though it were one heap of verdure. The air at the bottom of the bay, although in 51 of lat. and nearer to the sun than London, is excessively cold for nine months, and extremely hot the remain ing three, save when the n. w. wind prevails. The soil on the e. as well as on the w. side produces all kinds of grain and fruits of fine qualities, which are cultivated on the shore of the river Rupert. Lat. 52 12 n. Long. 80 w. 
|CHARNACOCHA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Pilaya and Paspaya in Peru. 
|CIIARO, MATLAZINGO, the alcaldia mayor of the province and bishopric of Mechoacan in Nucva Espana, of a mild and dry temperature, being the extremity of the sierra of Otzumatlan ; the heights of which are intersected with many veins of metals, which manifest themselves very plainly, although they have never yet been dug out ; and in the wet seasons the clay or mud pits render the roads impassable. It is watered by the river which rises in the pool or lake of Valladolid, and by which the crops of wheat, maize, lentils, and the fruits peculiar to the place, are rendered fertile and productive. This reduced jurisdiction belongs to the Marquises of Valle, and is subject to the Dukes of Terranova. Its population is reduced to lome ranches, or meetings for the purpose of labour, and to the capital, which has the same name, and which contains a convent of the religious order of St. Augustin, this being one of the first v temples built by the Spaniards in this kingdom, the present dilapidated state of it bearing ample testimony to its great antiquity. It contains 430 families of Pirindas Indians, employed in labour and in the cultivation of the land, and in making bread, which is carried for the supply of Valladolid, the neigh bouring ranches and estates. It should also have 45 or 50 families of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattoes. Is 50 leagues to the w. of Mexico, and two to the e. of Valladolid. Long. 100 44 . Lat. 934 . 
|CHARON, a small river of Canada, which runs f . and enters the lake Superior in the bay of Beaubarnois. 
|CHARPENTIER, FOND DU, a bay of the n. e. 
C II A 
coast of the island of Martinique, between the town and parish of Marigot and the Pan de Aziicar. 
|CHARPENTIEH, a small river of the same island, which runs n. e. and enters the sea in the former bay. 
|GHARQUEDA, a lake of the province and captainship of Rey in Brazil, near the coast which lies between this lake and that of Los Patos. 
|CIIARRUAS, a barbarous nation of Indians of Paraguay, who inhabit the parts lying between the rivers Parana and Uruguay. These Indians are the most idle of any in America, and it has been attempted in vain to reduce them to any thing like a civilized state. 
|CHARRUAS, a settlement of this province and government. 
|CHARRUAS, a river of the same province, which runs .v. s. w. and enters the Parana. 
|CHARTIER, BAHIA DE, a bay on the s. coast of the straits of Magellan, between the bay of San Simon and the point of Tunquichisgua. 
|CHARTIER, a settlement of Indians of the pro vince and colony of Virginia ; situate on the shore of a river of the same name. It runs s. and enters the sea in the county of Hampshire. 
|CHARTIER, a township in Washington county, Pennsylvania. 
|CHARTIER S Creek. See CANONSBURG and MORGANZA. 
|CHARTRES, a fort which was built by the French, on the e. side of the Mississippi, three miles n. of La Prairie du Rocher, or the Rock meadows, and 12 miles n. of St. Genevieve, on the w. side of that river. It was abandoned in 1772, being untenable by the constant washings of the Mississippi in high floods. The village s. of the fort was very inconsiderable in 1778. A mile above this is a village settled by 170 warriors of the Piorias and Mitchigamias tribes of Illinois Indians, who are idle and debauched. 
|CMASPAIA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Arica in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Tarata. 
CH ASSES, a small river of N. Carolina, which runs n. n. e. and enters that of Cutawba. 
|CHAT, TROU DF,, a settlement of the parish and island of Martinique ; situate near the bay of the Cul de Sac Royal, and to the n. e. of the capital. 
|CHAT, a river of the island of Guadalupe, which rises in the- mountains of the e. coast, and running e. enters the sea between the rivers Grand Bananier and Trou au Chien, or Hole of the Dog. 
|CHAT, a cape or point of land on the coast of the river St. Lawrence, on the shore opposite to the port of Sail Pacracio. 
|CHATACANCHA, a settlement of the province and corregitiiento of Huarochiri in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Olleros. 
|CHATA-HATCHI, or If ATCHI, is the largest river which falls into St. Rose s bay in \V. Florida-. It is also called Pea river, and runs from n. e. en tering the bottom of the bay through several months, but so shoal that only a small boat or canoe can pass them. Mr. Hutchins ascended this river about 25 leagues, where there was a small settlement of Coussac Indians. The soil,and tim ber on the banks of the river resemble very much those of Escambia. 
|CHATAHOUCHI, a settlement of Indians of Georgia, in which the English have an establish ment. It is situate on the shore of the river Apalachicola. 
|CHAT AS, some islands of the N. sea, which are very small and desert, and lie to the n. of the island of Ynagua. 
|CHATAUCHE, or CHATAHUTHE, a river in Georgia. The n. part of Apalachiola river bears this name. It is about 30 rods wide, very rapid, and full of shoals. The lands on its banks are light and sandy, arid the clay of a bright red. The lower creeks are settled in scattering clans and vil lages from the head to the mouth of this river. Their huts and cabins, from the high colour of the clay, resemble clusters of new-burned brick kilns. The distance from this river to the Talapose river, is about 70 miles, by the war-path, which crosses at the falls, just above the town of the Tuckabatches. 
|CHATAUGHQUE Lake, in Ontario county, New York, is about 18 miles long, and three broad. Conewango river, which runs a s. s. e. course, connects it with Allcghany river. This Jake is conveniently situated fora communication between lake Erie and the Ohio ; there being water enough for boats from fort Franklin on the Alleghany to the n. w. corner of this lake ; from thence there is a portage of nine miles to Chataughque harbour on lake Erie, over ground capable of being made a good waggon road. This communication was once used by the French. 
|CHATEAU, a settlement of New France, in which the French have a castle and establishment, on the shore of the river St. Lawrence. 
|CHATEAUX, a small river of the country and land of Labrador. It runs s. and enters the sea in the strait of Belleisle. 
|CHATHAM, a maritime township in Barnstaple county, Massachusetts ; situate on the ex terior extremity of the elbow of cape Cod, coTive
371 
niently for the fishery ; in which they have usually about 40 vessels employed. It has 1140 inhabi tants, and lies 95 miles s. e. of Boston. See CAPE COD. 
|CHATHAM, a township in Grafton county, New Hampshire. It was incorporated in 1767, and in 1790 contained 58 inhabitants. 
|CHATHAM, a flourishing township in Middlesex county, Connecticut, on the e. bank of Connecticut river, and opposite Middleton city. It was a part of the township of Middleton till 1767. 
|CHATHAM, a township in Essex county, N.Jer sey, is situated on Passaic river, 13 miles w. of Eli/abethtown, and nearly the same from New ark. 
|CHATHAM, a township of Columbia county, New York. By the state census of 1796, 380 of its inhabitants were electors. 
|CHATHAM County, in Hillsborough district, N. Carolina, about the centre of the state. It con tains 9221 inhabitants, of whom 1632 arc slaves. Chief town, Pittsburg. The court-house is a few miles w. of Italeigh, on a branch of Cape Fear river. 
|CHATHAM, a town of S. Carolina, in Cheraws district; situate in Chesterfield county, on the w. side of Great Pedee river. Its situation, in a highly cultivated and rich country, and at the head of a navigable river, bids fair to render it a place of great importance. At present it has only about 30 houses, lately built. 
|CHATHAM County, in the lower district of Georgia, lies in the n. e. corner of the state, having the Atlantic ocean e. and Savannah river n. e. It contains 10,769 inhabitants*, including 8201 slaves. The chief town is Savannah, the former capital of the state. 
|CHATHAM or PUNJO Bay, a large bay on the w. side of the s. end of the promontory of E. Flo rida. It receives North and Delaware rivers. 
|CHATHAM House, in the territory of the Hud son bay company. Lat. 55 28 n. Long. 97 32 za. from Greenwich. 
|CHALCA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Guarochiri in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Casta. 
|CHAUCA, another settlement, in the province and corregimienlo of Canta ; annexed to the curacy of Pari. 
|CHAUCAIAN, a settlement of the province and coiregimiento of Huailas in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Caxacai, in the province of Caxatarnbo. 
|CHAUCHILLOS, a settlement of the province 
372 
and government, of Tucuman, in tlie jurisdiction of the city of Santiago del Estero, on the shore of lite river Choromoros. 
CH AUDI ERE River, a s. e. water of the St. Lawrence, rising in Lincoln and Hancock coun ties, in the district of Maine. The carrying place from boatable waters in it, to boatable waters in the Kennebeck, is only five miles. 
| CIIAUDIERK Falls are situate about nine miles above Quebec, on the opposite shore, and about three or four miles back from the river St. Law rence, into which the river Ghaudiere disembogues i i self. The river is seen at a distance, emerging from a thick wood, and gradually expanding from an almost imperceptible stream till it reaches the cataract, whose breadth is upwards of 360 ieet. Here the disordered masses of rock, which appear to have been rent from their bed by some violent convulsion of nature, break the course of the waters, and precipitate them from a height of ISO feet into an immense chasm below. In some parts large sheets of water roll over the precipice, and fall unbroken to the bottom ; while in other places the water dashes from one fragment of the rock to another, with wild impetuosity, bellow ing and foaming with rage in every hollow and cavity that obstructs its progress ; from thence it rushes down with the rapidity of lightning into the boiling surge beneath, where it rages with in conceivable fury, till driven from the gulf by fresh columns, it hurries away and loses itself in the waters of the St. Lawrence. The scenery which accompanies the cataract of Chaudicre is beautiful and romantic beyond description. Jn the centre, a large fragment of rock, which first divides the water, at the summit of the precipice, forms a small island ; and a handsome fir-tree, which grows upon it, is thus placed in a most singular and picturesque situation. The forest on either side the river consists of firs, pines, birch, oak, ash, and a variety of other trees and shrubs, intermingled in the most wild and romantic man ner. Their dark green foliage, joined with the brown and sombre tint of the rocky fragments over which the water precipitates itself, form a strik ing and pleasing contrast to the snowy white ness of the foaming surge, and the columns of sparkling spray which rise in clouds and mingle with the air. 1 
ClIAUGE, a settlement of Indians of S. Carolina ; situate on the shore of the river Tugelo. 
|CHAUICO, SAN PEDRO DE, a settlement of the head settlement of Tlacotepec, and alcaldia 
mat/ or of Jnxtlahnaca, in Nueva Espana. It con tains 57 families of Indians. 
|CHAD IN, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Castro- Vireyna in Peru; annexed to the curacy of Chupamarca in the province of Yaivos. 
|CHAUIV, another settlement in the province and corregimiento of Caxamarquilla in Peru. 
|CHAlJIiVA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Lucanas in the same kingdom ; annexed to (he curacy of Paraisancos. 
|CMAUINILLOS, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Iluamalics in the same king dom ; annexed to the curacy of Pachas. 
|CHAUITAS, LA PHESKNTACION DE, a settle ment of the province and government of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito. 
|CHAD LAN, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Huanuco in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Huacar. 
|CHAUNAMILLA, a settlement of the pro vince and corregimiento of Maule in the kingdom of Chile ; situate upon the shore and at the source of the river Jecudahue. 
|CHAUPICOS, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Canta in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Atabillos Baxos. 
|CHAIIPIMARCA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Tarma in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Tapu. 
CIIAUTLAN, a settlement of the province and alcaldia mayor of Zoques in the kingdom of Guatemala. 
|CHAUX, PUNTA DE, an extremity of the e. coast of the island of Martinique, one of the An tilles. It runs into the sea nearly equal with that of Carabelle. 
|CIIAXAL, a river of the province and alcaldia mayor of Chiapa in the kingdom of Guatemala. It runs e. and enters the sea in the gulf of Higueras. 
|CHAYANTA, or CIIARCAS, a province and corregimiento of Peru, bounded n. by that of Cochabamba, n. w. by the corregimiento of Oruro, e. by the province of Yamparaez, s. e. and s. by that of Porco, and w. by that of Paria ; is 36 leagues in length from w. to e. and 44 in width, n. s. Its temperature is various, since it contains the settle ments of Puna and Valles ; in the former of these are found in abundance the productions of the sierra, and in the latter wheat, maize, and other seeds and herbs : they have equally a traffic with the surrounding provinces, especially in the ar ticles of wheat and flour of maize. Here arc bred 
|CHE 
|CHE 
373 
cattle of all sorts; and there are some gold mines, though they produce at present very sparingly; some of the silver mines, winch were very fruitful, have lately filled with water, and attempts have been made in vain to empty them. Indeed the only mines which have produced any great wealth are those found in the mountains of Anllagas, and from them, for some years past, vnrtals of the rarest qualities have been extracted. In the woods of the valleys, which produce very fine and excel lent timber, are found wolves, tigers, ;tnd other wild bea-ts inhabiting the mountains; also a species of bees, which form their combs in the hol lows of trees, and (he honey of which they call de charas. There is a river in this province com posed of several streams, and which unites itself with the Cochabamb u The number of its inha bitants amounts to 36,000, who are divided into 27 settlements. Its reparlimicnlo used to amount to 92,665 dollars, and its alcaxaJa to 741 dollars per annum. It is one of the richest provinces of Peru. 
The capital is of the same name, and the other settlements are, 
Chayantacas, Charca, 
Amayapampa, Pitantora, 
Lairnes , Ocuri, 
Calacala, Uruycarasi, 
Amaya, San Francisco de Micnni, 
Amayavilque, San Marcos de Miraflo
Pocoata, res, 
Chayala, Surumi, 
Casimbnco, Santiago de Moscari, 
San Pedro de Macha, San Pedro de Buena vista, Moromoro, Acasio, 
Maragua, Toracari, 
Pancachi, Huaicoma, 
Sarari, Aullagas. 
|CHEANE, a river of the province and govern ment of Paraguay. 
|CHEARA, a settlement of the province and correginriento of Andahuaihs in Peru; annexed to the curacy of Hnaiama. 
|CHEAT River rises in Randolph county, Virginia, and after pursuing a n. n. w. course, joins Monongahela river, three or four miles within the Pennsylvania line. It is 200 yards wide at its mouth, and 100 yards at the Dunkards settlement, 50 miles higher, and is navigable for boats, except in dry seasons. There is a portage of 37 miles from this river to the Potowrnack, at the mouth of Savage river. 
|CIJEBA, a settlement of the province and corregimicnto of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada, of a cold temperature. It lies between some mountains, and abounds in the productions of a cold climate, such as wheat, maize, truffles, and barley ; it consists of 100 house-keepers, and of 40 Indians, all of whom are subject to the disorder of the cotos, or swelling of the throat; is 24 leagues to the n. e. of Tunja. 
|CHEIJANONKOGUE, a town of the French, in Canada ; situate in the country of the Mistasuis Indians, on the n. shore of a lake which gives it its name. 
|CHEI3EN, a river of Nova Scotia. It rises from a small lake near the settlement and fort of Sackville, runs n. and enters the Basin tics Mines, or of the Mines, of the bay of Fundy. 
|CHEBUCTO, a bay and harbour on the 5. s. e. coast of Nova Scotia, distinguished by the loss of a French fleet in a former war between France and Great Britain. Near the head of this bay, on the w. side, stands the city of Halifax, the ca pital of the province. 
|CHECA, a settlement of the province and corregfmiento of Tinta in Peru. 
|CHECACUPI, a settlement of the same pro vince and kingdom as the former. 
|CHECACUPT, another, in the province of Quispicanchi or Urcos in the same kingdom. 
|CHECASA, LA NUEVA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Pilaya and Paspaya in Peru. 
|CIIECHIRCANTI, a river of the province and government, of Darien in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. It rises in the mountains on the n. side, runs n. and enters the sea in the small beech or plat/on, opposite the port of Calidonia. 
|CHECODIN, a small lake of the province and country of the Iroquees Indians in Canada, lies between the lake Oswego and the river Ohio. 
|CHECRAS. SeeCnANCAY. 
|CHEDABUCTO, or MILFORD HAVEN, a large and deep bay on the easternmost part of Nova Scotia, at the mouth of the gut of Canso. Opposite to its mouth stands isle Madame. Sal mon river falls into this bay from the w. and is remarkable for one of the greatest fisheries in the world. 
|CHEDIAC, a small river of Nova Scotia, which runs e. and enters the sea in the strait formed by the coast and the island of San Juan. 
|CHEESADAWD Lake, about 210 miles . e. by e. of the Canadian house, on the e. end of Slave lake, in the Hudson bay company s terri tory, is about 35 miles in length, and the same in breadth. Its w. shore is mountainous and rocky. 
374 
|CHE 
|CHEGOMEGAN, a point of land about 60 miles in length, on the s. side of lake Superior. About 100 miles zv. of this cape, a considerable river falls into the lake ; upon its banks abundance of virgin copper is found. 
|CHEGONOIS, a small river of the same pro vince and colony as the former. It runs s. K. and enters the Basin des Mines. 
|CHEGUEHIE, a river of the province of Sucumbios in the kingdom of Quito. It runs a. it;. and enters the Atjuarico, in lat. 6 w. 
|CIIEGUIQUILLA, a settlement of the pro vince and corrcginiienlo of Coquimbo in the king dom of Chile; situate to the s. of the town of Copiapp. 
|CHJSJANI, a settlement of the province and rorregimieulo of Carabaya in Peru; annexed to tlie curacy of Para. 
|CIIEKOUTIMI, a settlement of Indians of Canada, in the country of the nation of its name, on the shore of the river Saguenay. 
|CHELEL, a settlement or the province and corre gimiento of Luya and Chillaos in Peru; an nexed to the curacy of Cheto. 
|CHELMSFORD, a township in Middlesex county, Massachusetts ; situated on the s. side of Merrimack river, 26 miles n. w. from Boston, and contains 1144 inhabitants. There is an ingeniously constructed bridge over the river at Pawtucket falls, \vhich connects this town with Dracut. The route of the Middlesex canal, designed to connect the waters of Merrimack with those of Boston harbour, will be s. through the e. part of Chelmsford. 
|CHELQUE, a settlement of Indians of the district of Guadalabquen in the kingdom of Chile ; situate on the shore of the river Valdivia. 
|CHELSEA, called by tlie ancient natives 777/1nisimet) a town in Suffolk county, Massachusetts, containing 472 inhabitants. Before its incorpora tion, in 1738, it was award of the town of Boston. It is situated n. e. of the metropolis, and separated from it by the ferry across the harbour, called "VVinnisimet. j 
|CHELSEA, a township in Orange county, Ver mont, having 239 inhabitants. 
|CHELSEA, the name of a parish in the city of Norwich, (Connecticut), called the Landing, situ ated at the head of the river Thames, 14 miles n. of New London, on a point of land formed by the junction of Shetucket and Norwich, or Little rivers, whose united waters constitute the Thames. It is a busy, commercial, thriving, romantic, and 
Agreeable place, of about 150 houses, ascending 
|CHE 
one above another in tiers, on artificial founda tions, on the 5. point of a high rocky hill. 
|CHELSEA, a settlement of the English in the province and colony of Massachusetts, one of tlie four of New England, on the shore of the port of Boston. 
|CHEMIN, Cnoix DE LA MOLLE DE, a cross in Canada, standing in the middle of the road near the river Wab:ich". 
|CJIEM UNG. The w. branch ofSusquehannah river is sometimes so called. See TIOGA liiver. 
(Tur.MUNG is a township in Tioga county, Nttw York. By the state census of 1796, 81 of its inhabitants were electors. It has Newton w. and Oswego e. about 160 miles /?. zo. from New York city, measuring in a straight line. Between this place and Newton, (ieneral Sullivan, in his vic torious expedition against the Indians in 1779, had a desperate engagement with the Six Nations, whom he defeated. The Indians wcrestrongly entrenched, and it required the utmost exertions of the Ame rican army, with field pieces, to dislodge them ; although the former, including 250 tories, amount ed only to 800 men, while the Americans were 5000 in number, ami well appointed in every re spect. 
CIIENE, a river of Canada, which rurts n. w. and enters the river St. Lawrence, opposite the settlement of New Port. 
|CHENENGO is a ??. branch of Susquehannah river. Many of the military townships are watered by the n. in. branch of this river. The towns of Fayette, Jerico, Greene, Clinton, and Chenengo, in Tioga county, lie between this river and the e. waters of Susquehannah. 
|CIICNENGO, a post town, and one of the chief in Tioga county, New York. Tlie settled part of the town lies about 40 miles n. e. from Tioga point, between Chenengo river and Susquehan nah ; has the town of Jerico on the n. By the state census of 1796, 169 of its inhabitants are electors. It was taken off from Montgomery county, and in 1791 it had only 45 inhabitants. It is 375 miles n. n. w. of Philadelphia. 
Cli ENESSEE or GEN ESSEE River risesin Penn sylvania, near the spot, which is the highest ground inthatstate,Avhcrethe eastern most water of Alleghany river, and Pine creek, a water of Susquehannah, and Tioga river, rise. Fifty miles from its source there are falls of 40 feet, and five from its mouth of 75 feet, and a little above that of 96 feet. These falls furnish excellent mill-seats, which are improved by the inhabitants. After a course of about 100 miles, mostly n. *. by n. it empties into lakeQutario, four 
|CHE 
miles and a half e. of Irondequat or Rundagut bay, and 80 &lt; . from Xiagara falls. The settlements on Chenessee river from its mouth upwards, tire llarttbrd, Ontario, Wadsworth, and Williamsburgli. The last mentioned place, it is probable, wilt soon be the seat of extensive commerce. There will not be a carrying place between New York city and Williamsburgh when the w. canals and locks shall be completed. The carry ing places at present are as follows, viz. Albany to Schenectady, 16 miles; from the head of the Mohawk to Wood creek, one ; Oswcgo falls, two ; Chenessee falls, two ; so that there are but 21 miles land carriage necessary, in order to convey com modities from a tract of country capable of main taining several millions of people. The famous Chenessee flats lie on the borders of this river. They are about 20 miles long, and about four wide; the soil is remarkably rich, quite clear of trees, producing grass near JO feet high. These flats are estimated to be worth 200,000/. as they now lie. They are mostly the property of the Indians.! 
|CHENGUE, a settlement of the province and government of Santa Marta in the kingdom of Tierra Firme ; situate on the sea-coast. It was sacked by William Gauson in 1655, who also destroyed and plundered circumjacent estates. 
|CHEPAWAS, or CHIPEWAYS, an Indian nation inhabiting the coast of lake Superior and the islands in the lake. They could, according to Mr. Hutch ins, furnish 1000 warriors 20 years ago. Other tribes of this nation inhabit the coun try round Saguinam or Sagana bay, and lake Huron, bay Puan, and a part of lake Michigan. They were lately hostile to the United States, but, by the treaty of Greenville, Augusts. 1795, they yielded to them the island De Bois .Blanc. See Six NATIONS. 
|CIIEPA W Y AN Fort is situated on a penin sula at the s. IK. end of Athapescow lake, lat. 58 40 n. long. 1 10 25 w. in the territory of the Hudson bay company. 
|CHEPEN, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Sana in Peru. 
CH EPETLAN, a settlement of the head settle ment, anil alcaldia mayor of Tlapa, in Nueva Espana. It contains 203 families of Indians, who live by the making and selling of chocolate cups. Two leagues to the n. n. re. of Tenango. 
|CHEPEWAS, of Leach Lake, Indians of N. America, claiming the country on both sides of the Mississippi, from the mouth of the Crow-wing river to its source, and extending w. of the Missis
|CHE 
L frj r~ 
o/ J 
sippi to the lands claimed by the Sioux, with whom they still contend for dominion. They claim atao, e. of the Mississippi, the country ex tending as far as lake Superior, including the waters of the St. Louis. This country is thickly covered with timber generally, lies level, arid generally fertile, though a considerable propor tion of it is intersected and broken up by small lakes, morasses, and small swamps, particularly about the heads of the Mississipi and river St. Louis. They do not cultivate, but live princi pally on the \\ild rice, which they procure in great abundance on the borders of Leach lake and the banks of the Mississipi. Their number has been considerably reduced by wars and the small-pox. Their trade is at its greatest extent. 
|CHRPEWAS, of Red Lake, Indians of N.Ame rica, who claim the country about Red Lake and Red Lake river, as far as the Red river of lake Winnipie, beyond which last river they contend with the Sioux for territory. This is a low level country, and generally thickly covered with timber, interrupted with many swamps and morasses. This, as well as the other bands of Chepewas, are es teemed the best hunters in the n. w. country ; but from the long residence of this band in the country they now inhabit, game is become scarce ; there fore their trade is supposed to be at its greatest ex tent. The Chepewas are a well-disposed people, but excessively fond of spirituous liquors. 
|CHEPEWAS, of River Pembena, Indians of N. America, who formerly resided on the e. side of the Mississippi, at Sand lake, but were induced by the N. W. company to remove, a few years since, to the river Pembena. They do not claim the lands on which they hunt. The country is level, and the soil good. The u\ side of the river is principally prairies, or opon plains ; on the e. side there is a greater proportion of timber. Their trade at present is a very valuable one, and will probably increase for some years. They do not cultivate, but live by hunting. They are welldisposed towards the whites. 
|CHEPICA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Coquimbo in the kingdom of Chile; situate on the coast, between the port of Huasco and the point of Pajaros. 
|CHEPILLO, a small island of the S. sea, in the gulf of Panama, and at the mouth or entrance of the river Bayano, is somewhat more than two leagues distant from the continent ; three miles in circumference, and enjoys a pleasant climate, al though sometimes subject to intense heat. It was formerly inhabited by the Indians, of whom there 
376 
|CHE 
appears to have been a settlement towards the n. of the island, from some vestiges still remaining. It is at present frequented only by some of the in habitants ofChepo, who cultivate and gather here oranges, lemons, and plantains of an excellent fla vour, which are ibuud here in abundance. In lat. S jT w. 
|CHEPO, SAN CHRISTOVAT, mz, a settlement of the province and kingdom of Tierra Firme, and government of Panama ; siinnti; on the shore of the river Mamoni ; is of a kind temperature, fer tile and agreeable, though little cultivated. The air is however so pure that it is resorted to by invalids, and seldom fails of affording a speedy relief. It has a fort, which is an cstucadrt, or sur rounded with palisades, having a ditch furnished with six small cannon, and being manned by a detachment from the garrison of Panama, for the purpose of suppressing the encroachments of the infidel Indians of I). trien. This territory was dis covered by Tello Guzman in 1.515, who gave it the name of Chepo, through its Cazique Chepauri, in 1679. It was invaded by the pirates Bartholo mew Charps, John Guarlem, and Edward Uolmcn, when the settlement was robbed and destroy ed, and unheard-of prosecutions and torments were suffered by the inhabitants. Fourteen leagues nearly due n. e. of Panama, [and six leagues from the sea ; in lat. 9 8 n.~\ 
|CHEQUELTI,a settlement of the province and cortegimiepto of Chileas and Tarija in Peru ; an nexed to the curacy of its capital. 
|CHEQUETAN, or SEGUATANEIO, on the coast of Mexico or New Spain, lies seven leagues a , of of the rocks of Scguataneio. Between this and Acapulco, to the e . is a beach of sand, of 18 leagues extent, against which the sea breaks so violently, that it is impossible for boats to land on any part of it ; but there is a good anchorage for shipping at a mile or two from the shore during the fair season. The harbour of Chequetan is very hard to be traced, and of great importance to such vessels as cruise in these seas, being the most secure harbour to be met with in a vast extent of coast, yielding plenty of wood and water; and the ground near it is able to be defended by a few men. When Lord Anson touched here, the place was uninhabited. 
|CHEQUIN, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Maule in the kingdom of Chile, and in the valley or plain of Tango, near the river Colorado. In its vicinity, towards the s. is an estate called El Portrero del Hey, at the source of the river Maipo. 
|CHERA, a river near Colan, in the province of Quito in Peru, running to Amotage ; from whence Paita has its fresh water. 
|CIIERAKKE. See CHEROKEE. 
|CIIERAKIKAU, a river of the province and colony of South Carolina. It runs e. and enters the river Chuvakansty. On its shore is a small settlement of Indians of the same name. 
|CIIERAKILICIII, or APALACHICOLA, a fort oft he English, in the province and colony of Georgia, on the shore of the river Apalacliicola, and at the conilux, or where this river is entered by the Caiilore. 
CIIERAN EL GRANDK, S. FRANCISCO DE, a settlement of the head settlement of Siguinan, and alcaldia mayor of Valladolid, in Nueva Espaiia, contains 100 families of Curtidores Indians, and is a little more than half a league from its head settlement. 
|CHERAPA, a settlement of the province and corregimierito of Piura in Peru, on the confines of the province of Jaen de Bracamoros, upon the river Tambarapa, is of a hot and moist temperature, and consequently unhealthy ; and is situate in the royal road which leads from Loxa through Ayabaca and Guancabamba to Tomependa, a poit of the river Maraiion. 
|CIIERA YVS, a district in the upper country of South Carolina, having North Carolina on the 77. and n. e. Georgetown district on the s. e. and Lynche s creek on the s. ay. which separates it from Camden district. Its length is about 83 miles, and its breadth 63 ; and is subdivided into the counties of Darlington, Chesterfield, and Marlborough. By the census of 1791, there were 10,706 inhabitants, of which 7618 were white in habitants, the rest slaves. It sends to the state legislature six representatives and two senators ; and in conjunction with Georgetown district, one member to congress. This district is watered by Great Peter river and a number of smaller streams, on the banks of which the land is thickly settled and well cultivated* The chief towns are Green ville and Chatham. The court-house in this dis trict is 52 miles from Camden, as far from Lumberton, and 90 from Georgetown. The mail stops at this place. 
|CHERIF31CIIE, a port of the province and government of Venezuela, to the w. of the settle ment of Guaira. 
|CHERIGUANES. See CHIRIGUANOS. 
|CHERILLA, a settlement of the province and r orrex hnicnto of Caxamarca in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of its capital. 
|CHERINOS, a river of the province and go
|CHE 
vernment of Jacn de Bracamoros in the kingdom of Quito. It runs from n. to s. and enters the Chinchipe on the n. side, somewhat lower than where this latter is entered by the Namballe, and near a small settlement of Indians. 
|CHERNAL, a port of the coast of the kingdom of Chile, in the district of the province and corregimiento of Copiapo. Lnt. 27 27 . 
|CHEROKEE, a settlement of North Carolina, where there is a fort built by the English on the shore of the river of its name, and at the mouth of the Agiqua. 
|CHEROKEE, a large river of the above colony and province, called also Hogohegec and Callamaco. It rises in the county of Augusta, and takes its name from a numerous nation of Indians ; runs ty. for many leagues, forming a curve, and enters the Ohio near i\\efourches of the Mississippi. Near to this river are some very large and fertile plains ; and according to the account rendered by the Indians, there are, at the distance of 40 leagues from the Chicazas nation, four islands, called Tahogale, Kakick, Cochali, and Tali, inhabited by as many other different nations of Indians. [Cherokee was the ancient name of Tennessee river. The name of Tennessee was formerly confined to the fourteenth branch, which empties 15 miles above the mouth of Clinch river, and J8 below Knoxville. 
|CHEROKEE, the country of the Indians of the nation of this name in North Carolina. It stands w. as far as the Mississippi, and n. as far as the confines of the Six Nations. It was ceded to the English by the treaty of Westminster, in 1729. This celebrated Indian nation is now on the de cline. They reside in the n. parts of Georgia, and the s. parts of the state of Tennessee ; having the Apalachian or Cherokee mountains on the e. which separate them from North and South Caro lina, and Tennessee river on the n. and w. and the Oeek Indians on the s. The present line between -them and the state of Tennessee is not yet settled. A line of experiment was drawn, in 1792, from Clinch river across Holston to Chilhove mountain ; but the Cherokee commissioners not appearing, it is called a line of experiment. The complexion of the Cherokees is brighter than that of the neigh bouring Indians. They are robust and well made, and taller than many of their neighbours ; being generally six feet high, a few are more, and some less. Their women are tall, slender, and delicate. The talents and morals of the Cherokees are held in great esteem. They were formerly a powerful nation ; but by continual wars, in which it has been their destiny to be engaged with the n. In dian tribes, and with the whites, they are now re
|VOL. I. 
|CHE 
377 
duccd to about 1500 warriors ; and they are be coming weak and pusillanimous. Some writers estimate their numbers at 2500 warriors. They have 43 towns now inhabited. 
|CHKROK.EE, a settlement ot Indians of this na tion, in the same country as that in which the Eng lish had a fort and establishment, at the source of the river Caillon ; which spot is at present aban doned. 
|CHERREPE, a port of the coast of Peru, and of the S. sea, in the province and cortegrmitnto of Saiia, is open, unprotected, and shallow ; and consequently frequented only by vessels driven to it through stress, and for the sake of convenience. It is in bit. 7 70 s. 
|CHERRITON, a port of the coast of the pro vince and colony of Maryland, within the bay of Chesapeak, behind cape Charles. 
CM ERR Y Valley, a post-town in Otsego county, New York, at the head of the creek of the same name, about 12 miles n. r. of Cooperstown, and 18 s. of Canajohary, 61 w. of Albany, and 336 from Philadelphia. It contains about 30 houses, and a Presbyterian church. There is an academy here, which contained, in 1796, 50 or CO scholars. It is a spacious building, 60 feet by 40. The township is very large, and lies along the e. side of Otscgo lake, and its outlet to Adiqttntangic creek. By the state census of 1796, it appears that 629 of its inhabitants are electors. This settlement suffered severely from the Indians in the late war. 
|CHESAPEAK is one of the largest and safest bays in the United States. Its entrance is nearly e. n. e. and s. s. a&gt;. between cape Charles, lat. 37 13 and cape Henry, lat. 37, in Virginia, 12 miles wide, and it extends 70 miles to the n. dividing Virginia and Maryland. It is from 7 to 18 miles broad, and generally as much as 9 fathoms deep ; affording many commodious- harbours, and a safe and easy navigation. It has many fertile islands, and these are generally along the e. side of the bc
y, except a few solitary ones near the w. shore. A number of navigable rivers and other streams empty info it, the chief of which are Susquehannah, Patapsco, Patuxent, Potowmack, Rappahannock, and York, which are all large and na vigable. Chesapeak bay affords many excellent fisheries of herring and shad. There are also ex cellent crabs and oysters. It is the resort of swans, but is more particularly remarkable for n species of wild duck, called camasback, whose flesh is entirely free from any fishy taste, and is admired by epicures for its richness and delicacy. In a commercial point of view, this bay is of im5c 
378 
|CHE 
mense advantage to the neighbouring states, parti cularly to Virginia. Of that state it has been ob served, with some little exaggeration, however, that " every planter has a river at his door." 
|CHESHIRE county, in New Hampshire, lies in the s. w. part of the state, on the e. bank of Con necticut river. It has the state of Massachusetts on the 5. Grafton county on the n. and Hillsborough county e. It has 34 townships, of which Charlestown and Keene are the chief, and 8,772 inhabitants, including 16 slaves. 
|CHESHIRE, a township in Berkshire county, Massachusetts ; famous for its good cheese ; 140 miles n. \ from Boston. 
|CHESHIRE, a township in New-Haven county, Connecticut, 15 miles n. of New-Haven city, and 26 5. w. of Hartford. It contains an Episcopal church and academy, and three Congregational churches. 
|CHESNUTHill, a township in Northampton county, Pennsylvania. 
|CUES NUT Creek, a branch of the Great Kanhaway, in Virginia, where it crosses the Carolina line. Here, it is said, are iron mines. 
|CUES NUT Ridge. Part of the Alleghany mountains, in Pennsylvania, are thus called, 5. e. of Greensborough. 
|CHESSOT, a town of the province and colony of North Carolina ; situate on the shore of the river Euphasee. 
|CHESTER, a township in Lunenburg county, Nova Scotia, on Mahone bay, settled originally by a few families from New England. From hence to Windsor is a road, the distance of 25 miles. 
|CHESTER, a small plantation in Lincoln county, Maine, nine miles from Titcomb. It has eight or nine families. 
|CHESTER, a township in Hampshire county, Massachusetts, adjoining Westfield on the e. and about 20 miles n. w. of Springfield. It contains 177 houses, and 1119 inhabitants. 
|CHESTER, a large, pleasant, and elegant town ship in Rockingham county, New Hampshire. It is 21 miles in length ; and on the w. side is a pretty large lake, which sends its waters to Merriinack river. It was incorporated in 1722, and contains 1902 inhabitants, who are chiefly farmers. It is situated on the e. side of Merrimack river, 14 miles n. w. of Haverhill, as far w. of Exeter, 35 w. by s. of Portsmouth, six n. of Londonderry, and 306 from Philadelphia. From the compact part of this town there is a gentle descent to the sea, which, in a clear day, may be seen from thence. It is a post-town, and contains about 60 
|CHE 
houses and a Congregational church. Rattlesnake hill, in this township, is a great curiosity: it is half a mile in diameter, of a circular form, and 400 feet high. On the s. side, 10 yards from its base, is the entrance of a cave, called the Devil s Den, which is a room 15 or 20 feet square, and four feet high, floored and circled by a regular rock, from the upper part of which are depend ent many excrescences, nearly in the form and size of a pear, which, when approached by a torch, throw out a sparkling lustre of almost every hue; It is a cold, dreary place, of which many fright ful stories are told by those who delight in the marvellous. 
|CHESTER, a township in Windsor county, Ver mont, w. of Springfield, and 11 miles w. by 5. of Charlestown, in New Hampshire, and contains 981 inhabitants. 
|CHESTER, a borough and post-town in Penn sylvania, and the capital of Delaware county ; pleasantly situated on the w. side of Delaware ri ver, near Marcus hook, and 13 miles n. e. of Wil mington. It contains about 60 houses, built on a regular plan, a court-house, and a gaol. From Chester to Philadelphia is 20 miles by water, and 15 n. e. by land ; here the river is narrowed by islands of marsh, which are generally banked, and turned into rich and immensely valuable mea dows. The first colonial assembly was convened here, the 4th of December 1682. The place af fords genteel inns and good entertainment, and is the resort of much company from the metropolis during the summer season. It was incorporated in December 1795, and is governed by two bur gesses, a constable, a town-clerk, and three assist ants ; whose power is limited to preserve the peace and order of the place. 
|CHESTER County, in Pennsylvania, w. of Dela ware county, and s. w. of Philadelphia ; about 45 miles in length, and 30 in breadth. It contains 33 townships, of which West Chester is the shire town, and 27,937 inhabitants, of whom 145 are slaves. Iron ore is found in the n. parts, which employs six forges : these manufacture about 1000 tons of bar-iron annually. 
|CHESTER Court-House, in South Carolina, 22 miles s. of Pinckney court-house, and 58 n. w. of Columbia. A post-office is kept here. 
|CHESTER River, a navigable water of the e. side of Maryland, which rises two miles within the line of Delaware state, by two sources, Cyprus and Andover creeks, which unite at Bridgetown ; runs nearly s. w.; after passing Chester it runs s. nearly three miles, when it receives South-Eastern creek ; and 15 miles farther, in a s. w. direction, it 
|CHE 
empties into Chesapeak bay, at Love point. It forms an island at its mouth, and by a channel on the e. side of Kent island, communicates with Eastern bay. It is proposed to cut a canal, about 1 1 miles long, from Andover creek, a mile and a half from Bridgetown to Salisbury, on Upper Duck creek, \vhich falls into Delaware at Hook island. 
|CHESTER, a small town in Shannandoah county, Virginia, situate on the point of land formed by the junction of Allen s or North river and South river, which form the Shannandoah ; 16 miles s. by w. of Winchester. Lat. 39 4 n. Long. 78 25 a). 
|CHESTER County, in Pinckney district, South Carolina, lies in the s.e. corner of the district, on Wateree river, and contains 6866 inhabitants ; of whom 5866 are whites, and 938 slaves. It sends two representatives, but no senator, to the state legislature. 
|CHESTER, a town in Cumberland county, Vir ginia ; situate on the s. w. bank of James river, 15 miles . of Blandford, and six s. of Rich mond. 
|CHESTERFIELD, a township in Hampshire county, Massachusetts, 14 miles w. of Northamp ton. It contains 180 houses, and 1183 inha bitants. 
|CHESTERFIELD, a township in Cheshire county, New Hampshire, on the e. bank of Connecticut river, having Westmoreland n. and Hinsdale s. It was incorporated in 1752, and contains 1905 in habitants. It lies about 25 miles s. by w. of Charlestown, and about 90 or 100 w. of Ports mouth. About the year 1730, the garrison of fort Dummer was alarmed with frequent explosions, and with columns of fire and smoke, emitted from WestRiver mountain in thistownship,and four miles distant from that fort. The like appearances have been observed at various times since ; particularly, one in 1752 was the most severe of any. There are two places where the rocks bear marks of hav ing been heated and calcined. 
|CHESTERFIELD County, in South Carolina, is in Cheraws district, on the North Carolina line. It is about 30 miles long, and 29 broad. 
|CHESTERFIELD County, in Virginia, is between James and Appamatox rivers. It is about 30 miles long, and 25 broad ; and contains 14,214 inhabitants, including 7487 slaves. 
|CHESTERFIELD Inlet, on the w. side of tfudson s bay, in New South Wales, upwards of 200 miles in length, and from 10 to 30 in breadth ; full of islands. 
|CHESTERTOWN, a post-town and the capi tal of Kent county, Maryland, on the w. side of 4 
|CHE 
Chester river, 16 miles s. w. of Georgetown, 38 e. by s. from Baltimore, and 81 s. w. of Philadel* phia. It contains about 140 houses, a church, college, court-house, and gaol. The college was incorporated in 1782, by the name of Washing ton. It is under the direction of 24 trustees, who are empowered to supply vacancies and hold estates, whose yearly value shall not exceed 6000/. currency. In 1787 it had a permanent fund of 1250/. a year settled upon it by law. Lat. 39 12 n. Long. 76 10 zo. 
|CHETIMACHAS, a river of the province and government of Louisiana. It is an arm of the Mississippi, which runs s. e. and enters the sea on the side of the bay of Asuncion or Ascension. [On the Chetimachas, six leagues from the Mississippi, there is a settlement of Indians of the same name ; and thus far it is uniformly 100 yards broad, and from two to four fathoms deep, when the water is lowest. Some drifted logs have formed a shoal at its mouth on the Mississippi ; but as the water is deep under them they could be easily removed ; and the Indians say there is nothing to impede na vigation from their village to the gulf. The banks are more elevated than those of the Mississippi, and in some places are so high as never to be over flowed. The natural productions are the same as on the Mississippi, but the soil, from the extraordi nary size and compactness of the canes, is supe rior. If measures were adopted and pursued with. a view to improve this communication, there would soon be on its banks the most prosperous and im portant settlements in that colony. 
|CHETIMACHAS, Grand Lake of, in Loui siana, near the mouth of the Mississippi, is 24 miles long, and nine broad. Lake de Portage, which is 13 miles long, and H broad, commu nicates with this lake at the n. end, by a strait a quarter of a mile wide. The country bor dering on these lakes is low and flat, timbered with cypress, live and other kinds of oak ; and on (he e. side, the land between it and the Chafalaya river is divided by innumerable streams, which occa sion as many islands. Some of these streams arc navigable. A little distance from the s. e. shore of the lake Chetimachas, is an island where per sons passing that way generally halt as a resting place. Nearly opposite this island there is an opening which leads to the sea. It is about 150 yards wide, and has 16 or 17 fathoms water. 
|CHETO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Luya and Chillaos in Peru ; to the curacy of which is annexed the extensive val ley of Huaillabamba, in the province of Chachapoyas. 
3 c 2 
380 
C II I 
|CIJETU, SAVTISSTMA TRINIDAD DE, a settle ment of the province and corregimienlo of Caxamarca in Peru. 
CilEUELUS, orCiiAVELos, a barbarous nation of Indians of the country of Marafion,who inhabit the woods bordeiing upon the river Aguarico, to the e. and in the vicinity of the lakes. They are warlike, of a cruel and treacherous nature, and in eternal enmity with their neighbours. M. de la Martiniere will have it, that the name Chavelos is derived from the French word cAetfW-r, the men and the women both allowing and encouraging the growth of their hair till it reaches down to the waist ; supposing, forsooth, that these Indians must either have known French when they were discovered, or that their discoverers, at all events, must have been French. 
|CI1EURA, a river of the province and govern ment of EsnuTaldas in the kingdom of Quito. It runs ii. n. e. and e. washing the country of the ancient Esmeraldas Indians: it afterwards entcrsthe river of its name on the e. side, in lat. 1 23 n. 
|CIIEWOCHEE, a settlement of North Caro lina ; situate on the skirt of the mountains of Telliqno. 
CIIIA, a settlement of the corres
imiento of Zipaquira in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada; cele brated in the time of the Indians for having been ihe title of the kings or zipas of Bogota; the in vestiture of which dignity was always transferred with the greatest possible solemnity. It is of a very cold temperature, although salutary ; and is situate on a beautiful plain, on the shore of the river Bogota, four leagues to the ;. 7 . of Santa Fe. 
CIIIAMILA, ai head settlement of the nlcahlia mayor of Motines in Nueva Espafm, contains SO families of Indians. 
|CHIAMOTO. See SEYOTA. 
CIIIANTLA, a settlement of the province and alcaldia mayor of Chiapa in the kingdom of Gua temala. 
|CIIIAPA, a province and alcaldia mayor of the kingdom of Guatemala ; bounded on thew. by the province of Tabasco, e. by that of Vera Paz, to. by that of Oaxaca of Nueva Espana, and s. e. by that of Soconusco. It extends 85 leagues from e . to w. and is nearly 30 across at its widest part. It was conquered by Captain Diego Marariegos in 1531 : is divided into districts or alcaldias r)icti/ores&gt; which are those of Zoques, Chontales, J.os Llanos, and Xiquipila: is of a warm and moist temperature, although it has some parts in which the cold predominates. Its woods abound with large trees of pine, cypress, cedar, and wal nut ; and of others of a resinous kind, from which 
are extracted aromatic gums, balsams, and liquid amber, tacamaca, copnl
 &c. It produces also, in abundance, maize, swine, honey, cotton, cochi neal, which is only made use of for the purpose of dyeing the cotton ; also cacao, and much pepper and achole, or the heart-leaved bixa ; also various kinds of domestic and wild birds, especially par rots, which are very beautiful and highly esteemed ; a small bird, called toto
 less than a young pigeon, with green wings ; this is caught by the Indians, who pluck from its tail some feathers, which they prize highly, and then restoring it to liberty; it being a capital offence, according to their laws, to destroy it. The sheep, goats, and pigs, which have been brought from Europe, have multiple
 in this province in a most extraordinary manner ; so also have horses, which are of such an esteemed breed, that the colts are taken from hence to Mex ico, a distance of 500 miles. In the woods breed many lions, leopards, tigers, and wild boars, a great number of snakes, some being 20 feet in length, and others of a beautiful crimson colour, streaked with black and white. The territory is, for the most part, rugged and mountainous, and watered by different rivers: none of these, how ever, are of any particular consideration, although that which bears the name of this province is the medium by which the aforesaid productions are carried to the other provinces ; and although this province may be accounted comparatively poor, from being without mines of gold or silver, it is nevertheless of the greatest importance, as being the outwork or barrier to New Spain, from the fa cility with which this kingdom might be entered by the river Tnbasco. The capital is the royal city of Chiapn, situate on a delightful plain. It is the head of a bishopric, erected in I5S8; and has for arms a shield, upon which are two sierras, with a river passing between them : above the one is a golden castle, with a lion rampant upon it; and above the other a green palm, bearing fruit, and another lion, the whole being upon a red field. These arms were granted by the Emperor Charles V. in 1535. The cathedral is very beautiful. It contains three convents of the order of St. Francis, La Merced, and St. Domingo ; a monastery of nuns, and five hermitages. Its population is scanty and poor, and the principal commerce con sists in cocoa-nuts, cotton, wool, sugar, cochineal, and other articles. Its nobility, although poor, are very proud, as having descended from some an cient families of the first nobility of Spain ; such as those of Mendoza, Velasco, Cortes, &c. The women suffer great debility at the stomach on ac count of tiie exccsbive heat, ami they can never 
C H I A P A. 
381 
fast for a long time together : they consequently cat frequently ; the common food on these occa sions being chocolate, and which is even handed to them whilst at church. This irreverence the bishop very properly proclaimed against ; but it is said that this execution of his duty cost him no less than his life. It is 100 leagues distant from Guatemala. Lat. 17 ;/ 4 . Long. 93 53 . 
|CHIAPA, another city in the same province, which, to distinguish it from the former, is called Chiapa de los Indios; these (the Indians) being, for the most part, its inhabitants ; is the largest settlement in the whole province, and is situate in a valley close upon the river Tabasco, being 12 leagues distant from the former city. It has va rious churches, abounds in wealth, and is the place wherein the Indian families first settled. They enjoy many privileges and exemptions, owing to the zeal of the bishop, Fray Bartolome de las Casas, their procurator at court. The river abounds greatiy in fine fish ; and is full of barks, with which the} occasionally represent sea-fights. In the city also there are commonly balls, plays, con certs, bull-fights, and spectacles of horsemanship ; since the inhabitants are much given to diversions, and in these grudge no expence. 
Bishops of Chiapa. 
1. Don Fray Juan de Arteaga y A vend a no, na tive ofEstepa in Andalucia ; elected in 1541 : he died in the same year in Mexico, before he arrived at his church. 
2. Don Fray Bartolome de las Casas, a man reno\vned for his zeal in favour of the Indians ; be was born at Seville, where he studied, and passed over to the island of St. Domingo, where he said the first mass ever celebrated in that part of the world. He returned to Spain, in 1515, to declaim against the tyrannies which were practised against the Indians. He went buck the following year to Nueva Espana, where he took the habit of a monk of St. Dominic ; and returning a second time to Spain, he was presented by the Emperor to the bishopric of Chiapa, which office he did not ac cept ; but was afterwards prevailed upon to do so by the united entreaties of the whole of his order : he therefore entered upon it in 1544. He then left the bishopric, and returned, for the third time, to Spain ; and having retired to his convent of V"alladolid, died in 1550. 
3. Don Fray Tomas Casillas, also of the order of St. Dominic ; he was sub-prior of the convent of Salamanca, and passed over to America with Fray Bartolome de las Casas. Being renowned for the great zeal which he manifested in the con version of the infidel Indians, he was nominated 
to be bishop in 1560 ; which office he accepted at the express command of its general. He made the visitation of all his bishopric, and died full of vir tues, in 1567. 
4. Don Fray Domingo de Lara, of the order of St. Domingo ; he made so strong a refusal of his election, his renunciation of the office not having been admitted, that he prayed to God that he might die before that the bulls should arrive from Rome; and this was actually the case, since he departed this life in 1572, before he was conse crated. 
5. Don Fray Alonzo de Norona, who governed the church here seven years, and had for suc cessor, 
6. Don Fray Pedro de Feria, native of the town of this name in Estremadura, a monk of the order of St. Dominic ; he passed over to America, was prior of the convent of Mexico, and provincial of that province; he returned to Spain-, refused the general visitation to which he was appointed, and retired to his convent of Salamanca ; was presented with the bishopric of Chiapa, which he also re fused ; but being commanded by his superiors, he afterwards accepted it, and governed 14 years, until 1588, when he died. 
7. Don Fray Andres de Ubilla, of the order of St. Dominic, and native of the province of Guipuzcoa ; he took the habit in Mexico, where he studied and read the arts, and was twice prior and provincial of the province ; he came to Spain on affairs touching his religion, and returning to Mexico, found himself presented to this bishopric in 1592, where he governed until 1601, when he died, hav ing been first promoted to the archbishopric of Mechoacan. 
8. Don Lucas Duran, a friar of the order of Santiago, chaplain of honour to his Majesty ; who immediately that he was consecrated bishop of Chiapa, renounced his power, and the see was then vacant nine years. 
9. Don Fray Juan Gonzalez de Mendoza, na tive of Toledo, a monk of the order of St. Augustin ; he passed over to America, was made bishop of Lipari, and titular in the archbishopric of Toledo ; and lastly of Chiapa, in 1607 ; from whence he was promoted in the following year to Popayan. 
10. Don Fray Tomas Blanes, native of Valen cia, of the order of St. Dominic ; he passed over to Peru, where he resided many years, studying arts and theology ; he assisted in the visitation of the province of St. Domingo, and having come to Spain, he was presented to the bishopric in 1609, holding the government until 1612, when he died. 
382 
|CHI 
11. Don Fray Juan Zapata y Sandoval, native of Mexico, of the order of St. Augustin ; he came to Spain, was regent of the college of San Gabriel de Valladolid, and elected bishop of Chiapa in 1612 ; then promoted to the archbishopric of Gua temala in 1622. 
12. Don Bernardino de Salazar y Frias, native of Burgos, canon of Jaen, collegiate in the college of San Antonio de Portaceli de Siguenza ; pre sented to the bishopric in 1622 : he died in 1623. 
13. Don Alonzo Munoz, dean of the holy church of Mexico, professor of theology ; he died before he was consecrated. 
H. Don Agustin Ugarte de Saravia, elected in 1628 ; he was promoted in 1630 to the arch bishopric of Guatemala. 
15. Don Fray Marcos Ramirez de Prado, of the order of St. Francis, native of Madrid ; he studied in Salamanca arts and theology with great credit, was guardian of the convent of Lucena, vice-com missary general of the Indies, and guardian of the convent of Granada, when he was elected bishop of Chiapa in 1632 ; he entered its church in 1635, and was promoted to that of Mechoacan in 1639. 
16. Don Fray Christoval de Lazarraga, a monk of the order of St. Bernard, native of Madrid, was master and professor in Salamanca, abbot of the monastery of that city, and qualificator of the in quisition ; he was presented to the bishopric of Chiapa in 1639, and promoted to that of Carta gena of the Indies in 1641. 
17. Don Fray Domingo de Villaescusa, a monk of the order of St. Jerome, collegian in the col lege of San Lorenzo el Real, prior of the monas tery of Espeja, and of those of Parral de Segovia, of San Geronimo de Guisando of Madrid, visitor of the two Castillas, and general of his order ; was presented to the bishopric of Chiapa in 1641, go verned until 1651, when he was promoted to the church of Yucatan. 
18. Don Fray Francisco Nunez de la Vega, a monk of the order of St. Dominic. 
19. Don Christ6val Bernardo de Quiros, native of Tordelaguna, canon of the churches of Arequipa, Quito, and of Lima, provisor and vicargeneral of the archbishopric, and judge of the in quisition ; he was elected in 1660, and was pro moted to the archbishopric of Popayan in 1670. 
20. Don Manuel Fernandez de Santa Cruz y Sahagun, a native of Palencia in Castilla de Cuenca, in the university of Salamanca, first canon of Segovia, was elected in 1672, and before he ar rived was promoted to Guadalaxara. 
21. Don 32. Don 
23. Don Juan Bautista Alvarez de Toledo, na tive of the town of San Salvador, in the province of Guatemala, of the religious order of St. Francis, professor in his religion, and prelate of many con vents ; he was elected in 1708, and promoted to the archbishopric of Guatemala in 1714. 
24. Don 
25. Don Fray Joseph Cubero Ramirez de Arel lano, a monk ot the order of Nuestra Senora de la Merced ; elected in 1734, governed 19 years, until 1753, when he died. 
26. Don Fray Joseph Vidal de Montezuma, of the order of Nuestra Senora de la Merced, a native of Mexico ; elected in 1753, governed till 1767, when he died. 
27. Don Miguel de Cilieza y Velasco ; elected in the above year, governed until 1768, when he died. 
28. Don Fray Lucas Ramirez, of the order of St. Francis ; he was promoted to the archbishopric of Santa Fe in 1769. 
29. Don Fray Juan Manuel de Vargas y Ri vera, a native of Lima, monk of the order of Nues tra Senora de la Merced ; elected in the afore said year of 1769, governed until 1774, when he died. 
30. Don Antonio Caballero y Gongora, until the following year of 1775, when he was promoted to the church of Yucatan. 
31. Don Francisco Polanco, until 1785, when he died ; and, 
32. Don Joseph Martinez Palomino Lopez de Lerena, elected in 1786. 
|CHIAPA, with the appellation of Mota, a settle ment of the alcaldia mayor of Xilotepec in Nueva Espana. It contains 960 families of Otomies Indians, and is seven leagues to the . w. of its ca pital. 
|CHIAPANTONGO, a settlement and head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Xilotepec in Nueva Espana ; annexed to the curacy of its capital, from whence it lies two leagues to the n. It contains 102 familes of Indians. 
|CHIAPAS, a settlement of the province and government of Cinaloa. 
|CHIAPILLA, a settlement of the province and alcaldia mayor of Chiapa, and kingdom of Guate mala, in the district of its capital. 
|CHIARA, a settlement of the province and bi shopric of Huamanga in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of the parish of Santa Maria Magdalena in that city, from whence it is three leagues distant. 
|CHIAUTLA, S. ANDRES DE, a settlement and head settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Tezcoco 
|CHI 
in Nueva Espana, is of a mild temperature ; si tuate in a pleasant and fertile plain, and one which abounds in maize, wheat, and other seeds. It con tains 368 families of Indians, 13 of Spaniards, and a convent of the religious order of St. Francis; is one league n. of its capital. 
|CHIAUTLA, with the addition of La Sal, an other settlement, the capital of its jurisdiction, in the same kingdom, thus called from the salt mines found in it formerly, and from which the inhabi tants used to derive a great commerce. At pre sent it is in a thorough state of decay, not only as its trade has fallen oft in the other provinces ; but as the Indians have applied themselves rather to the cultivation of the soil and the planting of fruits and pulse, from the traffic of which they derive their maintenance. It is inhabited by 650 families of Mexican Indians, and 40 of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattoes. It contains a convent of the religious order of St. Augustin. The jurisdiction is so much reduced that it is not more than five leagues in length and three in width, void of com merce, and has but a small revenue. Its inhabi tants, although they are somewhat given to the breeding of small cattle, yet this must hardly be considered with them a branch of commerce, since they have scarcely enough of these where with to support themselves. It contains only two other settlements, and these are, 
Xicotlan, Huehetlan. 
Forty-five leagues s. e. \ to the s. w. of Mexico. 
|CHIBACOA, a settlement of the province and government of Venezuela ; situate on the shore of a river to the w. of the town of Nirua. 
CHIBATA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, and the head settlement of the corregi miento of Indios, is of a very cold and fresh tem perature, abounding in productions, and particu larly in cattle, from the fleeces and hides of which are made quantities of blankets, linen cloths, and other articles for garments. It may contain about 200 Indians, and it is eight leagues to the n. e. of Tunja, lying between this latter place and the settlement of Siachoque. 
|CHIBAI, a settlement of the province and corregimitnto of Collahuas in Peru. 
|CHICA, an island of the N. sea, one of the Lucayas ; situate between the islands Siguate and St. Andrew. The English gave it the name of Little. 
|CHICACHAE, a settlement of the province and government of Louisiana or S. Carolina, in which the English have a fort and establishment to earry 
|CHI 
383 
on commerce with the Indians, is situated on the shore of the river Sonlahove. 
CHICACHAS, a settlement of Indians of this nation, in the territory thus called, where the Eng lish have an establishment or factory for com merce. 
CHICAGOU, a port of Canada, on the w. side of the lake Michigan. 
|CHICAGOU, a river of the same province and government, which runs s. then n. e. and enters the former port. 
|CHICAHOMINI, a river of the province and colony of Virginia, runs s. e. and turning its course to the 5. enters the Thames. 
CI 1 ICAHUASCO, a settlement of the head settle ment of Huipuxtla, and alcaldia mayor of Tepetango, in Nueva Espana, contains 72 families of Indians. 
|CHICAHUASTEPEC, SAN MIGUEL DE, a settlement of the head settlement of Zoyaltepec, and alcaldia mayor of Yanguitlan. It contains 48 fa milies of Indians, and is 10 leagues from its head settlement. 
|CHICAHUAZTLA, SAN ANDRES DE, a settle ment and head settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Tepozcolula, in the province and bishopric of Oaxaca, in the kingdom of Nueva Espana, is of a cold temperature, inhabited by 332 families of Indians, including those of the settlements or wards of its district, and they maintain themselves by bartering cotton garments for salt on the coast of Xicayan : 12 leagues 5. w. of its capital. 
|CHICAHUAZTLA, another, a small settlement or ward of the alcaldia mayor of Guachinango in the same kingdom \ annexed to the curacy of that of Tlaola. 
|CHICAMA, a large, fertile, and beautiful valley of the province and corregimiento of Truxillo in Peru. It was one of the most populous in the times of the gentilism of the Indians, owing to its agreeable and benign temperature : is watered by a river of its name, which divides it from that of Chimu. In 1540, the friar Domingo de Santo Tomas founded here a convent of his order, for the instruction of the Indians, which immediately was turned into a priory and a house for noviciates. It is at present, however, fallen into decay, through the ravages of time. This valley is six leagues from the capital, to the n. in the road which leads to the provinces of Quito, Sana, and Piura. 
|CHICAMA, a river of this province and corregi miento. It rises in the province of Guamachuco, from two very lofty mountains, called Yulcaguanca and Yanaguanca, to the n, e.; and waters and fer
384 
C II I 
tilizes the valley which gives it its name ; and runs 30 leagues, collecting the waters of many other streams, mountain floods, and rivulets, which aug ment it to such a degree as to render the fording of it impracticable just where it enters the sea. 
|CHICAMOCUA, a river of the province and corregimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Rcyno de Granada. It rises in the paramo or mounfaindesert of Albarracin, between that city and the city of Santa Fc, on the ??. side : when it passes through Tunja, being then merely a rivulet, it has the name of the river of Gallinazos, which it after wards changes for that of Sogamoso ; and for that of Chia, when it passes through this settlement. It is afterwards called Chicamoeba, and passes through various provinces, until it becomes incor porated with the Magdalena, into which it enters in one large mouth. A little before this it forms a good port, called De la Tora, where there was formerly a settlement, but which is at present in a state of utter ruin. 
CHICANAM, a small river of the province and colony of Surinam, or the part of Guayana pos sessed by the Dutch. It is one of those which enter into the Cuyuni. 
CHICANI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Larecaja in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Combaya. 
CHICAPEE, or CHICKAREE, a small river in Massachusetts, which rises from several ponds in AVorcester county, and running s.v&gt;. unites with Ware river, and six miles further empties into the Connecticut at Springfield, on the c. bank of that river. 
CHiCAQUARO, a small settlement or ward, of the district and jurisdiction of V r alladolid, in the province and bishopric of Mechoacan. 
|CHICASAWS, a settlement of Indians of S. Carolina, comprising the Indians of this nation, who have here many other settlements ; in all of which the English have forts, and an establish ment for their commerce and defence. 
|CHICASAWS, a river of this province, which runs w. and enters the Mississippi 788 miles from its mouth, or entrance into the sea. 
|CHICCAMOGGA, a large creek, which runs n. w. into Tennessee river. Its mouth is six miles above the Whirl, and about 27 s. a\ from the mouth of the Hiwassee. The Chiccamogga Indian towns lie on this creek, and on the bank of the Tennessee. See CIUCKAMAGES.I 
|CHICHAS Y TARIJA, a province and corregi miento of Peru ; bounded on the n. by that of Ciuti, s, by that of Tucuman, the river called 
Quiaca serving as the line of division, w. by thai of Lipes, and n. by that of Porco. The district of Tarija belonging to this corregbnfattdj which is 40 leagues distant from (lie capital of Chichas, is bounded e. by the territories of the infidel Chiriguanos, Chanues, and Mataguayos Indians, to the first settlements of which from the lust habitations of Tarija there is a narrow, craggy, and mountain ous route of 14 leagues in length. It is also bounded on the n. and a\ i&gt;y the valley of Pilaya, and on the a. by the jurisdiction of Xuxui. The district of Chichas is 140 leagues in circumference, and that of Tarija 80, being either of them inter sected by some extensive serranias : in the boun daries of the former there are many farms and estates for breeding cattle, where are also produced potatoes, maize, wheat, barley and other grain, likewise some wine. Here are mines of gold and silver, which were formerly very rich ; it having been usual for the principal ones to yield some thousand marks in each caxon ; this being espe cially the case in the mines of Nueva Chocaya, which still yield to this day 50 or 60 marks. Many of the metals found in these mines arc worked up for useful purposes. The mines of Chilocoa have, on the whole, been most celebrated for their riches. The rivers, which are of some note, are that of Supacha, which flows down from the cordillera of Lipes, and running e. passes through the middle of the province until it enters the valley of Cinti, of the province of Pilaya and Paspaya ; and another, called Toropalca, which enters the province of Porco, and passes on to the same part of Cinti. The inhabitants of this district amount to 6200. In the settlement of Tatasi both men and women are subject to a distressing lunacy, which causes them to run wildly and heedlessly over the moun tains, without any regard to the precipices which lie in their way ; since it has generally been ob served that they dash themselves headlong down : if, however, it should happen that they are not killed, the fall, they say, frequently restores them to a sane mind. The observation, that the animals of this country, namely, ihc vicunas and the native sheep, are subject to this malady, is without founda tion ; but it is thought to arise from the peculiar cffluviasof the minerals abounding here, and which have a great tendency to cause convulsions. The women of the aforesaid settlement, when about to bring forth children, like to be delivered of them in the low parts of the qiiehradaS) or deep glens. The settlements of this province are, 
Santiago de Cota- San Antonio de Rio 
gaita, 
Blanco, 
Cotagaitilla, 
Escara, 
Chacnacocha, 
Cheqadti, 
Colnaca, 
Calccha, 
Tomola, 
Tumula, 
Estarca, 
Tupisa, 
Oploca, 
Tatasi, 
Ingenio del Oro, 
Nueva Chocaya, 
Talina, 
Vcrque, 
Chacapa, 
Choroma, 
Libilibi, 
Moray a, 
Moxo, 
Tojo, 
Sococha, 
Remedies, 
Chisloca, 
Suipacha. 
And in the district of Tarija, Tarija de Vieja, La Conception, 
San Bernardo de Tarija, Bermeo. 
The district of Tarija is a territory full of quebradas and craggy mountains, as far as the punas and lofty plains of Escayache and Tacsora, where there are two salt lakes. It is composed of four fertile valleys lying on the skirts of hills, and in these are found human bones of a prodigious size, petrified, shin-bones of a yard and a quarter long, and teeth larger than a fist. In the midst of one of these valleys is the town of San Bernardo de Tarija, which is the capital of the province. Its repartimiento used to amount to 82,350 dollars, and its alcavala to 558 dollars per annum. For the settle ments of this district, see above. 
|CHICHAS, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Condesuyos de Arequipa in the same kingdom ; annexed to the curacy of Sala manca. 
|CHICHAS, a river of the province and govern ment of Tucuman, in the district and jurisdiction of the city of Xuxuy, which divides this city from that of the capital of San MigueL 
|CHICHESTER, UPPER and LOWER, two townships in Delaware county, Pennsylva nia. 
|CHICHESTER, a small township in Rocklrigham county, New Hampshire, about 35 miles n. w. of Exeter, and 45 from Portsmouth. It lies on Suncook river, was incorporated in 1727, and contains 491 inhabitants. 
|CHICHIBACOA, CABO DE, a cape on the coast of the province and government of Santa Marta, and kingdom of Tierra Firme ; 80 leagues to the w. of that city. 
|CHICHICAPA, a settlement and capital of the alcaldia mayor of the province and bishopric of Oaxaca in Nueva Espafia. It is of a mild tem perature, and was anciently the real of the most esteemed silver mines; but is at present much fallen of, the working of the mines having been for 
|VOL. I. 
385 
the most part abandoned from the want of hands, in as much as the natives have given themselves up to the trade of cochineal, in which its territory abounds : it produces also much seed and maize. Its jurisdiction includes some of the finest and richest provinces. It consists of five head settle ments of districts, to which are subject as many other. Its capital contains 430 families of Indians, and some of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattoes. Ninety leagues s. e. of Mexico. The other settle ments are, 
ItioHondoor Thequila, Zimitlau, San Agusiin de Losi- Tepezimatlan, 
cha, La Magdalena, 
Tetipai, Atzozola. 
Cozantepcc, 
|CHICHICATEPEC, a settlement and head settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Villalta in Nueva Espaiia, is of a cold temperature, contains 26 fa milies of Indians, and is seven leagues to the s. e* of its capital. 
CHICHICOAUTLA, ST. FRANCISCO DE, a settlement and head settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Metepeque in Nueva Espana. It contains 91 families of Indians. 
|CHICHIMEQUILLA, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of Zitaquaro, and alcaldia mayor of Maravatio, in the bishopric of Mechoacan and kingdom of Nueva Espana. It contains 84: families of Indians, and is a quarter of a league to the s, of its head settlement. 
|CHICHIQUILA, a settlement of the head settlement of Quinuxtlan, and alcaldia mayor of San Juan de los Llanos, in Nueva Espaiia. It contains 180 families of Indians. 
|CHI CHOI, a settlement of the province and kingdom of Guatemala. 
CHICHOPON, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Caxamarca in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Xuambos. 
|CHICIBICHE, a point of the coast of the pro vince and government of Venezuela, opposite the island of Aves. 
|CHICKAHOMIN\T, a small navigable river in Virginia. At its mouth in James river, 37 miles from point Comfort, in Chesapeak bay, is a bar, on which is only 12 feet water at common flood tide. Vessels passing that may go eight miles up the river; those of 10 feet draught J2 miles ; and vessels of six tons burdea may go 32 miles up the river. 
|CHICKAMACOMICO Creek, in Dorchester county, Maryland, runs s. between the towns of Middletown and Vienna, and empties into Fishing bay. 
3 o 
386 
|CHI 
|CHICKAMAGES, a part of the Cherokee na tion of Indians, known by this name, inhabit five Tillages on Tennessee river. See CHICCA
|MOGGA. 
|CIIICKAMINE, a river of the province and colony of Virginia. 
|CHICKASAW Bluff is on the e. bank of the Mississippi, within the territories of the United States, in lat. 35 n. The Spaniards erected here a strong stockaded fort, with cannon, and furnished it witrTtroops, all in the space of 24 hours, in the month of June 795. It has since been given up, according to the treaty of 1796. j 
|CHICKASAW, a creek which falls into the W abash from the e. a little below Post St. Vin cent. 
CiiiCKASAW, a river which, empties into the Mississippi, on the e. side, 104 miles n. from the mouth of Margot, and 67 s. w. of Mine au Fer. The lands here are of an excellent quality, and covered with a variety of useful timber, canes, &c. This river may be ascended during high floods up wards of 30 miles with boats of several tons burden. 
CmcKASAWs, a famous nation of Indians, who inhabit the country on the e. side of the Mississippi, on the head branches of the Tombigbee, Mobile, and Yazoo rivers, in the n. w. corner of the state of Georgia, and n. of the country of the Chactaws. Their country is an extensive plain, tolerably well watered from springs, and of a pretty good soil. They have seven towns, the central one of which is in lat. 34 23 n. long. 89 30 zo. The num ber of souls in this nation has been formerly reckoned at 1725, of which 575 were fighting men. There are some Negroes among the Chickasaws, who either were taken captive in war, or ran away from their masters, and sought safety among the Indians. In 1539, Ferdinand de Soto, with 900 men, besides seamen, sailed from Cuba with a de sign to conquer Florida. He travelled n. to the Chickasaw country, about lat. 35 or 36 ; and three years after died, and was buried on the bank of Mississipi river. 
CHICLAIO, a settlement of the province and corregiwiento of Sana in Peru, in which there is a convent of the religious order of St. Francis. 
|CHICO, Rio, a settlement and garrison of the province and government of Sonora ; situate on the shore of the river Yaqui. 
|CHICO, a river of the province and government of Panama in the kingdom of Ticrra Firme. It rises in the mountains to the s. of the islmo, or isthmus, near the settlement of Chepo ; and runs s. vt. and enters the sea in the bay or gulf of Pa nama. 
|CHICO, another river of the province and go vernment of Tucurruin in Peru. It runs to the e. of the jurisdiction of the city ofXuxuy. 
|CHICO, a small island, called Morro, near the coast of the province and government of Santa Marta ; opposite this city, and not far from ano ther island, distinguished by the name of Morro Grande. 
CHICOANTEPEC, a settlement of the province and alcaldia mayor of Zoques in the kingdom of Guatemala. 
|CHICOLAPA, a settlement of the head settle ment, and alcaldia mayor of Coatepec, in Nueva Espana; annexed to the curacy of its capital. It contains 187 families of Indians, who celebrate every Friday throughout the year a tean
uis or fair, at which are sold cattle and other productions of the country. At these times it is a place of ge neral rendezvous for the inhabitants of all the con tiguous provinces ; and this fair has, from the great concourse of people usually assembling here, ob tained the title of the famous teangnis of S. Vi cente dc Chicolapa. It is extremely fertile and plea sant, and surrounded by several very small settle ments or wards. 
|CIIICOMESUCHTL, a settlement 
 and head settlement of the cilcaldia mayor of Yxtepexi of the province and bishopric of Oaxaca in Nueva Espana, is of a hot temperature, and contains 300 families of Indians, who exercise themselves in the making scarlet cloths and cotton garments. 
|CHICOMI, a settlement and head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Tampico in Nueva Espaiia. It contains 45 families of Indians, and lies 10 leagues to the s. of its capital. 
|CHICOMOCELO, a settlement of the province and alcaldia mayor of Chiapa in the kingdom of Guatemala ; [having a cave very narrow at the entry, but spacious within, with a stagnant lake, which is, however, clear, and is two fathoms deep towards the banks. 1 
|C4ICONAUTA, ST.TOMAS DE, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Ecatepec in Nueva Espana ; annexed to the curacy of its capital ; from whence it is distant one league to the n. n. e. It contains 160 families of Indians. 
|CHICONCUAC, S. MIGUEL DE, a settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Tezcuco in Nueva Espana. It contains 123 families of Indians, and six of Spaniards. It produces a good proportion of grain, seeds, and cattte, from the fleeces of which they derive great emolument, as also from the coarse stuffs manufactured of tho same. It is one league to the n. of its capital. 
|CHICONCUASO, a settlement of the head 
|CHI 
387 
settlement of Nanlingo, and alcaldia mayor of Xalapa, in Nueva Espana, the name of which sig nifies the place of six fountains. It is situate in the most lofty part of a rugged arid mountainous sierra-, on which account its temperature is every where cold, and subject more than any other part of its district to continual fogs and rains. Its commerce consists in maize, which it produces in abundance, and in the breeding of swine, both of which articles are carried for sale to Vera Cruz. Its inhabitants are also engaged in the mule-droves which pass through these parts in their way to the windward coasts, and which proceed over a road so rough and stony that they are under the necessity of descending and ascending precipices by means of steps or artificial passages hewn out or the rocks ; and however difficult this might ap pear to some, they do not experience any great delay, although the animals are very heavily loaded, and the road be rendered still more diffi cult, if, as it often happens, the journey be per formed in the winter season. This very stony route is a narrow pass or defile which shortens the way leading to the province of La Guasca. The inhabitants of this settlement are composed of 236 families of Indians. It lies three short leagues to the n. of its capital. 
|CHICONCUAUTLA, a settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Guachinango in Nueva Espana. It is of a mild temperature, and contains 270 families of Indians, including the three other small settlements of its district. Six leagues to the e. of its capital. 
|CHICONTEPEC, a settlement of the head settlement of Tlalixcoya, and alcaldia mayor of Mizantla, in Nueva Espana. It contains 53 fa milies of Indians. 
CHICORATO, a settlement of the missions which were held by the regulars of the society of Jesuits, in the province and government of Ciiialoa. 
|CHICUAS, a nation of Indians of Peru. It is at present reduced to merely a settlement of the province of Condcsuyos, in which is found abun dance of cochineal, made use of by the natives in dyeing of wool; this being the branch of com merce by which they maintain themselves. 
CHIEGNETO, a settlement and fort of the English, in the province and colony of Nova Scotia, in the most interior part of the bay of Fundy. 
|CHIEGNETO, a small river of the above pro vince, which rises from a lake, runs s. and enters the 13asin of the Mines. 
|CHI EG VETO, a cape or point of the coast of the same province, in the bay of Fundy. 
|CHIEN, THOU ATJ, a river of the island of Guadalupe. It rises in the mountains towards the e. runs e. and enters the sea between the point of Petit Carbct and the river Trou or Chat. 
CHIENS, ISLA DE LOS, or ISLAND OF THE DOGS, in the gulf of St. Lawrence, at the entrance of the strait of fJelleisle, and on the w. coast of the island of Newfoundland. 
CHIETLAN, a head settlement of the alcaldia, mayor of Yzucar in Nueva Espana. It was for merly the corregimiento, and is at present embo died with this jurisdiction. It is of a warm and moist temperature, but very pleasant, and covered with gardens full of flowers, fruits, and vegetables. The territory also abounds in wheat, maize, and other seeds, and particularly in dates, the whole of the district being covered with palms. Its inhabitants consist of 267 families of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattocs, and of 356 families of Indians, including those dwelling in the settlements which belong to this district. It abounds like wise in garbanzoS) or Spanish pease, anniseed, and melons, all of which are of the best quality of any in the whole kingdom. It lies three leagues $. of its capital. 
The aforesaid settlements are, Ahuehuezingo, San Nicolas de Tenaxcalco, Santiago de Azalan. 
CHIGNAL, "VOLCAN DE, a mountain of the province and corregimiento of Maiile in the king dom of Chile, distinct from the other which is near to it and of the same name. 
CHIGNECTO Channel, the n. w. arm of the bay of Fundy, into which Petitcodiac river falls. The spring tides rise here 60 feet. 
|CHIGUACHI, a settlement of the corregimi ento of Ubaque in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; situate behind the mountains of Guadalupe and Monserrat, of the city of Santa Fe, from whence it is distant five leagues to the e. It is of a delight ful temperature, and abounds in wheat, maize, barley, potatoes, sugar-cane, and plantains. Its inhabitants consist of 200 families of Spaniards, and a very few Indians. 
|CHIGLJAGUA, SAN FELIPE DE, a town of the province of Taraumara, and kingdom of Nueva Y r iscaya ; situate near the river San Pedro. Its population consists of 2000 families of Spa niards, and some of Mtistces and Mulattocs. The town is large and well built, and the houses are handsome j amongst other buildings, the most con
388 
spicuous arc the parish church, the college which belonged to the Jesuits, and the convent of St. Francisco. It enjoys a mild and pleasant tempe rature, and its principal commcrceconsists in silver, Avhich it derives in large quantities from its mines, and which is given in exchange for all kinds of articles of merchandize, brought hither by such as tire induced to visit this place, and who are at tracted in great numbers, so as to render the town extremely populous. [This town is surrounded with considerable mines to the c. of the great real of Santa Rosa de Cosiguiriachi. It was found ed in 1691, and has a population of about 7000 souls, according to Pike, though Humboldt esti mates the same at 11,600. It is 260 leagues n. n. w. of Mexico, in long. 104 32 , and lat. 28 47 n.l 
CHIGUAGUILA, a settlement and real of the mines of the province and government of Sonora. 
|CIIIGUAGUILLA, a settlement of the pro vince and government of Cinaloa ; situate near the sierra) 40 leagues to the e. a quarter to the . e. of the town of Los Alamos. 
|CHIGUARA, a settlement of the government and jurisdiction of Maracaibo in the province of Venezuela. It is of a cold temperature, abounds , sugar-cane, and other vegetable produc 
n 
tions peculiar to the climate. It was formerly a large and rich town, owing to the number of estates which lie within its district, and particularly to one within a league s distance, called Los Estangucs, in which there used to be upwards of 40,000 head of large cattle ; to another also which belong ed to the regulars of the society of Jesuits, called La Selva. It is, however, at the present day, destroj ed and laid waste by the incursions of the Motilones Indians ; and its population scarcely amounts to 40 Indians and 30 whites. 
|CHIHEMECOMET, an island of the province and colony of N. Carolina, near the coast, and to the . of the province of Hateras. 
|CHIHOHOEKl, an Indian nation, who were confederates of the Lenopi or Dclawares, and in habited the w. bank of Delaware river, which was anciently called by their name. Their s. boundary was Duck creek, in Newcastle county. 
|CHIHUATA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Arequipa in Peru. It is of a cold temperature, and in its jurisdiction is a lake, from whence is taken salt sufficient to supply the whole province, the surplus being used in the working of the metals. 
CHIKAGO River empties into the 5. w. end of lake Michigan, where a fort formerly stood. 
|CHI 
Here the Indians have ceded to the United States, by the treaty of Greenville, a tract of land six miles square. 
|CHIKEHAUK, an island of the N. sea, near the coast of N. Carolina. This coast forms with the same island the strait of Currotuck. 
|CHILA, a settlement and head settlement of the district of the alcaJdia mayor of Acatlan in Nueva Espana. It contains 200 families of Indians, some of Spaniards and Muslccs, and a con vent of the religious order of St. Domingo. 
CHILAC, SAN GABRIEL DE, a settlement and head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Thehtiacau in Nueva Espana. It contains 286 families of Indians, and lies four leagues to the s. w. of its capital. 
CHILAPA, a capital settlement of the alcaldia mayor of this name in Nueva Espana. Its tem perature is rather cold. It contains 41 families of Spaniards, 72 of Mustees, 26 of Mulattoes, and 447 of Indians, and a convent of the religious order of St. Augustin ; belonging, in as much as regards its ecclesiastical functions, to the bishop ric of La Puebla. The jurisdiction is composed of 1 1 head settlements of districts, and of 23 others, in which are enumerated 2503 families of Indians, 65 of Spaniards, 116 of Mustees, and 47 of Mu lattoes ; all of whom are occupied in the cultiva tion and selling of its natural productions, which are sugar, honey, and cascalote, and in the mak ing of earthen-ware and scarlet cloth. This settle ment abounds also in wild wax, cotton, in the fruits of the country, potatoes, and other regetables. It is sixty leagues to the s. a quarter to the s. w. of Mexico, in long. 99, and lat. 17 11 . The other settlements are, Holcazautitlan, Tehuaustitlan, 
Temalacl, Zacanhualin, 
Hostutla, Tlaquilzingo, 
Mezquitlan, Palantla, 
Papulatla, Ayahualtempa, 
Tollman, Petatlan, 
Atengo, Ayahualulco, 
Comala, Mitlazingo, 
San Juan de la Brea, Tcpoxtlan, Zitlala, Quecholtenango, 
Acatlan, San Martin, 
Azaquiloya, Colotlipan, 
Acazango, Xocutla, 
Hahuacazingo, Nazintla, 
Pochotla, Teozintla, 
Alpoyeca, Zicultepec, 
Xintopantla, Calmetitlan. 
|CHILAPA, SAN MIGUEL DE, another settle
ment and head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Tepozcolula in the same kingdom. It is of a mild temperature, and contains a convent of the religious order of St. Domingo, and 128 fa milies of Indians, who occupy themselres in the trade of cochineal, as likewise of certain seeds which they sow in the ranches* Four leagues to the n. by s. of its capital. 
|CHILAPA, SAN PEDRO DE, another, of the head settlement of the district of Huitepec, and alcaldia mayor of Ixqnintepec, in the same kingdom. It contains 30 families of Indians, and is five leagues to the n. with a slight inclination to the e . of its capital. 
CHILAQUE, a settlement of the head settle ment of the district of Olintla, and alcaldia mayor of Zacatlan, in Nueva Espaila. It is situate in a delightful glen surrounded by rocks, and is water ed by various streams, being distant five leagues from its head settlement. 
|CHILATECA, S. JUAN DE, a settlement of the head settlement of the district of Cuilapa, and alcaldia mayor of Quatro Villas, in Nueva Espana. It contains 52 families of Indians, who trade in cochineal, seeds, and fruits, and collect coal and timber, all of which form branches of their commerce. Five leagues to the s. e. of its head settlement. 
|CHILCA, a settlement of the province and correginuento of Canete in Peru, with a small but sate and convenient port. It abounds in saltpetre, which its natives carry to Lima for the purpose of making gunpowder, on which account they are for the most part muleteers or carriers. In its vicinity are the remains of some magnificent build ings which belonged to the Ineas of Peru* The name of Chilcais given by the Indians of the same Jkingdom, as also by those of the kingdom of Quito, to a small tree or shrub which is a native of hot climates, and which, when burnt to ashes, is often used as lye for the use of the sugar en gines. 
|CHILCA, a beautiful and extensive valley of this province, which, although it be not irrigated by any river, stream, or fountain, by which it might be fertilized, produces an abundant harvest of maize. The seed of this is accustomed to be buried in the ground with heads of pilchards, an abundance of which fish is found upon the coast ; and thus, by the moisture arising from this prac tice, and by the morning dews, the soil becomes sufficiently moistened to produce a very fair crop. The same method is observed, and the same effect produced, with regard to other fruits and herbs ; but for drinking and culinary uses, the little 
|CHI 
water that is procured is drawn from wells. Lat 12 31 .?. Long. 76 35 w. 
|CHILCAIMARCA, a settlement of the pro vince and corregimiento of Condesuyos de Arequipa in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Andahua. 
|CIIILCAIO, a settlement of the province and government of Lucanas in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Querobamba. 
CHILCAS, a settlement of the province and corrcgimiento of Caxatambo in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Hacas. 
|CHILCAS, another settlement of the province and corregimicnto of Huanta in the same kingdom ; annexed to the curacy of Tambos. 
|CHILCHAIOTLA, a settlement of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Zochicoatlan in Nueva Espana; situate on the side of a hill. It is of a hot temperature, contains 26 families of Indians, and is 11 leagues to the n. of its capital. 
|CHILCHOIAQUE, a settlement of the head settlement of Tlacolula, and alcaldia mayor of Xalapa, in Nueva Espafta ; situate in a very ex tensive glen, surrounded by heights which begin in the neighbourhood of Xilotepec, and run some what more than a league in length. The popula tion is very scanty, and the temperature bad; indeed, out of the many families which formerly inhabited it, 19 only are remaining ; these employ themselves in the rancherias y agriculture being indispensably necessary to their maintenance, owing to the barrenness of the territory of the dis trict. At the distance of a league to the n. of Xa lapa, and on the side of the royal road leading to Mexico, is the great mill of Lucas Martin. Here the lands are fertilized by the large river Cerdeno ; by the waters of which also other settlements are supplied, as likewise some of the ranches, wherein employment is found for upwards of 30 families of Spaniards, some Mustecs
 and many Indians. Four leagues to the s. w. of its head settlement. 
|CHILCHOTA, the alcaldia mayor and juris diction of the province and bishopric of Mechoacan. It is very mean, and reduced to a few small settlements, which lie so nigh together, that their situations are pointed out to the traveller by crosses stuck up in the roads. Its population consists of 470 families of Tarascos Indians, and about 300 of Spaniards, Mulattoes, and Mustees-, who are, for the most part, scattered in the agricultural estates of its district, where, from the fertility of (he soil, wheat, maize, and other seeds, are cultivated in abundance. The country is agreeable, and well stocked with every kind of fruit trees. The capi* 
390 
C II I 
tal, the settlement of this name, is 70 leagues to the w. n. w. of Mexico. 
|CHILCHOTA, another settlement of the head settlement of Huautla, and alcaldia mayor of Cuicatlan ; situate at the top of a pleasant mountain which is covered with fruit trees. It contains 80 families of Indians, who live chiefly by trading in cochineal, saltpetre, cotton, seeds, and fruits. Jt is eight leagues from its head settlement. 
|CHILCHOTA, another, with the dedicatory title of San Pedro. It is of the head settlement of Quimixtlan, and alcaldia mayor of S. Juan de los Llanos, in Nueva Espana. It contains 210 fami lies of Indians. 
|CIIILCUAUTLA Y CARDINAL, a settlement and real of the mines of the alcaldia mayor of Ixmiquilpan in Nueva Espaua. It contains 215 families of Indians, and in the real are 27 of Spaniards, and 46 of Mustces and Mulattoes. It is of an extremely cold and moist temperature, and its commerce depends upon the working of the lead mines. Some silver mines were formerly worked here, but these yielded so base a metal, and in such small quantities, that they were en tirely abandoned for those of lead, which yielded by far the greatest emolument. Five leagues to the e. of its capital. 
|CHILE, a kingdom in the most s. part of S. Ame rica, bounded on the n. by Peru, on the s. by the straits of Magellan and Terra del Fuego, on the e. by the provinces of Tucuman and Buenos Ayres, on the n. e. by Brazil and Paraguay, and on the w. by the S. sea. It extends from n.tos. 472 leagues ; comprehending the Terras Magallanicas from the straits and the plains or des erts of Copiapo, which are its most n. parts. The Inca Yupanqui, eleventh Emperor of Peru, carried his conquests as fur as the river Mauli or Maulle, in lat. 34 30 s. Diegro de Almagro was the first Spaniard who discovered this country, in the year 1535, and began its conquest, which was after wards followed up, in 1541, by the celebrated Pe dro d V aldivia, who founded its first cities, and afterwards met with a disgraceful death at the hands of the Indians, having been made prisoner by them in the year 15 M. These Indians are the most valorous and warlike of all in America ; they have maintained, by a continual warfare, their inde pendence of the Spaniards, from whom they are separatrd by the river Biobio. This is the limit of the country possessed by them ; and though the Spaniards have penetrated through different entrances into their territories, and thc-;e built va rious towns and fortresses, yet have all these been pulled down and destroyed by those valiant de 
|CHI 
fenders of their liberty and their country. They are most dexterous in
the management of the lance, sword, arrow, and weapons made of Macana wood ; and although they are equally so in the practice of fire-arms, they use them but seldom, saying, " they are only n t for cowards." They are very agile and dexterous horsemen, and their horses are excellent, since those which run wild, and which are of the Andaluchn breed, have not degenerated, or become at all inferior to the best which that country produces. The part which the Spaniards possess in this kingdom extends its whole length, from the aforesaid valley of Copiapo to the river Sinfordo, (unfathomable), beyond the isle of Chiloe, in lat. 44, but it is only 45 leagues, at the most, in breadth ; so that the country is, as it were, a slip between the S. sea and the cordilkra of the Andes : from these descend infinite streams and rivers, watering many fertile and beautiful valleys, and forming a country altogether charming and luxurious ; the soil abounds in every necessary for the convenience and enjoyment of life, producing, in regular season, all the most delicate fruits of Ame rica and Europe. The summer here begins in September, the estio (or hot summer) in December, the autumn in March, and the winter in June. The climate is similar to that of Spain, and the temperature varies according to the elevation of the land; since the provinces lying next to Peru, and which are very low, are of a warm tempera ture, and lack rain, having no other moisture than what they derive from some small rivers descend ing from the cordillera, and running, for the .space of 20 or 30 leagues, into the sea. In the other provinces it rains more frequently, in proportion as they lay more to the s. especially in the winter, from April to September ; for which reason they are more fertile. These provinces are watered by more than 40 rivers, which also descend from the Cordillera, being formed by the rains, and the snow melted in the summer, swelling them to a great height. They generally abound in fish of the most delicate flavour, of which are eels, trout, bagrcs, reyeques, ahogatos, pejerej/es, and many others. The sea-coast is of itself capable of main taining a vast population by the shell-fish found upon it, of twenty different sorts, and all of the most delicious flavour. Other fish also is not wanting : here are plenty of skate, congers , rokalos, sitnas
 a species of trout, viejas, soles, machuelos, dorados, pejrga-los, pulpos, pampanos, corlrinas, pcjereyes 9 and tn-inies, which come at their seasons on the coast, in the same manner as in the Almadrabas of Andalucia. For sonic years past they salt dowu cod-fish in these parts, which, although of a 
|CHILE. 
391 
smaller size, are more delicate, and of superior flavour to those caught in Newfoundland. Am bergris is also found upon the coast. The moun tains abound in trees of the most beautiful kind, laurels, oaks of four sorts, the carob-tree, the wood of which is extremely hard, reulis, cinna mon-trees, Cyprus, sandal, paraguas, hazel-nut, wall-nut, "colos, and alerces, which are a kind of cedar, of which they make planks in great num bers to carry to Lima and other parts. Many of these trees are green the whole year round, from the moisture and shelter they derive from the cordillera, which contains in its bowels much fire, as appears from the volcanoes found upon it, and which are 12 in number, without counting many others, even as far as the straits of Magellan. Al though these mountains and woods are so immense, beasts of a savage kind are rarely to be found, ex cepting such, now and then, as a tiger or leopard ; but there are great numbers of deer, stags, vicunas, and hitanacos, which served as food for the Indians ; as likewise of birds, as ducks, vandurrias, swans, herons, kites, doves, piuguenes, tartaks, parrots, hawks, falcons, goshawks; and many sing ing birds, as goldfinches, larks, starlings, diucas, triffies, and many others. Its present vegetable productions are wheat, barley, Indian wheat, grains of different kinds, oil of the finest olives, excellent wines, much esteemed in Peru ; all kinds of suc culent fruits, oranges, lemons, innumerable sorts of apples, and every kind of garden herb. Flax and hemp is cultivated here, from which they make rigging for vessels trading to the S. seas ; and this could be supplied in a proportion equal to any de mand. This kingdom keeps up a considerable trade with Peru ; for, one year with the other, it sends to Lima from 150 to 180.000 bushels of wheat, 120,000 quintals of grease, much wine, and other productions, as almonds, nuts, lentils, a sort of wild marjoram and bnstard saffron ; and takes in exchange sugar and cloths of the country. It derives also great emolument from large herds of the cow kind, from flocks of sheep and goats, of the skins of which they procure fine tanned lea ther, leathern jackets, shamois leather, and soles of shoes : from these animals is also procured much fat or tallow. Here are numerous breeds of most beautiful horses, and some of these, from excelling all the others in the swiftness of their paces, are called aguilillias. It also abounds in mules, and it would still more so, if, as formerly, they were in request at Peru, where their skins were used instead of fine cloths and carpets. Baizes are still made ; as likewise some sorts of small cord, coarse stuff s, and many kinds of sackcloth, which is the 
common vesture, and consists of a square garment, with an opening to admit the head ; but many looms have been lost through a want of Indians in the manufactories. The greater part of these people still prefer their original uncivilized state, depending upon the natural fruits of the earth for for their food ; for, besides the productions above enumerated, they used to gather, without the trouble of cultivation, all sorts of delicious fruits, such as pines, though different from those of Eu rope; and to make excellent chicha of the murtilla. Indeed the luxuriance and abundance of delicate flowers, and aromatic and medicinal herbs, is al most incredible ; of the last the follow ing are the most esteemed for their virtue, viz. the canchalagua, quinchemali, albnhaquilla, and culen. It contains many mines of the richest gold, silver, copper, lead, tin, quick-silver, brimstone, load stone, and coal : yielding immense riches, which the Indians never appreciated, nor even gave themselves the least trouble about, until the con quest of the Incas, who began to work them ; sending portions of gold to Cuzco for the orna ment of the temples and palaces, rather by way of gift than of tribute. The incursions and rebel lions of the Indians, principally of the Araucanians, who, in the year 1599, took and destroyed six cities, viz. Valdivia, Imperial, Angol, Santa Crux, Chilian, and Concepcion, is the cause why the population is in many places not large, and that it consists of poor people, living in small communities ; the fact being, that they are always living in constant dread of a surprise from the Indians; not but that on the confines there are gar risons, well defended by Spanish troops, witli ne cessary provisions of artillery, victuals, and am munition. The war which has from the begin ning been sustained by the Spaniards against these most ferocious Indians, has tended greatly to re duce the numbers of the former ; some having been killed on the spot, and others doomed to be slaves to their indignant conquerors. Indeed, when it was found that arms were of no avail against them, some missionaries of the society of the Jesuits were sent among them, in the year 1612, in order to propagate the gospel ; when the Fathers Horacio Vechi and Martin de Aranda suffered martyrdom at their hands : after which a treaty of peace was made by the Governor Mar quis de Baides, A. D. 1610, and which has since been renewed yearly ; their deputies coming re gularly to the capital to receive the presents from the king of Spain. They have, notwithstanding, at different times broken the treaty, making in cursions into the Spanish towns, and their manner 4 
392 
|CHILE. 
of declaring war is by sending from town to town an arrow clenched in a dead man s hand, which they call c onvocatoria ; and this they did in the year 1723, making terrible havoc and slaughter. This kingdom is evidently, from what has been asserted, the most fertile, abun dant, rich, and delightful region of all America ; to which Nature has granted, in profusion, all that she has given to others, either with a sparing hand, or at too high a price. The people are healthy and robust. The wind which generally prevails is the s. ze. and the Pudche, which comes from the cordillera, is somewhat troublesome. [The Puelche wind takes its name from some Indians so called, and from whose country it blows. Chile is divided into two bishoprics, suffragan to the archbishopric of Lima ; and these are of Santiago and La Concepcion. It is governed bv a president, governor, and captain-general, which title was first possessed by Don Melchor Bravo de Saravia, and its government is divided into 18 provinces or districts, which are, Cuyo, Maule, 
Copiapo, Ytata, 
La Serena or Coquimbo Chilian, Quillota, Estancia del Rey or 
Aconcagua, Rede, 
Santiago, Puchacay, 
Melipilla, La Concepcion, 
Rancagua, Valdivia, 
Colchagua, Chiloe, 
And the islands of Juan Fernandez. The capi tal is Santiago. Catalogue of the barbarous Nations and principal 
Places in the kingdom of Chile. Nations. Mountains. 
Antallis, Antojo, 
Araucanos, Chilian, vole. 
Cauquis, Chuapa, vole. 
Chauracabis, Estancia de Rey, gold, 
Guarpes, Lampangui, silver, 
Juncos, Ligua, vole. 
Pequenches, Llaon, gold, 
Pevinges, Llupangui, gold, 
Pincus, Notuco, vole. 
Poyas, Payen, lead, 
Pulches, Peteroa, vole. 
Yanaeunas. Petorca, gold, 
Tnk,* Quillacoya, gold, 
Sinn, vole. 
Aguas Calientes, Yapel, gold. 
Guanacache, Cities. 
Mallabauquen, Calbuco, 
Padaguel, Canete, 
Purcn. Castro, 
1 
Chacao, 
Chilian, 
Concepcion. 
Confines, 
Copiapo, 
Eyoil, 
Guasco, 
Ytata, 
Labapi, 
Laxa, 
Coquimbo or La Se- Lebo, 
rena, Ligua, 
Imperial, Liman, 
Loyola, Limathi, 
Mendoza, Longatoma, 
Osorno, Mapocho, 
Santiago, Mataquito, 
San Juan de la Fron- Maule, 
tcra, Maypo, 
San Luis de Loyola, Nubbe or Nuble, Valdivia, Pereroa, 
Valparaiso, Poangue, 
Villarica. Queule, 
Forts. Ralemo, 
Arauco, Salado, 
Los Angeles, Teno, 
San Fernando, Tolten, 
Tucapel, Tongoy, 
Yumbel. Topocalma, 
Promontories. Turuyan, 
Ballena, Uten. 
Carnero, Ports. 
Cauten, Castro, 
Changui, Cauten, 
Feliz, Cerrito Verde, 
Villiva, Chacao, 
Rivers. Cumberland, 
Andalie, Guasco, 
Arancagua, Paracas, 
Biobio, Quillin, 
Buono, Talcaguano, 
Cachapoal, Tome, 
Cauquenes, Tongoy. 
Cauren, Isles. 
Cauten, Chiloe, 
Chavin, Ciones, 
Civapa, Farallones, 
Claro, Fernandez, 
Copiapo, Guaiteca, 
Curarahua, Moche, 
De Lora, Quinquina, 
De la Sal, Santa Maria. 
Catalogue of the Presidents, Governors, and Cap tains-general of the Kingdom of Chile. 
1. The Adelantado Pedro de Valdivia, conquer or of the kingdom ; he served much, and with great valour, in the conquest of Peru, was a colo nel of foot under Francis Pizarro, entered in the year 1537, founded the first towns, and governed until the year 1551 ; he was made prisoner, fight
|CHILE. 
393 
ing valiantly in a battle against the Araucanos, and killed. 
2. Don Garcia Ilurtado do Mendoza, son of the Marquis de Cauete. who was viceroy in Peru ; immediately that he received news of the death of Valdivia, he nominated him as his successor, and he returned to Peru as soon as he had seen him confirmed in the government, and his title sanc tioned by the king. 
3. Francisco de Villagra, a noble captain, who, in pursuing his conquests, wns also killed by the Indians in battle ; provisionally succeeded by his uncle, until a governor was appointed by the king. 
4. The Adelaniado Rodrigo de Quiroga, who governed peaceably until his death, leaving the government to the charge of his father-in-law. 
5. The Brigadier Martin Ruiz de Gamboa, until he was nominated by the king. 
6. The Doctor Melchor Bravo de Saravia, with the title of first president, until his death. 
7. Don Alonso de Sotomayor, Marquis de Villahermosa, appointed in the year 1584 : having ma nifested his valour, talent, and address, in the go vernment, which ho held with much credit, and with great advantage, against the Indians, until the year 1592, when arrived, 
8. Don Martin Garcia Ofiez y Loyola, knight of the order of Calatrava ; was killed by the Indians succouring the fort of Puren, which was be sieged in the year 1599. 
9. The Licentiate Pedro de Vizcarra, who ex ercised the employ of lieutenant-general of the kingdom ; he was appointed to it when the former was killed, until the viceroy alty of Peru was given to, 
10. The Captain Francisco de Quinoncs, who employed himself in restraining the Araucanos from their rebellion, until his death ; afterwards was nominated for the viceroyalty of Peru. 
11. Captain Alonzo Garcia Remon, an officer of much credit, and skilled in the country and the war with the Indians ; being colonel of foot of Don Alon/o Sotomayor, began to govern, ap pointed by the viceroy of Lima, until arrived, sanctioned and duly elected by the king, 
12. Don Alonso de la Rivera, who was serving in Flanders, and was sent to Chile, where, having married contrary to the prohibition of his Majesty, he was deprived of his office, and in his place was appointed, 
13. The aforesaid Don Alonso Garcia Remon, whose speedy death did not suffer him long to reign, and he was succeeded by, 
14. The Doctor Don Luis Merlo de la Fuente, chief auditor of the royal audience, who, through 
|VOL. I. 
the death of his antecessor, governed also but a short time before the arrival of, 
15. Don Juan de Xaraquemada, native of Canaria, who was in Lima covered with honours ac quired in the war of Chile, when he was nomi nated governor by the viceroy of Peru, Marquis de Montes Claros. 
16. Don Alonso de la Rivera again, being at that time governor of Tucuman ; he was sepa rated from this government, and was sent by the king, at the instance of the missionaries, to re duce that kingdom by the experience he possessed, and gave proofs of his great ability in peace and war until his death. 
17. The Licentiate Fernando Talaverano, most ancient oidor of the audience, was charged with the government through this quality, and by the particular recommendation of his antecessor, un til the viceroy of Peru, Prince of Esquilache, re gularly appointed, 
18. Don Lope de Ulloa, who, in the exercise of this office, was confirmed in it by his Majesty un til his death, when the government was taken up by, 
19. Don Christoval de la Cerda Sotomayor, na tive of Mexico, chief auditor of the real audencin* whom, notwithstanding his excellent qualities, and the celebrity of his government, the viceroy of Peru soon set aside, in favour of, 
20. Don Pedro Sorez de Ulloa y Lemos, knight of the order of Alcantara, who in a short time was confirmed in the government by the king, ex ercising it until his death, and leaving it to the care of his brother-in-law, 
21. Don Francisco de Alva
y Noruena, who held it a short time, from the viceroy having, ac cording to custom, nominated a successor; and this was, 
22. Don Luis Fernandez de Cordoba y Arcc, Senor del Carpio, Veinte y Quatro de Cordoba, who, although he Avas not confirmed by the king, maintained it some years, in consideration of the judgment and skill he manifested, until, in the year 1633, he was supplanted by, 
23. Don Francisco Laso de la Vega, knight of the order of Santiago, a man of high endowments and splendid fortunes in the war of the Indians : he finished his reign, delivering it to his suc cessor; 
24. Don Francisco de Zuniga, Marquis de Baydes, Count del Pedroso, entered into the posses sion of the government in the year 1640 ; it w r as he who established and secured the peace with the Indians by means of the missionaries of the so ciety of the Jesuits ; with which glory h 
394 
|CHILE. 
left the government, in the year 1655, to the suc cessor, 
25. Don Martin de Muxica, knight of the order of Santiago, a renowned officer, and one who had gained much renown in the armies of Italy and Flanders. 
26. Don Pedro Porter de Casanate, A. D. 1659. 
27. Don Francisco Meneses Bravo de Sarabia, who led from Spain a body of troops, in order to subdue the Indians; this he accomplished ; and in the year 1664 rebuilt the cities which had been destroyed in 1599 : his government lasted until the year 1668, when he was deposed by the vice roy of Peru. 
28. Don Angel Peredo, knight of the order of Santiago ; he was appointed as an intermediate governor upon the deposition of his antecessor, and governed during the following year, 1669. 
!&gt; 29. Don Juan Enriquez, native of Lima, knight of the order of Santiago, governed until the year 1677. 
30. Don 
31. Don 
32. Don 
33. Don Juan Andres de Ustariz, native of Sevilla, until the year 1715, when was elected, 
34. Don Gabriel Cano de Aponte, brigadiergeneral of the royal armies, in whose time the Araucanos again declared war, when he obliged them to renew the peace : died A.D. 1728. 
35. Don Juan de Salamanca, colonel of the militia of that kingdom ; he was an intermediate go vernor, and at his death, 
36. Don Joseph de Santiago Concha, Marquis de Casa Concha, kinght of the order of Calatrava, chief auditor of the royal audience of Lima, nomi nated by the viceroy. 
37. Don Alonso de Obando, Marquis de Obando, vice-admiral of the royal armada ; appointed by the viceroy, the Marquis de Villa Garcia, as inter mediate successor, until the year 1736. 
38. Don Joseph Manso de Velasco, Count of Superunda, knight of the order of Santiago ; he was at that time captain of the grenadiers of the regiment of Spanish guards, and ranked as briga dier ; well recommended by his valour and ex ploits, when he was appointed to this presidency in the aforesaid year ; he governed until the year 1746, Avhen he was promoted to the viceroyalty of Peru. 
39. Don Domingo Ortiz de Rozas, knight of the order of Santiago, was at that time governor of Buenos Ayres, and was elected to this presidency in the aforesaid year ; he founded several towns, 
on which account the king gave him the title of Conde de Poblaciones ; governed until the year 1754, when returning to Spain, he died. 
40 Don Manuel Amat y J unient, knight of the order of San Juan, colonel of the regiment of dra goons of Sagunto, of the rank of brigadier, ap pointed to this presidency ; which he filled until the year 1761, when he was promoted to the viceroyalty of Peru". 
41. Don Mateo de Toro de Zambrano y Urueta, appointed as intermediate successor by the former, upon his departure from Lima, until the arrival of the right successor, 
42. Don Antonio Guill, formerly colonel of the regiment of infantry of Guadalaxara, and then ranked as brigadier, being governor and captaingeneral of the kingdom of Tierra Firme ; promoted to this presidency in the aforesaid year, 1761, and exercised it until his death, in 1768. 
43. Don Mateo de Toro Zambrano y Urueta, the second time of his being nominated as intermediate successor by the audience in the vacancy, until was nominated by the viceroy of Peru, 
44. Don Francisco Xavier de Morales, knight of the order of Santiago, brigadier of the royal armies, who being captain of the grenadiers of the regiment of the royal Spanish guards, was made general of the militia in Peru, and was nominated as intermediate successor by the viceroy to this presidency, which he enjoyed till his death in the year 1772. 
45. The aforesaid Don Mateo de Toro Zam brano y Urueta, then Count of LaConquista, knight of the order of Santiago, and lieutenant-colonel of the royal armies, nominated for the third time by the royal audience during the vacancy, until ar rived the right successor, 
46. Don Agustin de Jauregui, knight of the order of Santiago, brigadier of the royal armies, who had been colonel of the regiment of dragoons of Sagunto ; was appointed to this presiclency A.D. 1773, and enjoyed it until 1782, when he was promoted to the viceroyalty of Peru. 
47. Don Ambrosio de Benavides, brigadier of the royal armies, was nominated in the same year, 1782. 
|INDEX TO THE ADDITIONAL HISTORY AND INFORMATION RESPECTING ClllLE. 
|CHAP. 1. Origin and language of the Chilians. Conquest of the Peruvians, and state of Chile before the arrival of the Spaniards. What were then its political establishments , government, and arts. 
1. Language. 2. Original state. 3. Divided into free and subjugated. 4. Agriculture. 5 Civi
|CHILE. 
395 
lized state. 6 The metals . 7. Substitute for writing. 
|CHAP. JI. First expedition of the Spaniards in Chile. Encounters with the natives, with various success, until the alliance formed between the Spaniards and Promaucians. 
1. Almagro marches against Chile. 2. Road from Peru to Chile.- 3. Kindly received at Copiapo. 4. First European blood shed. 5. Battle with 
the Promaucians. 6. Expedition abandoned, 
and why.---!. Valdivia marches against Chile. 8. Province of St. Ja go described. 9. The ca pital founded. 10. Steady enmity of the Mapoc/rinians.ll. The mine of Qutttota.12. The compassionate ulmena. 13. Recruits from Pent, under Monroy.l
. Stratagem of the Quillotanes.15. Serena founded.- 16. Promaucian allies. 17. Valdivia sets sail for Peru, and returns with men and S2ipplies. 18. Con ception founded. 
|CHAP. III. Of the character and manners of the Araucanians. 
1. Local situation. 2. Character.- 3. Dress. 
4. Dwellings. 5. Division of the Araucanian state.- 6. Its political form. 7. Civil institu tions. 8. Military system. 9. Their arms, and mode of making war. W. Division of the spoil. II. Sacrifice after the war. 12. Con gress of peace. 13. System of religion. 14. Funeral ceremonies. 15. Division of time. 16. Astronomical ideas. 17. Measures. IS. Rhetoric. 19. Poetry. 20. Medical skill. 21. Commerce. 2%. National pride. %3. Kind ness towards each other. 24:. Mode of saluta tion. 25. Proper names. 26. Domestic em ployments. 27. Food. 28. Music, and other diversions. 
|CHAP. IV. The wars of the Araucanians with the 
Spaniards, and concomitant events. I. The Toqui Aillavila.
. The Toqui Lincoyan. 3. Imperial founded. . Vittarica founded. 
5. The Clinches. 6. Valdi-cia founded.- 7. For tresses of Puren, Tucapel, and Arauco built. 8. City of the Frontiers founded. - 9. Three principal military offices instituted at Concepcivn. 
10. The Toqui Caupolican. 11. Valdivia 
slain. Lautaro appointed lieutenant- general. 12. The mountain Mariguenu. 13. The Go vernor Villa gran. l
. Conception destroyed. 15. The small-pox appears. 16. Decision of the audience of Lima respecting the governor?. 
17. Conception rebuilt, and destroyed by Lau taro. 18. Lautaro arrives at Santiago. 19. Death of Lautaro. 20. Caupolican raises the siege of Imperial.* 21. The Governor Don Gar 
cia Hurtado de Mendoza.22. Caupolican taken prisoner and impaled. %3. Canete founded.24. The Cunches, their curious embassy and stratagerii.25. Archipelago of Chiloe discovered. 26. City of Osorno founded. 27. Caupolican the Second. 28. The Guarpes subjected. .29. St. Juan and Mendoza founded. 30. Villagran re instated. 31. The province of Tucuman re stored, afterwards retaken. 32. Canete de stroyed. S3. Pedro Villagran. 34. The Toqiti Paillataru. 35. Archipelago of Chiloe sub jected; description of the same; its inhabitants, Sec.- 36. The court of audience established. 
37. Suppression of the tribunal of audience. 
38. Description of the Pehitenches.39. De scription of the Chiquillanians. 4Q. Landing and defeat of the English.- 41. Nature of the war in anno 1589. 42. Independence restored. 
43. Expedition of the Dutch. 44. All the. Spanish settlements destroyed. 45. Court of au dience re-established. 46. Ineffectual efforts of Philip III. to establish a lasting peace. *--47. Second expedition of the Dutch. 48. Second expedition of the English.- 49. Peace at length concluded. 50. Last expedition of the Dutch. 
51. Dreadful earthquake. 52. Commerce 
with the French. 53. How the Pehuenches be came inimical to the Spaniards. 54. Peace re stored. 
|CHAP. V. Present state, of Chile. 1. Civil government. 2. Military force. 3. Ec clesiastical government. 4. The cities and 
dwellings. 5. Population. 6. Chilian Creoles. 7. State of arts and sciences. S. The pea santry. 9. Dress, fyc.lQ. Diseases ; smallpoX) how cured. \{. Manners, moral and phy sical. 12. Intwnal and external commerce
 
mines, imports, and exports. 13. Natural divi sions. 14. Political divisions. 15. Climate. 16. Of rain. 17. ffinds. \&. Meteors. 19. Volcanoes. 20. Earthquakes. 21 . Some de tail of productions. 22. Present revolution. 
|CHAP. I. 
Origin and language of the Chilians.- Conquest of the Peruvians, and state of Chile before the arrival of the Spaniards.- What was then its political establishments, government, and arts. OF the origin and language of the Chilians, no traces are to be found further back than the middle of the 15th century, "which was the time when Ihe Peruvians first began their conquests in this de lightful country. It is the general opinion that America was settled from the n. e. part of Asia, but the opinion entertained by the Chilians is., that  3 E 2 
306 
|CHILE. 
their country was peopled from the zo. However this may be, that it was originally peopled by one nation appears possible, as all the Aborigines in habiting it, however independent of each other, speak the same language, and have a similar ap pearance. 
1. Language. Their language is copious, full of harmony and richness. Each verb, either de rivatively or conjunctively, becomes the root of numerous other verbs and nouns, as well adjectives as substantives, which in their turn reproduce others, which are secondary, modifying themselves in an hundred different ways. There is no part of speech from which an appropriate verb cannot be formed by the addition of a final en. Even from the most simple particles various verbs are derived, that give great precision and strength to conversa tion : but what is truly surprising in this language is, that it contains no irregular verb or noun. Every thing in it may be said to be regulated with a geometrical precision, and displays much art with great simplicity : it contains words, appa rently of Greek and Latin derivation, and of a similar signification in both languages. But what is most remarkable, it differs from every other Ame rican language, not less in its words than in its construction ; and with all its richness and har mony, its theory is so easy that it may be readily learned in a few days. Several grammars of this language are to be met with, but that of Febres, printed at Lima in 1765, is particularly to be re commended for its method and clearness. One ar gument further in favour of the simplicity of this tongue, is the circumstance of its having main tained itself in its pure state, and of its not having sunk into an unintelligible unconnected jargon, when it is considered that the Chilians, to the afore mentioned period, had no ideas of writing, and that their traditionary accounts were so crude and im perfect, as to afford not the least degree of informa tion to the inquisitive mind. Hence it follows that the first accounts of them are contained in the Peru vian annals ; that nation, as it was more civilized, being more carefid to preserve the memory of re markable events. 
2. Original state. When the Inca Yupanqui began to attempt the conquest of Chile, its inhabi tants were supposed to be numerous. They were divided into 15 tribes or communities, independent of each other, but subject to certain chiefs called ulmenes. These tribes, beginning at the n. and proceeding to the s. were called Copiapins, Coquimbanes, Quillotanes, Mapochinians, Promaucians, Cures, Cauques, Pencones, Araucanians, Cunches, Chilotes, Chiquilanians, Pehucnches, Pu
elches, and Huilliches. Of these were subjugated to the Peruvian government, more by persuasion than force, the Copiapins, Coquimbanes, Quillo tanes, and Mapochinians; but the valour of the Promaucians put a stop to the success of the arms of the Inca, or rather to Sinchiruca, (a prince of the blood royal), to whom was entrusted the com mand of the expedition : for these brave people, naturnlly addicted to pleasures and diversions, and whose very name signifies the free dancers, op posed the Peruvian army with the most heroic valour, and entirely defeated it in a battle which, according to Garcilasso the historian, was conti nued for three days in succession. 
3. Divided into free and subjugated. Thus Chile became divided into two parts, the one free, and the other subject to foreign domination. The tribes who had so readily submitted to the Peru vians were subjected to an annual tribute in gold, an imposition which they had never before expe rienced ; but the conquerors, whether they dared not hazard the attempt, or were not able to effect it, never introduced their form of government into these provinces. Of course, the subjected Chilians, as well as the free, preserved until the arrival of the Spaniards their original manners, which were by no means so rude as many are led to imagine. 
4. Agriculture. Agriculture was already known to them ; but being in want of animals to till the ground, they were accustomed to turn it up with a spade made of hard wood. The plants which either necessity or accident made known to them, were the maize, the magu, the guegen, the tuca, the quinoa, pulse of various kinds, the potato, the oxalis tuberosa, the common and the yellow pump kin or gourd, the Guinea pepper, the inadi, and the great strawberry. To these provisions of the vegetable kind, may be added the following of the animal, the little rabbit, and the Chiliheuque or Araucanian camel, whose flesh furnished excellent food, and whose wool, clothing for these people. If tradition may be credited, they had also the hog and the domestic fowl. With these productions, which required a very moderate degree of indus try, they subsisted comfortably, and even with a degree of abundance, considering the few things which their situation rendered necessary. Subsist ence, the source of population, being thus secured, the country became rapidly peopled under the in fluence of so mild a climate; whence it appears, that the first writers who treated of Chile, cannot have greatly exaggerated in saying, that the Spa niards found it filled with inhabitants. 
5. Chilized state. It is a fact that there was but one language spoken throughout the country ; a 
|CHILE. 
397 
proof that these tribes were in (he habit of inter course with each other, arid were not insulated, or separated by vast deserts, or by immense lakes or forests, which is the case in many other parts of America. Another proof of their civilization, and perhaps equally so, as to the amount of population, is, that they had in many parts of the country aqueducts for watering their fields, which were constructed with much skill. Among- these, the canal which for the space of many miles borders the rough skirts of the mountains in the vicinity of the capital, and waters the land to the n. of that city, is particularly remarkable for its extent and solidity. The right of property was fully esta blished among the Chilians ; they were found to have collected themselves in societies, more or less numerous, in those districts that were best suited to their occupation ; and here, having established themselves in large villages, called cara, a name which they at present give to the Spanish cities, or in small ones, which they denominated lov. they enjoyed a specific form of government, and they had in each village or hamlet a chief, called ulmcn, signifying a rich man, who in certain points was subject to the supreme ruler of the tribe, who was known by the same name. They built their houses of a quadrangular form, and covered the roof with rushes ; the walls were made of wood plastered with clay, and sometimes of brick, called by them, tica. A house of similar construction at the village of Casa Blanca, is mentioned by Vancouver as having afforded accommodation to himself and friends on their way to St. Jago : indeed, they arcstill the common dwellings of the Indians ; and some of the villages before mentioned exist at present ui several parts of Spanish Chile ; and of these the most considerable are Lampa, in the pro vince of St. Jago, and Lorn, in that of Maule. They manufactured cloths for their garments from the wool of the Chilihueque : they used two kinds of looms ; the first not unlike that used in Europe, the other vertical. Jt is very certain that the art of pottery is very ancient in Chile, as on opening a large heap of stones in the mountains of Arauco, an urn of extraordinary size was discovered at the bottom. 
6. The metals. The mines of gold, silver, and other metals, with which this country abounds, had not yet been fully appreciated ; but they ex tracted from the earth gold, silver, copper, tin, arid lead, and after purifying, employed these metals in a variety of useful and curious works. They had also discovered the method of making salt upon the sea-shore, and extracted fossil salt from several mountains which abounded in that 
production. They procurrd dyes of all colours for their cloths, not only from the juice of plants, but also from mineral earths, and had discovered the art of fixing them by means of the polcura, a luminous stone of an astringent quality. Instead of soap, the composition of which they had not discovered, although acquainted with lye, they em ployed the bark of the quillai, which is an excellent substitute. From the seeds of the niadi they ob tained an oil, which is very good to eat and to burn, though it is not ascertained whether they ever applied it to the latter purpose. Although hunting was not a principal occupation with these people, they were accustomed to take such wild animals as are found in their country, particularly birds, of which there are great quantities. It is alleged, that from their connection with the Peru vians, they had advanced so far with respect to the enlargement of the sphere of their ideas, as to in vent words capable of expressing any number ; mart signifying with them 10, pataca 100, and quaranca 1000. 
7. Substitute for writing, To preserve the me mory of their transactions, they made use, as other nations have done, of the prow, called by the Peru vians qitippo, which was a skein of thread of several colours, with a number of knots : the subject treated of was indicated by the colours, and the knots designated the number or quantity. The progress which they had made in physic and astro nomy was indeed wonderful ; but an account of these, of their religion, their music, and military skill, is deferred until we treat of the Araucanians, who still continue the faithful depositories of all the science and ancient customs of the Chilians. (See subsequent chapter III.) 
|CHAP. II. 
First expeditions of the Spaniards in Chile ; encoun ters with the natives ) zcith various success
 until the alliance formed between the Spaniards and the Promaucians. 
1. Alma&ro marches against Chile. Francis Pizarro and Diego Almagro having put to death the Inca Atahualpa, had subjected the empire of Peru to the dominion of Spain. Pizarro, desirous of enjoying without a rival (his important conquest, made at their mutual expence, persuaded his companion to undertake the reduction of Chile, cele brated for its riches throughout all those countries. Almagro, filled with sanguine expectations of booty, began his march for that territory in the end of the year 1.535, with an army composed of 570 Spaniards and 15,000 Peruvians, under the com mand of Paullu, the brother ofthe Inca Manco, the 
39S 
|CHILE. 
"nominal emperor of Peru, who had succeeded the unfortunate Atahualpa. 
2. Roads from Peru to Chile. Two roads lead from Peru to Chile ; one is by the sea-coast, and is destitute of water and provision ; the other, for a distance of 120 miles, passes over the immense mountains of the Andes : the inexperience of Al magro caused him to take the latter for although it was, without doubt, the shortest, it was difficult in the extreme : for his army, after having been exposed to infinite fatigue, and many conflicts with the adjoining savages, reached the Cordilleras just at the commencement of winter, destitute of provisions, and but ill supplied with clothing. In this season the snow falls almost incessantly, and completely covers the few paths that are passable in summer ; notwithstanding, the soldiers, en couraged by their general, advanced with much toil to the top of those rugged heights. But, vic tims to the seyerity of the weather, 150 Spaniards there perished, with 10,000 Peruvians, who, being accustomed to the warmth of the torrid zone, were less able to endure the rigours of the frost. It is affirmed, that of all this army not one would have escaped with life, had not Almagro, resolutely pushing forward with a few horse, sent them timely succours and provisions, which were found in abundance at Copiapo. 
3. Kindly received at Copiapo. Those of the most robust constitutions, who were able to resist the inclemency of the season, by this unexpected aid, were enabled to extricate themselves from the snow, and at length reached the plains of that province, which is the first in Chile ; where, through respect for the Peruvians, they were well received and en tertained by the inhabitants. While Almagro re mained in Copiapo, he discovered that the reigning ulmcn had usurped the government in prejudice of his nephew and ward, who, through fear of his uncle, had fled to the -woods. Pretending to be irritated at this act of injustice, he caused the guilty chief to be arrested, and calling before him the lawful heir, reinstated him in the government, with the universal applause of his subjects, who attributed this conduct entirely to motives of jus tice, and a wish to redress the injured. The Spa niards, having recovered from their fatigues thro ugh the hospitable assistance of the Copiapins, and re inforced by a number of recruits whom Rodrigo Organez had brought from Peru, commenced their march for the s. provinces. As it was natural, the natives were not a little curious concern ing these their new visitors : they crowded around them to their march, as well to examine them near, as a present them with such things as they thought 
would prove agreeable to a people who appeared to them of a character far superior to that of other men. In the mean time, two soldiers having se parated from the army, proceeded to Guasco, where they were at first well received, but were afterwards put to death by the inhabitants, in con sequence, no doubt, of some acts of violence, which soldiers freed from the controul of their officers are very apt to commit. 
4. First European blood shed. This was the first European blood spilt in Chile, a country afterwards so copiously deluged with it. On being informed of this unfortunate accident, calculated to destroy the exalted opinion which he wished to inspire of his soldiers, Almagro, having proceeded to Coquimbo, ordered the ulrnen of the district, called Marcando, his brother, and twenty of the principal inhabitants, to be brought thither; all of whom, together with the usurper of Copiapo, he delivered to the flames, without, according to Herrera, pretending to assign any reason for his con duct. This act of cruelty appeared to every one very extraordinary and unjust, since among those adventurers there were not wanting men of sensi bility, and advocates for the rights of humanity. The greater part of the army openly disapproved of the severity of their general, the aspect of whose affairs, from this time forward, became gradually worse and worse. About this period, 1537, Alma gro received a considerable reinforcement of re cruits under Juan dc Rada, accompanied with royal letters patent, appointing him governor of 200 leagues of territory, situate to the s. of the government granted to Francis Pizarro. The friends whom he had left in Peru, taking ad vantage of this opportunity, urged him by private letters to return, in order to take possession of Cuzco, which they assured him was within the limits of his jurisdiction. Notwithstanding this, inflated with his new conquest, he pursued his march, passed the fatal Cachapoal, and regardless of the remonstrances of the Peruvians, advanced into the country of the Promaucians. 
5. Battle with the Promaucians. At the first sight of the Spaniards, their horses, and the thun dering arms of Europe, these valiant people were almost petrified with astonishment ; but soon re covering from the effects of surprise, they opposed with intepridity their new enemies upon the shore of the Rio Claro. Almagro, despising their force, placed in the first line his Peruvian auxiliaries, in creased by a number whom Paullu had drawn from the garrisons ; but these, being soon routed, fell back in confusion upon the rear. The Spa niards, who expected to have been merely specta- 
|CHILE. 
599 
tors of the battle, saw themselves compelled to sus tain the vigorous attack of the enemy, and advanc ing with their horse, began a furious battle, which continued with great loss upon either side till night separated the combatants. Although the Promaucians had been very roughly handled, they lost not courage, but encamped in the sight of their enemy, determined to renew the attack the next morning. The Spaniards, however, though by the custom of Europe they considered themselves as victors, having kept possession of the field, were very dif ferently inclined. Having been accustomed to subdue immense provinces with little or no resist ance, they became disgusted with an enterprise which could not be effected without great fatigue, and the loss of much blood, since in its prosecution they must contend with a bold and independent na tion, by whom they were not believed to be im mortal. 
6. Expedition abandoned, and &ny. Thus all, by common consent, resolved to abandon this ex pedition ; but they were of various opinions re specting their retreat, some being desirous of re turning to Peru, while others wished to form a settlement in the n. provinces, where they had been received with such hospitality. The first opinion was supported by Almagro, whose mind began to be impressed by the suggestions contained in the letters of his friends. Accordingly we find him re turning with his army to Peru in 1538 : he took possession of the ancient capital of that empire ; and after several ineffectual negociations, fought a battle with the brother of Pizarro, by whom he was taken, tried, and beheaded as a disturber of the public peace. His army having dispersed at their defeat, afterwards reassembled under the title of the soldiers of Chile, and executed new disturb ances in Peru, already sufficiently agitated. Such was the fate of the first expedition against Chile, undertaken by the best body of European troops that had as yet been collected in those parts. The thirst of riches was the moving spring of the ex pedition, and the disappointment of their hopes of obtaining them, the cause of its failure. Francis Pizarro, having by the death of his rival obtained the absolute command of the Spanish possessions in S. America, lost not sight of the conquest of Chile, which he conceived might, in any event, prove an important acquisition to him. Amon
 the adven turers who had come to Peru, were two officers commissioned by the court of Spain, under the titles of Governors, to attempt this expedition. To the first, called Pedro Sanchez de Hoz, was com mitted the conquest of the country as far as the river Maule; and to the other, Carmargo,the remainder 
to the Archipelago of Chiloe. Pizarro, jealous of these men, under frivolous pretexts, refused to con firm the royal nomination, and appointed to this expedition his quarter-master, Pedro de Valdivia, a prudent and active officer, who had gained ex perience in the Italian war, and what was still a greater recommendation, was attached to his party ; directing him to take De Hoz with him, who was probably more to be feared than his colleague, and to allow him every advantage in the partition of the lands. 
7. Valdi-cia marches against Chile. This officer having determined to establish a permanent settle ment in the country, set out on his march in the year 1540, with 200 Spaniards, and a numerous body of Peruvian auxiliaries, accompanied by some monks, several women, and a great number of European quadrupeds, with every thing requisite for a new colony. He pursued the same route as Almagro ; but, instructed by the misfortunes of his predecessor, he did not attempt to pass the Andes until midsummer. He entered Chile without in curring any loss, but very different was the recep tion he experienced from the inhabitants of the n. provinces from that which Almago had met with. Those people, informed of the fate of Peru, and freed from the submission they professed to owe the Inca, did not consider themselves obliged to respect their invaders. They of course began to attack them upon all sides, with more valour than con duct. Like barbarians in general, incapable of making a common cause with each other, and for a long time accustomed to the yoke of servitude, they attacked them by hordes or tribes, as they advanced, without that steady firmness which cha racterises the valour of a civilized people. The Spaniards, however, notwithstanding the ill-com bined opposition of the natives, traversed the pro vinces of Copiapo, Coquimbo, Quillota, and Melipilla, and arrived, much harrassed, but with little loss, at that of Mapocho, now called St. .Jago. 
8. Province of St. Jago described. This pro vince, which is more than 600 miles distance from the confines of Peru, is one of the most fertile and pleasant in the kingdom. Its name signifies "the land of many people;" and from the accoujvts of the first writers upon Chile, its population corres ponded therewith, being extremely numerous. It lies upon the confines of the principal mountain of the Andes, and is 140 miles in circumference. It is watered by the rivers Maypo, Colina, La in pa, and Mapocho, which last divides it into two nearly equal parts ; and after pursuing a subterraneous course for the space of five miles, again shows it self with increased copiousness, and discharges its 
400 
|CHILE. 
waters into the Maypo. The mountains of Caren, which terminate it on the n. abound with veins of old ; and in that part of the Andes which bounds it at the e. are found several rich mines of silver. Valdivia, who had endeavoured to penetrate as far as possible into the country, in order to render it difficult for his soldiers to return to Peru, deter mined to make a settlement in this province, which, from its natural advantages, and its remote ness, appeared to him more suitable than any other , for the centre of his conquests. 
9. Capittil founded. With this view, having selected a convenient situation on the left shore, of the Mapocho, on the 24th February 1541, he laid the foundations of the capital of the kingdom, to which, in honour of that apostle, he gave the name of St. Jago. In laying out the city, he di vided the ground into plats or squares, each con taining 4096 toiscs, a fourth of which he allowed to every citizen, a plan which lias been pursued in the foundation of all the other cities ; one of these plats, lying upon the great square, he destined for the cathedral and the bishop s palace, which he intended to build there, and the one opposite for that of the government. He likewise appointed a magistracy, according to the forms of Spain, from such of his army as were the best qualified ; and to protect the settlement in case of an attack, he constructed a fort upon a hill in the centre of the city, which has since received the name of St. Lucia. Many have applauded the discernment of Valdivia, in having made choice of this situa tion for the seat of the capital of the colony. But considering the wants of a great city, it would have been better placed 15 miles farther to the s. upon the Maypo, a large river, which has a direct com munication with the sea, and might easily be ren dered navigable for ships of the largest size. This city, however, contained in 1807 more than 40,000 inhabitants, and is rapidly increasing in popula tion, from its being the seat of government, and from its great commerce, supported by the luxury of the wealthy inhabitants. Meanwhile the na tives saw with a jealous eye this new establishment, and concerted measures, although late, for freeing themselves of these unwelcome intruders. Valdivia having discovered their intentions in season, con fined the chiefs of the conspiracy in the fortress ; and suspecting some secret intelligence between them and the neighbouring Promaucians, repaired with 60 horse to the river Oachapoal to watch their movements. But this measure was unneces sary ; that fearless people had not the policy to think of uniting with their neighbours in order to secure themselves from the impending danger. 
10. Steady unammity of the Mapocfnnfans. The Mapochinians, taking advantage of the de parture of the general, fell upon the colony with inconceivable fury, burned the half-built houses, and assailed the citadel, wherein the inhabitants had taken refuge, on all sides. Notwithstanding the ultimate defeat which the Mapochinians expe rienced in this battle, and others of not less import ance which they afterwards experienced, thoy never ceased, for the space of six years, until their utter ruin, to keep the Spaniards closely besieged, attacking them upon every occasion that offered, and cutting oft their provisions, in such a manner that they were compelled to subsist upon unwhole some and loathsome viands, and upon the little grain that they could raise beneath the cannon of the place. The fertile plains of the neighbour hood had become desert and uncultivated, as the inhabitants had destroyed their crops and retired to the mountains. This mode of life did not fail to disgust the soldiers of Valdivia, but he contrived with much prudence and address to sooth their turbulent spirits, painting to them in seducing colours the happy prospect that awaited them. 
11. The mhie of Ptttdbto.--- Valdivia had often heard in Peru that the valley of Quillota abounded in mines ot gold, and imagined that he might obtain from thence a suflicient quantity to satisfy his sol diers ; in consequence, notwithstanding the diffi culties with which he was surrounded, he sent thither a detachment of troops, with orders to superintend t ie digging of this precious metal. The mine that was opened was so rich that its product surpassed their most sanguine hopes ; their present and past sufferings were all buried in oblivion, nor was there one among them who had the remotest wish of quitting the country. The governor, (for Valdivia had persuaded the magis tracy of the city to give him this title), who was naturally enterprising, encouraged by this success, had a frigate built in the mouth of the river Chile, which traverses the valley, in order more readily to obtain succours from Peru, without which he was fully sensible he could not succeed in accom plishing his vast undertakings. In the mean time, as the state of affairs was urgent, Valdivia was resolved to send to Peru by land two of his cap tains, Alonzo Monroy and Pedro Miranda, with six companions, whose spurs, bits, and stirrups he directed to be made of gold, hoping to entice, by this proof of the opulence of the country, his fel low-citizens to come to his assistance. These mes sengers, though escorted by 30 men on horseback, who were ordered to accompany them to the bor ders of Chile, were attacked and defeated by 100 
|CHILE. 
401 
archers ofCopiapo, commanded by Coteo, an officer of the ulinen of that province. Of the whole band none escaped with life but the two officers, Monroy and Miranda, who were brought covered with wounds before the ulmen. 
12. The compassionate ulmena. Whilst that prince, who had resolved to put them to death, as enemies of the country, was deliberating on the mode, the ulmena, or princess, his wife, moved with compassion for their situation, interceded with her husband for their lives ; and having obtained her request, unbound them with her own hands, ten derly dressed their wounds, and treated them like brothers. When they were fully recovered, she desired them to teach her son the art of riding, as several of the horses had been taken alive in the defeat. The two Spaniards readily consented to her request, hoping to avail themselves of this op portunity to recover their liberty. But the means they took to effect this, were marked with an act of ingratitude to their benefactress, of so much the deeprrdye, as, from their not being strictly guard ed, such an expedient was unnecessary. As the young prince was one day riding between them, escorted by his archers, and preceded by an ofiicer armed with a lance, Monroy suddenly attacked him with a poniard which he carried about him, and brought him to the ground with two or three mortal wounds ; Miranda at the same time wrest ing the lance from the officer, they forced their way through their guards, who were thrown into confusion by such an unexpected event. As they were well-mounted, they easily escaped pursuit, and taking their way through the deserts of Peru, arrived at Cuzco, the residence at that time of Vascade Castro, who had succeededed to the go vernment upon the death of Pizarro, cruelly as sassinated by the partizans of Almagro. 
13. Recruits from Peru under Monroy. On being informed of the critical situation of Chile, Castro immediately dispatched a considerable number of recruits by land, under Jhe command of Monroy, who had the good fortune to con ceal his march from the Copiapins, and at the same time gave directions to Junn Bautista Pastene, a noble Genoese, to proceed thither by sea with a still greater number. V aldivia, on receiv ing these two reinforcements, which arrived nearly at the same time, began to carry his great designs into execution. As he had been solicitous from the first to have a complete knowledge of the sea-coast, he ordered Pastene to explore it, and note the situa tion of the most important parts and places, as far as the straits of Magellan. On his return from this expedition, he sent him back to Peru for new 
|TOL. I. 
recruits, as since the affair of Copiapo, the natives became daily more bold and enterprising. 
14. Stratagem of the Quitlotanes. Among others the Quillotanes had, a little time before, massacred all the soldiers employed in the mines. To this end they made use of the following strata gem : One of tiie neighbouring Indians brought to the commander, Gonzalo llios, a pot full of gold, telling him that he had found a great quan tity of it in a certain district of the country ; upon this information, all were impatient to proceed thither to participate in the imagined treasure. As they arrived tumultuously at the place de scribed, they easily became victims to an ambus cade which had been formed for them, not one of them escaping except the imprudent commander and a Negro, who saved themselves by the supe rior excellence of their horses. The frigate, which was then finished, was also destroyed, being burned together with the arsenal. 
15. Serena founded.- Valdivia, on receiving advice of this disaster, hastened thither with his troops, and having revenged as far as in his power the death of his soldiers, built a fort to protect the miners. Being afterwards reinforced with 300 men from Peru, under the command of Francis Villagran and Christopher Escobar, he became sensible of the necessity of establishing a settJeinent in the n. part of the kingdom, that might serve as a place of arms, and a protection for the convoys that should come that way. For this pur pose he made choice of a beautiful plain at the mouth of the river Coquimbo, which forms a good harbour, where, in J564, he founded a city calk d by him Serena, in honour of the place of his birth ; it is not, however, known at present by this ap pellation, except in geographical treatises, the country name having prevailed, as is the case with all the other European settlements in Chile. 
16. Promaucian allies, In the ensuing year he began to think of extending his conquests, and for that purpose proceeded into the country of the Promaucians. Contemporary writers have not made mention of any battle that was fought upon this occasion ; but it is not to be supposed that this valiant people, who had with so much glory repulsed the armies of the Inca and of Almagro, would have allowed him, without oppo sition, to violate their territory. It is, however, highly probable that Valdivia, in the frequent in cursions which he made upon their frontiers, had discovered the art to persuade them to unite with him against the other Chilians by seducing pro mises. In fact, the Spanish armies have ever since that period been strengthened by Promauciaq 
402 
|CHILE. 
auxiliaries, from whence has sprung that rooted antipathy which the Araucanians preserve against the residue of that nation. In the course of the year 1546, Valdivia, having passed the Maule, proceeded in his career of victory to the river Itata ; but being defeated there, lie relinquished his plan-; of proceeding farther, and returned to St. Jago. 
17. Valdivia sets sail for Perir, and returns with men and supplies. Being disappointed in his succours from Peru, he, in 1547, \vas on the eve of his departure for that country, when Pastenes arrived, but without any men, and bringing news of the civil war which had broken out between the conquerors of the empire of the Incas. Neverthe less, persuaded that he might reap an advantage from these revolutions, he set sail with Pastene for Peru, taking with him a great quantity of gold ; on his arrival he served, in quality of quarter-master-gencral, in the famous battle that decided the fate of Gonzalo Pizarro. Gasca, the president, who under the royal standard had gained the victory, pleased with the service rendered him upon this occasion by .Valdivia, confirmed him in his office of governor, and furnishing him with an abun dance of military stores, sent him back to Chile with two ships filled with those seditious adven turers, of whom he was glad of an opportunity to be disembarrassed. The Copinpins, eager to re venge the murder of their prince, killed about the same time 40 Spaniards, who had been detached from several squadrons, and were proceeding from Peru to Chile ; and the Coquirnbanes, instigated bv their persuasion, massacred all the inhabitants of the colony lately founded in their territory, razing the city to its foundation. Francis Aguirre was immediately ordered there, and had several encounters with them with various success. In 1.549 he rebuilt the city in a more advantageous situation ; its inhabitants claim him as their founder, and the most distinguished of them boast them selves as his descendants. After a contest of nine years, and almost incredible fatigues, Valdivia, conceiving himself well established in that part of Chile which was under the dominion of the Peru vians, distributed the land among his soldiers, assigning to each, under the title of commandery, a considerable portion, with the inhabitants liv ing thereon. By this means, having quieted the restless ambition of his companions, he set out anew on his march for the s. provinces, with a respectable army of Spanish and Promaucian troops. 
18. Conception founded. After a journey of 120 niiios, he arrived, without encountering many 
obstacles, at the bay of Penco, which had been already explored by Pastene, where, on the 5th of October 1550, he founded a third city, called Concepcion. The situation of this place was very advantageous for commerce from the excellence of its harbour, but, from the lowness of the ground, exposed in earthquakes to inundations of the sea. Accordingly we find it destroyed in this manner by an earthquake that occurred on the 8th of July 1730, and the 24th of May 1751; for this reason, the inhabitants established themselves, on the 24th of November 1764, in the valley of Mocha, three leagues s. of Penco, between the rivers Andalien and Biobio, where they founded New Concepcion. The harbour is situated in the middle of the bay called Talgacuano, a little more than two leagues zo. of Mocha ; a fort is now all the building that is left at Penco. But to return to our history, the adjacent tribes perceiving the intention of the Spaniards to occupy this important post, gave in formation of it to their neighbours and friends the Araucanians, who foreseeing that it would not be long before the storm would burst upon their own country, resolved to succour their distressed allies, in order to secure themselves. But before we pro ceed to relate the events of this war, it may be more advisable to give some account of the cha racter and manners of that warlike people, who have hitherto, with incredible valour, opposed the overwhelming torrent of Spanish conquest, and from henceforward will furnish all the materials of our history. 
|CHAP. III. 
Of the character and manners of the Arauca nians. 
1. Local situation. The Araucanians inhabit that delightful country situate between the rivers Biobio and Valdivia, and between the Andes and the sea, extending from 36 44 to 39 50 of s. latitude. They derive their appellation of Arau canians from the province of Arauco, which, though the smallest in their territory, has, like Holland, given its name to the whole nation, either from its having been the first to unite with the neighbouring provinces, or from having at some remote period reduced them under its do minion. This people, ever enthusiastically at tached to their independence, pride themselves in being called auca, which signifies frank or free ; and those Spaniards who had left the army in the Netherlands to serve in Chile, gave to this country the name of Araucanian Flanders, or the Invincible State ; and some of them have even had the mag nanimity to celebrate in epic poetry the exploits 
|CHILE. 
403 
of a people, who, to preserve their independence, have shed such torrents of Spanish blood. 
2. Character. The Araucanians, although they do not exceed the ordinary height of the human species, are in general muscular, robust, well proportioned, and of a martial appearance. It is very unusual to find among them any person who is crooked or deformed, not from their pursuing, as some have supposed, the cruel custom of the ancient Spartans, of suffocating such unfortunate children, but because they leave to nature the care of forming thorn, without obstructing her opera tions by the improper application of bandages and stays. Their complexion, with the exception of the Boroanes, who are fair and ruddy, is of a reddish brown, but yet clearer than that of the other Americans ; they have round faces, small animated eyes full of expression, a nose rather flat, a handsome mouth, even and white teeth, muscu lar and well shaped leg?, and small flat feet ; like the Tartars, they have scarce any beard, and the smallest hair is never to be discerned on their faces, from the care they take to pluck out the little that appears ; they esteem it very impolite to have a beard, calling the Europeans, by way of reproach, the long beards. The same attention is paid to removing the hair from their bodies, where its growth is more abundant ; that of their heads is thick and black, but rather coarse ; they permit it to grow to a great length, and wind it in tresses around their heads ; of this they are as proud and careful as they are averse to beards, nor could a greater affront be offered them than to cut it off. Their women are delicately formed, and many of them, especially among the Boroanes, are very handsome. Possessed of great strength of consti tution, and unencumbered with the cares that disturb civilized society, they are not subject, ex cept at a very advanced period of life, to the in firmities attendant upon old age ; they rarely be gin to be grey before they are 60 or 70, and are not bald or wrinkled until 80 ; they are generally longer lived than the Spaniards, arid many are to be met with whose age exceeds 100 ; and to the latest period of their lives, they retain their sight, teeth, and memory unimpaired. Their moral qualities are proportionate to their personal en dowments; they are intrepid, animated, ardent, patient in enduring fatigue, ever ready to sacri fice their lives in the service of their country, en thusiastic lovers of liberty, which they consider as an essential constituent of their existence, jea lous of their honour, courteous, hospitable, faith ful to their engagements, grateful for services ren dered them, and generous and humane towards 
the vanquished. But these noble qualities are obscured by the vices inseparable from the half savage state of life which they lead, unrefined by literature or cultivation; these are drunkenness, debauchery, presumption, and a haughty con tempt for all other nations. Were the civil man ners and innocent improvements of Europe intro duced among them, they would soon become a people deserving of universal esteem; but under the present system, this happy change appears impossible to be effected. 
3. Dress. All those nations, whom either the nature of the climate or a sense of decency has induced to clothe themselves, have made use at first of loose garments, as being the most easily made. But the Araucanians, from their great attachment to war, which they consider as the only true source of glory, have adopted the short garment, as best suited to martial conflicts ; this dress is made of wool, as was that of the Greeks and Romans, and consists of a shirt, a vest, a pair of short close breeches, and a cloak in form of a scapulary, with an opening in the middle for the head, made full and long so as to cover the hands and descend to the knees ; this cloak is called poncho, and is much more commodious than our mantles, as it leaves the arms at liberty, and may be thrown over the shoulder at pleasure ; it is also a better protection from the wind and the rain, and more convenient for riding on horseback, for which reason it is commonly worn, not only by the Spaniards in Chile, but by those of Peru and Pa raguay. The shirt, vest, and breeches are always of a greenish blue, or turquois, which is the fa vourite colour of the nation, as red is that of the Tartars. The poncho is also, among persons ot inferior condition, of a greenish blue; but those of the higher classes wear it of different colours, either white, red, or blue, with stripes a span broad, on which are wrought, with much skill, figures of flowers and animals in various colours, and the bor der is ornamented with a handsome fringe : some of iliese ponchos are of so fine and elegant a tex ture as to be sold for 150 dollars. The Arauca nians make use of neither turbans nor hats, but wear upon their heads a bandage of embroidered wool, in the form of the ancient diadem ; this, whenever they salute, they raise a little as a mark of courtesy, and on going to war ornament it with a number of beautiful plumes ; they also wear around the body a long woollen girdle or sash handsomely wrought. Persons of rank wear wool len boots of various colours, and leather sandals, called chefle, but the common people always &lt;ro barefooted. The women are clad with much 
404 
|CHILE 
modesty and simplicity ; their dress is entirely of wool, and, agreeable to the natural taste, of a greenish blue colour ; it consists of a tunic, a gir dle, and a short cloak, called ichella, which is fastened before with a silver buckle. The tunic, called chiamaf, is long, and descends to the feet ; it is without sleeves, and is fastened upon the shoul der by silver broches or buckles ; this dres-, sanctioned by custom, is never varied ; but to gratify their love of finery, they adorn themselves with all those trinkets which caprice or vanity sug gests. They divide their hair into several tresses, which float in graceful negligence over their shoul ders, and decorate their heads with a species of false emerald, called glianca, held by them in high estimation ; their necklaces and bracelets are of glass, and their ear-rings, which are square, of silver ; they have rings upon each finger, the greater part of which are of silver. It is calculated that tnore than 100,000 marks of this metal are employed in these female ornaments, since they arc worn even by the poorest class. 
4. Dwellings. We have already given some account of the dwellings of the ancient Chilians : the Araucanians, tenacious, as are all nations not corrupted by luxury, of the customs of their country, have made no change in their mode of building. But as they are almost all polygamists, the size of their houses is proportioned to the num ber of women they can maintain ; the interior of these houses is very simple ; the luxury of conve nience, splendour, and show, is altogether un known in them, and necessity alone is consulted in the selection of their furniture. They never form towns, but live in scattered villages or ham lets on the banks of rivers, or in plains that are easily irrigated. Their local attachments are strong, each family preferring to live upon the land inherited from its ancestors, which they cul tivate sufficiently for their subsistence. The genius of this haughty people, in which the savage still predominates, will not permit them to live in walled cities, which they consider as a mark of servitude. 
5. Division of the Araucanian state. Although in their settlements the Araucanians are wanting in regularity, that is by no means the case in the political division of their state, which is regulated with much nicety and intelligence. They have divided it from n. to 5. into four uUial-mapus, or parallel tetrarchates, that are nearly equal, to which they give the names of JLauquen-mapu
 the maritime country ; JLelbun-mapu
 the plain coun try ; Inapire-mapU) the country at the foot of the Andes ; and Pire-mapu., or that of the Andes. 
Each uthal-niapu is divided into five aillaregues or provinces ; and each aillaregue, into nine regues or counties. The maritime country comprehends the provinces of Arauco, Tucapel, lllicura, Boroa, and Nagtolten ; the country of the plain in cludes those of Encol, Puren, Reposura, Maquegua, and Mariquina ; that at the foot of the Andes contains Mar ven, Colhue, Chacaico, Quecheregua, and Guanagua ; and in that of the Andes is included all the valleys of the cordilleras, situate within the limits already mentioned, which are inhabited by the Puelches. These moun taineers, who were formerly a distinct nation, in alliance with the Araucanians, are now united under their government, and have the same ma gistrates. Iii the second and third articles of the regulations of Lonquilmo, made in the year 1784, the limits of each uthal-mapu are expressly defined, and its districts marked out. It declares to be appertaining to that of the cordilleras, the Huilliches of Changolo, those of Gayolto and Rucachoroy, to the s. ; the Puelches and Indian pampas to the n. from Malalque and the frontiers of Mendoza to the Mamil-mapu in the pampas of Buenos Ayres ; the whole forming a corporate body with the Puelches and Pehuenches ofMauIe, Chilian, and Antuco ; so that at present, in case of an in fraction of the treaty, it may easily be known what uthal-mapu is to make satisfaction. This divi sion of Araucania, which discovers a certain de gree of refinement in its political administration, is of a date anterior to the arrival of the Spaniards, and serves as a basis for the civil government of the Araucanians, which is aristocratic, as that of many other barbarous nations has been. This species of republic consists of three orders of no bility, each subordinate to the other; the toquis, the apo-idmencs, and the ulmenes
 all of whom have their respective vassals. The toquis, who may be styled tetrarchs, are four in number, and preside over the uthal-mapus. The appellation of toqui is derived from the verb toquin
 which sig nifies to judge or command ; they are independent of each other, but confederated for the public welfare. The apo-ulmenes or arch-ulmenes go vern the provinces under their respective toquis. The ulmenes, who are the prefects of the regues or counties, are dependent upon the apo-ulmenes ; this dependence, however, is confined almost en tirely to military affairs. Although the ulmenes are the lowest in the scale of the Araucanian aris tocracy, the superior ranks, generally speaking, are comprehended under the same title, which is equivalent to that of cacique. The discriminative badge of the toqui is a species of battle-axe, made 
|CHILE. 
405 
of porphyry or marble. The apo-ulmcnes and the ulmeries carry staves with silver heads, but the first, by way of distinction, have a ring of the same metal around the middle of their staves. All these dignities are hereditary in the male line, and proceed in the order of primogeniture. Thus have the dukes, the counts, and marquises of the mili tary aristocracy of the north been established, from time immemorial, under different names, in a corner of South America. With its resemblance to the feudal system, this government contains also almost all its defects. The toqui possesses but the shadow of sovereign authority. The triple power that constitutes it is vested in the great body of the nobility, who decide every important question, in the manner of the ancient Germans or modern Poles, in a general diet, which is called butacoyog or aucacoijogi the great council, or council of the Araucanians. This assembly is usually held in some large plain, where they combine the pleasures of the table with their public deliberations. Their code of laws, which is traditionary, is denominated admapu, that is to say, the customs of the country. In reality, these laws are nothing more than pri mordial usages or tacit conventions, that have been established among them, as was originally the case with almost all the laws of other nations; they have consequently all the defects peculiar to such systems. 
6. Its political form. The clearest and most explicit of their political and fundamental laws are those that regulate the limits of each authority, the order of succession in toquiates and in the ulmenates, the confederation of the four tetrarchates, the choice of the power of the comman ders in chief in time of war, and the right of con voking the general diets, which is the privilege of the toquis ; all these laws have for their object the preservation of liberty, and the established form of government. According to them, two or more states cannot be held under the rule of the same chief. Whenever the male branch of the reigning family becomes extinct, the vassals re cover their natural right of electing their own chief from that family which is most pleasing to them. But before he is installed, he must be pre sented to the toqui of their uthal-mapu, who gives notice of his election, in order that the new chief may be acknowledged and respected by all in that quality. The subjects are not, as under the feudal government, liable to a levy
 or to any kind of personal service, except in time of war. Neither are they obliged to pay any contributions to their chiefs, who must subsist themselves by means of their own property. They respect them, 
however, as their superiors, or rather as the first among their equals ; they also attend to their deci sions, and escort them whenever they go out of the state. These chiefs, elated with their-authority, would gladly extend its limits, and govern as ab solute masters; but the people, who cannot endure despotism, oppose their pretensions, and compel them to keep within the bounds prescribed by their customs. 
7. Civil institutions. The civil laws of a so ciety whose manners are simple, and interests but little complicated, cannot be very numerous. The Araucanians have but a few; these, however, would be sufficient for their state of life, if they were more respected and less arbitrary. Their system of criminal jurisprudence, in a particular manner, is very imperfect. The offences that are deemed deserving of capital punishment are treach ery, intentional homicide, adultery, the robbery of any valuable article, and witchcraft. Never theless, those found guilty of homicide can screen themselves from punishment by a composition with, the relations of the murdered. Husbands and fa thers are not subject to any punishment for killing their wives or children, as they are declared by their laws to be the natural masters of their lives. Those accused of sorcery, a crime chiefly known in countries involved in ignorance, are first tor tured by fire, in order to make them discover their accomplices, and then stabbed with daggers. Other crimes, of less importance, are punished by retaliation, which is much in use among them, un der the name of thaidonco. Justice is administered in a tumultuous arid irregular manner, and with out any of those preliminary formalities that are observed among civilized nations. The criminal who is convicted of a capital offence is imme diately put to death, according to the military custom, without being suffered to rot in prison ; a mode of confinement unknown to the Araucanians. It has, however, lately been introduced into Tucapel, the seat of the government of Lauquenmapu, by Cathicnra, the then toqui of that dis trict; but the success of this experiment, which was at first very ill received by his subjects, is sup posed generally to have failed. The ulmenes are the lawful judges of their vassals, and for this rea son their authority is less precarious. The un conquerable pride of this people prevents them from adopting the wise measures of public justice ; they merely possess some general and vague ideas upon the principles of political union, whence the executive power being without force, distribu tive justice is ill administered, or entirely aban doned to the caprice of individuals, The injured} 
|CHILE. 
family often assumes the right of pursuing the ag gressor or his relations, and of punishing them. F. rom this abuse are derived the denominations and distinctions, so much used in their jurisprudence, of gengiierui, genguman, genla, c. denoting the principal connections of the aggressor, of the in jured, or the deceased, who are supposed to he authorised, by the laws of nature, to support by force the rights of their relatives. A system of judicial proceedings so irregular, and apparently so incompatible with the existence of any kind of civil society $ becomes the constant source of dis orders entirely hostile to the primary object of all good government, and public and private security. When those who are at enmity have a consider able number of adherents, they mutually make incursions upon each other s possessions, where they destroy or burn all that they cannot carry oft . These private quarrels, called malocas, resemble much the feuds of the ancient Germans, and are very dreadful when the ulmenes are concerned, in which case they become real civil wars. But it must be acknowledged, that they are generally unaccompanied with the effusion of blood, and are confined to pillage alone. This people, not withstanding their propensity to violence, rarely employ arms in their private quarrels, but decide them with the fist or with the club. 
8. Military system. The military government of the Araucanians is not only more rational and better systematized than the civil, but in some re spects appears to be. superior to the genius of an uncultivated nation. Whenever the grand coun cil determines to go to war, they proceed imme diately to the election of a commander in chief, to which the toquis have the first claim, as being the hereditary generals or stadtholders of the re public. If neither of them is deemed qualified lor the command, dismissing all regard for rank, they entrust it to the most deserving of the ulinenes, or even the officers of the common class, as the talents necessary for this important station are what alone are required. In consequence, Vilumillii) a man of low origin, commanded the Araucauian army, with much honour, in the war of 1722 ; and Curignanca, the younger son of the ulmen of the province of Encol, in that which terminated in 1773. On accepting his appoint ment, the new general assumes the title of toqui, and thestone hatchet, in token of supreme command; at which time the native toquis lay aside theirs, it not being lawful for them to carry them during the government of this dictator. They likewise, sacrificing private ambition to the public good, take the oaths of obedience and fealty to him, to 
gether with the other ulmenes. Even the people, who in peace shew themselves repugnant to ail sub ordination, are then prompt to obey, and sub missive to the will of their military sovereign. He cannot, however, put any one to death without the consent of the principal officers of his army ; but as these are of his own appointment, his orders may be considered as absolute. From the arrival of the Spaniards in the country to the present time, it isobservable, that all the toquis who have been ap pointed intimeofwarwerenatives of the provinces of Arauco, o( Tucapel, of Encol, or of Puren. Whe ther this partiality be owing to some superstitious no tion, or rather to some ancient law or agreement, we are unable to determine ; it appears, however, to be repugnant to the principles of sound policy, as it is very rare for the component parts of a state to maintain themselves long in any sort of union when they do riot all participate equally in the advan tages of the government. But it is a peculiarity worthy of admiration, that this discrimination has hitherto produced no division among them. One of the first measures of the national council, af ter having decided upon war, is to dispatch cer tain messengers or expresses, called guer-quenis, to the confederate tribes, and even to those Indians who live among the Spaniards, to inform the first of the steps that have been taken, and to request the others to make a common cause with their countrymen. The credentials of these envoys are some small arrows tied together with a red string, the symbol of blood. But if hostilities are actually commenced, the finger, or (as Alcedo will have it) the hand of a slain enemy is joined to the arrows. This embassy, called pulchitum, to run the arrow, is performed with such secrecy and expedition in the Spanish settlements that the messengers arc rarely discovered. The toqui directs what num ber of soldiers are to be furnished by each uthalmapu ; the tetrarchs, in their turn, regulate the contingencies of the apo-ulmencs, and these last apportion them among their respective ulmenes. Every Araucanian is born a soldier. All are ready to proffer their services for war, so that there is no difficulty in raising an army, wbtich usually consists of live or six thousand men, be sides the corps de reserve, which are kept in readi ness for particular occasions, or to replace those killed in battle. The commander in chief ap points his vice-toqui, or lieutenant-general, and the other officers of his staff, who in their turn nominate their subaltern officers : by this method harmony and subordination are maintained be tween the respective commanders. The vicc-toqui is almost always selected from among the 
|CHILE. 
407 
Puelches, in order to satisfy that valiant tribe, who amount to the fourth part of the population of the state. Nor have the Araucanians ever had cause to repent of this selection. During the last war, one of these mountaineers, Lcviantu, lieutenantgeneral of Curignancu, harassed the Spaniards greatly, and gave their troops constant employ ment. The army is at present composed of infan try and of horse. It originally consisted entirely of the former: but in their first battles with the Spaniards, perceiving the great advantages which their enemies derived fjom their cavalry, they soon began to discipline themselves in the same manner. Their first care was to procure a good breed of horses, which in a short time became so numerous, that in the year 1568, seventeen years after their first opposing the Spanish arms, they were able to furnish several squadrons ; and in the year 1585, the cavalry was first regularly organized by the Toqui Cadeguala. The infantry, which they call namtintiilinco, is divided into regiments and companies : each regiment consists of one thou sand men, and contains ten companies of one hun dred. The cavalry is divided in like manner, but the number of horse is not always the same. They have all their particular standards, but each bears a star, which is the national device. The soldiers are not clothed in uniform, according to the European custom, but all wear beneath their usual dress cuirasses of leather, hardened by a pe culiar mode of dressing ; their shields and helmets are also made of the same material. 
9. Their army and mode of making war. The cavalry is armed with swords and lances; the in fantry with pikes or clubs pointed with iron. They formerly employed bows and slings, in the use of which they were very dexterous ; but since the arrival of the Spaniards, they have almost en tirely relinquished them ; experience having taught them to avoid the destructive effect of their mus ketry, by immediately closing in, and fighting hand to hand with the enemy. The art of mak ing gunpowder is as yet unknown to this warlike people. Either they regard it but little, or, what is more probable, those Spaniards with whom they have sometimes traded would not, if they were themselves acquainted with it, communicate to them the composition. It is, however, believed that they made use at first of the greatest exertions to obtain the knowledge of this secret, so important in the present system of warfare. The discovery of powder is well ascertained to have been owing more to accident than to the efforts of human in genuity, although some pretend that it was known 
in China long before the period that it was discocovered in Europe. The inhabitants of the coun try relate the following anecdote respecting gunpowder, which, however fabulous and absurd it may appear, is generally credited. The Arau canians, on first seeing Negroes with the Spaniards, imagined that they prepared from them the pow der which they used. Soon after, having taken one of those unfortunate men, they first covered him with stripes from head to foot, and afterwards burned him to a coal, in order, by reducing it to powder, to obtain the so much wished-for secret ; but were soon convinced of the fallacy of their chemical principles. In their various encounters with the Spaniards, they occasionally took from them powder and muskets, which, in the subse quent battles, they employed with as much skill as if they had been for a long time accustomed to them ; but as soon as the powder was expended, they were forced to resume their former arms. The Dutch, when they took the city of Valdivia, attempted to form an alliance with them, and pro mised to supply them with powder and cannon ; but as they distrusted all Europeans, they would not listen to their proposal. Before setting out on his expedition, the general assigns three days for consultation, in order to consider anew the plans of the campaign, and to adopt t he best expedients. Upon this occasion every one has the liberty of offering his opinion, if he deems it conducive to the public welfare. In the mean time the general consults in secret with the officers of his staff upon the plans which he has formed, and the means of remedying sinister events. After this the army commences its march to tiie sound of drums, be ing always preceded by several advanced parties, in order to prevent a surprise. The infantry, as well as cavalry, proceed on horseback ; but on coming to action, they immediately dismount, and form themselves into their respective companies. Each soldier is obliged to bring from home not only his arms, but his supply of provisions, ac cording to the custom of the Romans. As all are liable to military service, so no one in particular is obliged to contribute to the support of the army. The provision consists in a small sack of parched meal lor each, which, diluted with water, fur nishes sufficient food for them until they are enabled to live at free quarters upon the enemy. The Araucanian troops are extremely vigilant; they adopt at night the most prudent measures, by en camping in secure and advantageous positions. On these occasions centinels are placed upon all sides ; and in presence of the enemy they re-1 
408 
|CHILE. 
fdouble their precautions, and strengthen the posts they occupy with strong entrenchments. Every soldier during night is obliged, in order to prove his vigilance, to keep up a fire before his tent : the great number of these fires serves to deceive the ene -ny, and have at a distance a very singular appearance. They are, besides, well acquainted with the art of constructing military works, and of protecting themselves with deep ditches, which they guard with branches of thorn, and strew cal trops in the environs to repress the incursions of the enemy s horse. In short, there are few mili tary stratagems that they do not employ at a pro per time and place. The celebrated Spanish poet Ercilla, who fought against them under Don Gar cia, expresses his admiration at meeting with troops so well disciplined, and possessing such perfec tion in tactics, which, to use his expressions, the most celebrated nations in the world have not been able to attain without great trouble, and after a long course of years. When an action becomes necessary, they separate the cavalry into two wings, and place the infantry in the centre, di vided into several battalions, the files being com posed alternately of pikemen and soldiers armed with clubs, in such a manner, that between every two pikes a club is always to be found. The vicetocjui has the command of the right wing, and that of the left is committed to an experienced officer. The toqui is present every where, as occasion may require, and exhorts his men with much eloquence to fight valiantly for their liberties. But of this there appears little need, as the soldiers manifest such ardour, that their officers have much more difficulty in restraining their impetuosity than in exciting them to action. Fully impressed with the opinion, that to die in battle is the greatest ho nour that a man can acquire in this life, on the signal for combat being given, they advance des perately, shouting in a terrific manner ; and not withstanding the slaughter made among them by the cannon, endeavour to penetrate the centre of the enemy. Though they know full well that the first ranks will be exposed to almost certain de struction, they eagerly contend with each other for these posts of honour, or to serve as leaders of tjie files. As soon as the first line is cut down, the second occupies its place, and then the third, until they finally succeed in breaking the front ranks of the enemy. In the midst of their fury they nevertheless preserve the strictest order, and perform all the evolutions directed by their officers. The most terrible of them are the club-bearers, who, like so many Hercules, destroy with their 
iron-pointed maces all whom they meet in their way. 
10. Division of the spoil. The spoils of war are divided among those who have had the good for tune to take them. But when the capture has l&gt;ecn general, they are distributed among the whole in equal parts, called re*, so that no preference is shown to any of the officers, nor even to the toqui. The prisoners, according to the custom of all bar barous nations, are made slaves, until they are ex changed or ransomed. According to the admapu, one of these unfortunate men must be sacrificed to the manes of the soldiers killed in the war. This cruel law, traces of which are to be found in the annals of almost all nations, is nevertheless very rarely put in practice, but one or two instances having occurred in the space of nearly 200 years. The Araucanians are sensible to the dictates of compassion, although the contrary is alleged by certain writers, who having assumed as an incon trovertible principle, that they never give quarter to their enemies, afterwards contradict themselves in mentioning the great number of priso
, rs who have either been exchanged or ransomed after the war. 
11. Sacrifice after the war. The sacrifice above mentioned, called pruloneon
 or the dance of the head, is performer! in the following manner : The officers, surrounded by the soldiers, form a circle, in the centre of which, in the midst of four poniards, representing the four uthal-mapus, is placed the official axe of the toqui. The unfortunate pri soner, as a mark of ignominy, is then led in upon a horse deprived of his ears and tail, and placed near the axe, with his face turned towards his country. They afterwards give him a handful of small sticks and a sharp stake, with which they oblige him to dig a hole in the ground ; and in this they order him to cast the sticks one by one, repeating the names of the principal warriors of his country, while at the same time the surrounding soldiers load these abhorred names with the bitterest exe crations. He is then ordered to cover the hole, as if to bury therein the reputation and valour of their enemies, whom he has named. After this ceremony the toqui, or one of his bravest compa nions, to whom he relinquishes the honour of the execution, dashes out the brains of the prisoner with a club. The heart is immediately taken out by two attendants, and presented palpitating to the general, who sucks a little of the blood, and passes it to his officers, who repeat in succession the same ceremony ; in the mean time he fumigates with tobacco smoke from his pipe the four cardinal 
|CHILE. 
409 
"points of the circle. The soldiers strip the flesh from the bones, and make of them flutes : then, cutting off the head, carry it round upon a pike, amidst the acclamations of the multitude, while, stamping in measured pace, they thunder out their dreadful war-song, accompanied by the mournful sound of these horrid instruments. This barba rous festival is terminated by applying to the mangled body the head of a sheep, which is suc ceeded by a scene of riot and intoxication. Jfthe skull should not ne broken by the blows of the club, they make of it a cup, called rn/ilonco, which they use in their banquets in the manner of the an cient Scythians and Goths. 
12. Cotigfcts of peace. On the termination of a war, a congress is a**cmbHl, called by the Spa niards parlitmi-nlo, and tk*. Araucanians huwcacof/a&lt;&gt; . This is usually held in a delightful plain, between the rivers Biobio and Duqueco, on the confines of both territories, whither the Spanish president and the Araucanian toqui repair with the attendants airreed upon in the preliminary articles. The four uthal-mapus send at the same time four deputies, who are usually the tetrarchs themselves, and whose unanimous consent is requisite for the establishment and ratification of peace. In the congress which was held after the war of 1723, were present 130 ulmenes, with their attendants, who amounted to the number of 2000 men. The camps of the negociating parties were separated by an interval of two miles. The conference is com menced with many compliments on either side, and in token of future friendship, they bind the staves of the ulmenes with that of the Spanish pre sident together, and place them in the midst of the assembly : an Araucanian orator then presents a branch of cinnamon, which is with them the token of peace, and placing his left, hand upon the bundle of staves, makes, in the Chilian language, a perti nent harangue on the causes which produced the war, and the most eligible means of preserving har mony between the two nations. He then proceeds with much eloquence to point out the losses and miseries occasioned by war, and the advantages which nre derived irom peace, to which he exhorts the chiefs of either party in a pathetic peroration. An interpreter then explains the precise meaning of all that the Araucauian has said. The Spanish president replies in another speech adapted to the subject, which is interpreted in the same manner. The articles of the treaty are then agreed upon, and are ratified by a sacrifice of several chilineques
 or Chilian camels, which the Araucanians immolate for the happy continuance of the peace. After this the president dines at the same table with 
|VOL. I. 
the toqui and the principal ulmenes, to whom he makes the customary presents in the name of his sovereign. This parliament is renewed as often as a new president is sent from Spain to Chile, and cannot possibly be dispensed with, as in that case the Araucimians, imagining themselves despised, would without any other cause commence war. For this reason, there is always a considerable sum ready in the royal treasury for the expences neces sary on these occasions. On the arrival of a new president, an envoy, called the national commis sary, is dispatched in his name to the four uthalmapus, to invite the toquis and the other ulmenes to meet him at the place appointed, lor the purpose of becoming acquainted with each other, and to confirm the friendship contracted with his prede cessors. In this convention nearly the same cere monies are practised as are made use of on ratify ing a treaty of peace. The ulmenes collect upon this occasion in great numbers, not only for the purpose of becoming personally acquainted with the new governor, but to form an opinion, from his manners and countenance, of his pacific or warlike disposition. A great number of merchants are at tracted to the place where this meeting is held, and they form a kind of fair, which is mutually advantageous to both nations. 
13. System of religion. The religious system of the Araucanians is simple, and well adapted to their free manner of thinking and of living. They acknowledge a Supreme Being, the Author of all things, whom they call Pillan, a word derived from pttlli or pilli
 the soul, and signifies the Su preme Essence ; they also call h\mGucnu-pil/ftn 9 the Spirit of Heaven ; Butu-gen, the Great Being ; Thalcore, the Thunderer ; Vifoemvoe, the Creator of all ; Vilpepihoe, the Omnipotent ; Mollgelu, the Eternal ; Aonehi, the Infinite, &c. The univcrsal government of the Pillan is a prototype of the Araucanian polity. He is the great toqui of the invisible world, and as such, has his apo-nlrpcnes, and his ulmenes, to whom he entrusts the adminis tration of affairs of less importance. In the first class of these subaltern divinities is the Epunamun, or god of war : the Meulen, a benevolent deify, the friend of the human race; and the Guecubu, a malignant being, the author of ;xll evil, who ap pears to be the same as the Algue. From hence it appears, that the doctrine of two adverse prin ciples, called Manicheisra, is very extensive. The Guecubu is the Mavari of the Oronoques, and the Aherman of the Persians. He is, according to the general opinion of the Araucanians, the efficient cause of all the misfortunes that occur. If a horse tires, it is because the Guecubu has rode him. If 3 6 
410 
|CHILE. 
an earthquake happens, the Guecubu has given it a shock ; nor does any one die that is not suffo cated by the Guecubn. The ulmenes of their celestial hierarchy are the genii, who have the charge of all created things, and who, in concert with the benevolent Menlen. form a counterpoise to the enormous power of Guecubu. They arc of both sexes, male and female, who always continue pure and chaste, propagation being unknown to their system of the spiritual world. The males are called gen, that is, lords, unless this word should be the same as the ginn of the Arabians. The fe males are called amei-mdlg/ien, which signifies spiritual nymphs or fairies, and perform for men the offices of lares, or familiar spirits. There is not an Araucanian but imagines he has one of these in his service. Nien cai gni amchimalghen
 " 1 keep my nymph still," is a common expression when they succeed in an undertaking. The Araucanians carry still farther their ideas of the analogy between the celestial government and their own ; for as their ulmenes have not the right of imposing any species of service or contributions upon their subjects, still less, in their opinion, should those of celestial race require it of man, since they have no occasion for it. Governed by these singular opi nions, they pay to them no exterior worship. They bavc neither temples nor idols, nor are they accus tomed to oiler any sacrifices, except in cases of some severe calamity, or on concluding a peace ; at such times they sacrifice animals, and burn to bacco, which they think is the incense the most agreeable to their deities. Nevertheless they inTokc them and implore their aid upon urgent oc casions, addressing themselves principally to Pillan and to Meulen. To this little regard for religion, is owing the indifference which they have mani fested at the introduction of Christianity among them, which is tolerated in all the provinces of their &lt;lominion. The missionaries are there much respected, well treated, and have full fiberty of publicly preaching their tenets, but notwithstand ing there are but few of the natives who are con-verted. If the Araucanians discover little regard for their deities, they are, however, very supersti tions in many points of less importance. They firmly believe in divination, and pay the greatest attention to such favourable or unfavourable omens as the capricionsness of their imagination may sug gest. These idle observations are particularly di rected to dreams, to the singing and flight of birds, which are esteemed by the whole of them the truest interpreters ot the will of the gods. The fearless Araucanian, who with incredible valour confronts death in battle, trembles at the sight of an owl. 
Their puerile weakness in this respect would ap pear incompatible with the strength of their intel lect, if the history of the human mind did not fur nish us with continual examples of similar contra dictions. They consult upon all occasions their diviners, or pretenders to a knowledge of futu rity, who are sometimes Ctilled 
Hgua or gugol, among whom are some who pass for genpugttn, genpiiu, &c. which signifies masters of the hea vens, of epidemic diseases, and of worms or in sects : and, like the llamas of Tibet, boast of being able to produce rain, of having the power to cure all disorders, and to prevent the ravages of the worms which destroy the corn. They are in great dread of the calcus, or pretended sorcerers, who, they imagine, keep concealed by day in caverns with their disciples, called ivitncfies, rnan-animals, and who at night transform themselves into noc turnal birds, make incursions in the air, and shoot invisible arrows at their enemies. Their super stitious credulity is particularly obvious in the se rious stories which they relate of apparitions, phan toms, and hobgoblins; respecting which they have innumerable tales. But, in truth, is there a nation on earth so far removed from credulity in that par ticular, as to claim a right of laughing at the Arau canians ? They have, nevertheless, some among them who are philosophers enough to despise such credulity as an absurdity, and to laugh at the folly of their countrymen. They are all, however, agreed in the belief of the immortality of the soul. This consolatory truth is deeply rooted, and in a manner innate with them. They hold that man is composed of two substances essentially different : the corruptible body, which they call anca, and the soul, am or pulli, which they say is ancanolu, incorporeal, and nmgealu, eternal, or existing for ever. This distinction is so fully established among them, that they frequently make use of the word anca metaphorically, to denote a part, the half, or the subject of any thing. As respects the state of the soul after its separation from the body, they are not however agreed. All concur in say ing, with the other American tribes, that after death they go towards the w. beyond the sea, to a certain place called Gulcheman ; that is, the dwelling of the men beyond the mountains. But some believe that this country is divided into two parts, one pleasant, and filled with every thing de lightful, the abode of the good ; and the other de solate, and in want of every thing, the habitation of the wicked. Others are of opinion that all in discriminately enjoy there eternal pleasures, pre tending that the deeds of this life have no influence upon a future state. 
|CHILE. 
411 
14. Funeral ceremonies. Notwithstanding they know the difference between the body and the soul, their ideas of the spirituality of the latter do not seem to be very distinct, as appears from the cere monies practised at their funerals. As soon as one of their nation dies, his friends and relations seat themselves upon the ground around the bojy, and weep fora long time; (hey afterwards expose it, clothed in the best dress of the deceased, upon a high bier, called pilluay
 where it remains during the night, which they pass near it in weeping, or in eating and drinking with those who come to console them ; this meeting is called curicahuin, the black entertainment, as that colour is among them, as well as the Europeans, the symbol of mourning. The following day, though sometimes not until the second or third after the decease of the person, they carry the corpse in procession to the eltun
 or burying place of the family, which is usually situated in a wood or on a hill ; two young men on horseback, riding full speed, pre cede the procession. The bier is carried by the principal relations, and is surrounded by women, who bewail the deceased in the manner of the hired mourners among the Romans ; while another woman, who walks behind, strews ashes in the road, to prevent the soul from returning to its late abode. On arriving at the place of burial, the corpse is laid upon the surface of the ground, and surrounded, if a man, with his arms, if a woman, with female implements, and with a great quan tity of provisions, and with vessels filled with chica, and with wine, which according to their opinions are necessary to subsist them during their passage to another world ; they sometimes even kill a horse, and inter it in the same ground. After these ceremonies, they take leave with many tears of the deceased, wishing him a prosperous journey, and cover the corpse with earth and stones placed in a pyramidal form, upon which they pour a great quantity of chica. The similarity between these funeral rites and those practised by the ancients must be obvious to those acquainted with the cus toms of the latter. Immediately after the relations have quitted the deceased, an old woman, called Tenipulcague, comes, as the Araucanians believe, in the shape of a whale, to transport him to the Elysian fields ; but before his arrival there, he is obliged to pay a toll, for passing a very narrow strait, to another malicious old woman who guards it, and who, on failure, deprives the passenger of an eye. This fable resembles much that of the ferryman Charon, not that there is any probability that the one was copied from the other ; as the human mind, when placed in similar situations, 
will give birth to the same ideas. The soul, whrn separated from the body, exercises in another life the same functions it performed in this, with no other d inference except that they are unaccom panied with fatigue or satiety; husbands have there the same wives as they had on earth, but the latter have no children, as that happy country cannot be inhabited by any except the spirits of the dead ; and every thing there is spiritual. Ac cording to their theory, the soul, notwithstanding its new condition of life, never loses its original attachments ; and when the spirits of their country men return, as they frequently do, they fighf furiously with those of their enemies whenever they meet with them in the air ; and these com bats are the origin of tempests, thunder, and lightning. Not a storm happens upon the An des or the ocean which they do not ascribe to a battle between the souls of their fellow-country men and those of the Spaniards ; they say that the roaring of the wind is the trampling of their horses ; the noise of the thunder that of their drums, and the flashes of lightning the fire of their artillery. If the storm takes its course towards the Spanish territory, they affirm that their spirits have put to flight those of the Spaniards, and exclaim triumphantly, Incwimen, inavimen, puen, lagitvi men! " Pursue them, friends, pursue them, kill them!" If the contrary happens, they are greatly afflicted, and call out in consternation, Yavulumen, puen y namitntumcn! " Courage, friends, be firm !" Thus do they believe that the dead, al though mere spirits, are possessed, like the sha. dows which thronged about /Eneas in his descent into the infernal regions, of the same passions, and a love of the same pursuits, by which they were actuated when living. 
" QUCB gratia curnmm Armorumque fuit vivis, quce citra nitentes Pascere equos, eadem sequilur tellure repostos" 
Their ideas respecting the origin of creation are so crude and ridiculous, that to relate them would serve for little else than to shew the weakness of human reason when left to itself. They have among them the tradition of a great deluge, in which only a few persons were saved, who took refuge upon a high mountain, called Thcgt/ieg t the thundering, or the sparkling, which had three points, and possessed the property of moving upon the water. From hence it is to be inferred, that this deluge was in consequence of some volcanic eruption, accompanied by terrible earthquakes, or should appear to be a corrupted tradition of Noah s flood. Whenever a violent earthquake occurs, these people fly for safety to these moun-J 
OP TH# 
invgt 1 ? 
412 
|CHILE. 
tains, which they fancy to be of a similar appear ance, and which, of course, as they suppose, must possess the same property of floating upon the \vater, assigning as a reason, that they are fearful after an earthquake that the sea will again return and deluge the world. On these occasions, each one takes a good supply of provisions, and wooden plates to protect their heads from being scorched, provided the Tkegtktig, when raised by the waters, should be elevated to the sun. Whenever they are told that plates made of earth would b&lt;
 much more suitable for this purpose than those of wood, which are liable to be burned, their usual reply is, that their ancestors did so before them. 
15. Division of time. -Time is divided by the Araucauians, as with us, into years, seasons, mouths, days, and hours, but in a very different method. Their year is solar, and begins on the 22d of December, or immediately after the southern solstice ; for this reason they call this solstice thaumatkipantu, the head and tail of the year, and denominate June Udanth ipanlit, the divider of the year, from its dividing it into two equal parts. These two essential points they are able to ascertain with sufficient exactness by means of the solstitial shadows. The year is called tipantu, the departure, or course of the son, as that lumi nary departs, or appears to depart, from the tropic, in order to make its annual revolution : it is divid ed into 12 months of 30 days each, as was that of the Egyptians and Persians. In order to com plete the tropical year, they add five intercalary days, but in what manner they are introduced we are not able to determine ; it is, however, probable they are placed in the last month, which in that case will have 35 days. These months are called generally cw/ew, or moons, and must have originally been regulated wholly by the phases of the moon. The proper names of them, as near as they can be rendered by ours, are the following, which are derived from the qualities, or the most remarkable things which are produced in each month : Avun-cujen, January, The month of fruit. Cogi-cujen, February, The month of har 
vest. 
Glor-cujen, March, The month of maize. 
Itimu-citjcn, April, The first month of the 
rimu. Inarimu-cujen, May, The second month of the 
rimu. 
Thor-cujeri) June, The first month of foam. 
Inanthor-cujfn, J uly , The second month of foam. Ifuin-cujen, August, The unpleasant month. 
September, The treacherous month. 
Hucul-cujcn, October, The first month of new 
winds. Inanhueul-cujen
 November, The second month of 
new winds. flueviru-cujen, December, The month of new 
fruit. 
The seasons, as in Europe, consist of three months ; the spring is called pdtghen, the sum mer itcan, the autumn gualug, and the winter puchani. To render the distribution of the year uniform, thoy also divide the natural day into J2 parts, which they call gKagtttttu, assigning six to the day, and six to the night, in the manner of the Chinese, the Japanese, the Otaheitans, and seve ral other nations. Thus each gliagcwtu, or Araticanian hour, is equal to two of ours. Those of the day they determine by the height of the sun, and those of the night by the position of the stars ; but as they make use of no instrument for this purpose, it follows that this division, which must necessarily be unequal, according to the different seasons of the year, will be much more so from the imperfect manner of regulating it. They begin to number their hours, as is general in Europe, from mid night, and give to each a particular name. In civil transactions they calculate indifferently, either by days, nights, or mornings; so that three days, three nights, or three mornings, signify the same thing. 
16. Astronomical ideas. Yo the stars in general they give the name of huaglen, and divide them into several constellations, which they call pal or ritha. These constellations usually receive their particular appellations from the number of remarkable stars which compose them. Thus the pleiades are called cajupal, the constellation of six ; and the antarctic cross, melerithQ, the con stellation of four ; as the first has six stars which are very apparent, and the last four. The milky way is called rupuepeu, the fabulous road, from a story which, like other nations, they relate of it, and which is considered as fabulous by the astro nomers of the country. They are well acquainted with the planets, which they call gnu, a word derived from the verb gaun, to wash ; from whence it may be inferred, that they have respecting these bodies the same opinion as the Romans, that at their setting they submerge themselves in the sea. Nor are there wanting Fontenelles among them, who believe that many of those globes are so many other earths, inhabited in the same manner as ours ; for this reason they call the sky Gucnumapu, the country of heaven ; and the moon, Cuyen-mapU) the country of the moon. They agree likewise with the Aristotelians, in maintain-J 
|CHILE. 
413 
ing that the comets, called by them proceed from terrestrial exhalations, inflamed in the upper regions of the air ; but they are not considered as the precursors of evil and disaster, as they have been esteemed by almost all the nations of the earth. An eclipse of the sun is called by them layanlU) and that of the moon lacujen
 that is, the death of the sun or of the moon. But these expressions are merely metaphorical, as are the correspondent ones in Latin, of defect us soli s ant luntE. Their opinions as to the causes of these phenomena are not known, but it has been observ ed that they evince no greater alarm upon these oc casions than at the most common operations of nature. Their language contains many words solely applicable to astronomical subjects, such as t/ioren, the late rising of the stars, and others similar, which prove that their knowledge in this respect is much greater than what is generally supposed, 
17. Measures. Their long measures arc the palm, nela; the span, duihe ; the foot, namun ; the pace, thccan ; the ell, newt ; and the league, tupu, which answers to the marine league, or the parasang of the Persians. Their greater distances are computed by mornings, corresponding to the day s journeys of Europe. Their liquid and dry measures are less numerous: the guampar, a quart; the cw, a pint ; and the menc.u, a mea sure of a less quantity, serve for the first. The dry measures are the chiaigue
 which contains about six pints ; and the gliepu
 which is double that quantity. With regard to the speculative sciences they have very little information. Their geometrical notions are, as might be expected from an uncultivated people, very rude and confined. They have not even proper words to denote the principal figures, as the point, the line, the angle, the triangle, the square, the circle, the sphere, the cube, the cone, &c. ; their language, however, is so flexible and copious, that it would be easy to form from it a vocabulary of technical words to facilitate the acquisition of the sciences to the Araucanians. 
IS. Rhetoric. - Notwithstanding their general ignorance, they cultivate successfully the sciences of rhetoric, poetry, and medicine, as far as these are attainable by practice and observation ; for they have no books among them, nor are there any of them who know how to read or write. Neither can they be induced to learn these arts, either from their aversion to every thing that is practised by the Europeans, or from their being urged by a savage spirit to despise whatever does not belong to their country. Oratory is particularly held in 
high estimation, and, as among the ancient Romans, is the high road to honour, and the management of public affairs. It is equally valued amongst the North American Indians. The eldest son of an ulmenwhois deficient in this talent, is for that sole reason excluded from the right of succession, and one of his younger brothers, or the nearest relation that he ha, who is an able speaker, substituted in his place. Their parents, therefore, accustom them from their childhood to speak in public, and carry them to their national assemblies, where the best orators of the country display their eloquence. From hence is derived the attention -which they generally pay to speak their language correctly, and to preserve it in its purity, taking great care to avoid the introduction of any foreign word; in which they are so parti cular, that whenever a foreigner settles among them, they oblige him to relinquish his name, and take another in the Chilian language. The mis sionaries themselves are obliged to conform to this singular regulation, if they would obtain the pub lic favour. These have much to endure from, their excessive fastidiousness, as even while they are preaching, the audience will interrupt them, and with importunate rudeness correct the mis takes in language or pronunciation which may es cape them. Many of them are well acquainted with the Spanish language, from their frequeMt communication with the neighbouring Spaniards. They, however, make but little use of it, none of them ever attempting to speak in Spanish in any of the assemblies or congresses that have been held between the two nations ; on which occasions they had much rather submit to the inconvenience of listening to some tiresome interpreter, than, by hearing another language, to suffer their native tongue to be degraded. The speeches of their orators resemble those of the Asiatics, or more properly those of all barbarous nations. The style is highly figurative, allegorical, elevated, and re plete with peculiar phrases and expressions, that are employed only in similar compositions ; from whence it is called coya
tucan y the style of parlia mentary harangues. Tiiey abound with parables and apologues, which sometimes furnish the whole substance of the discourse. Their orations, not withstanding, contain all the essential parts re quired by the rules of rhetoric ; which need not excite our surprise, since the same principle of nature which led the Greeks to reduce eloquence to an art, has taught the use of it to these people. They are deficient neither in a suitable exordium, a clear narrative, a well-founded argument, or a pathe tic peroration : they commonly divide their subject 
414 
|CHILE. 
into two or throe points, whin h they call th &gt;?/, and specify the number by saying-, epu thot/-gei tan.cn piai in, " \vhat I am going to say is divided into tuo points." They employ in their oratory se veral kinds of style, but the most esteemed is the rachidngurij a word equivalent to academic. 
19. J oetri/. " Their poets are called gempin, lords of speech. This expressive name is well ap plied to them, since, possessing that strong enthu siasm excited by passions undebilitated by the re straints and refinements of civil life, they follow no other rules in their compositions than the impulse of their imaginations. Of course, their poetry ge nerally contains strong and lively images, bold figures, frequent allusions and similitudes, novel and forcible expressions, and possesses the art of moving and interesting the heart by exciting its sensibility. Every thing in it is metaphorical and animated, and allegory is, if we may use the ex pression, its very soul or essence. The principal subject of the songs of the Araucanians is the ex ploits of their heroes. Their verses are composed mostly in stanzas of eight or eleven syllables, a measure which appears most agreeable to the hu man ear. They are blank, but occasionally a rhyme is introduced, according to the taste or caprice of the poet. 
20. Medical skill. The Araucanians have three kinds of physicians, the amphes
 the vileus, and the machis. The ampires, a word equivalent to empirics, are the best. They employ in their cures only simples, are skilful herbalists, arid have some very good ideas of the pulse, and the other diagnos tics. The rileus correspond to the regular phy sicians. Their principal theory is, that all conta gious disorders proceed from insects, an opinion held by many physicians in Europe. For this reason, they generally give to epidemics the name of cutampiru, that is to say, verniiculous disorders, or diseases of Avorrns. The tnachis are a supersti tious class, that are to be met with among all the savage nations of both continents. They maintain that all serious disorders proceed from witchcraft, and pretend to cure them by supernatural means, for which reason they are employed in desperate cases, when the exertions of the umpires or the cileus are ineffectual. Their mode of cure is de nominated muchi tun, and consists in the following idle ceremonies, which are always performed in the night. The room of the sick person is lighted with a great number of torches ; and in a corner of it, among several branches of laurel, is placed a large bough of cinnamon, to which is suspended the magical drum ; near it is a sheep ready for sacri fice. The machi directs the women who are pre 
sent to sing with a loud voice a doleful eong, ac companied with the sound of some little drums, which they beat at the same time. In the mean while he fumigates three times with tobacco smoke the branch of cinnamon, the sheep, the singers, and the sick person. After this ceremony he kills the sheep, takes out the heart, and after sucking the blood, fixes it upon the branch of cinnamon. He next approaches the patient, and by certain charms prelends to open his belly to discover the poison which has been given him by the pretended sor cerer. He then takes the magical drum, which he beats in concert to a song sung by himself and the women, who follow him round the room in proces sion ; when, all at once, he falls to the ground like a maniac, making frightful gesticulations and hor rible contortions of his body, sometimes wildly opening his eyes, then shutting them, appearing like one possessed of an evil spirit. During this farcical scene, the relations of the sick interrogate the machi upon the cause of the malady. To these questions the fanatical impostor replies in such a manner as he believes best calculated to promote the deception, either by naming, as the cause of the malady, some person of whom he wishes to be revenged, or expressing himself doubtfully as to the success of his incantations. In this manner these diabolical mountebanks become very fre quently the cause of horrible murders ; as the re lations of the sick, supposing the accusation true, put to death without pity those accused of these practices, and sometimes involve in their revenue the whole family, should they not be strong enough to resist their violence. But these malicious fomenters of discord are careful never to accuse the principal families. The machis
 though not in vested with the sacerdotal character, like the physi cians of most other savage nations, greatly resem ble in their impostures the shammiis of Kamschatka, the mobiles of Africa, and the piachis of Orenoque, whose tricks are accurately described by the Abbe (iili, in his History of the Orinokians. These physicians, notwithstanding the different systems they pursue, sometimes meet to satisfy the solici tude or the vanity of the relations of the sick ; but their consultations, which are called thauman
 have generally the same issue as those of the physi cians of Europe. They have besides these other kinds of professors of medicine. The first, who may be styled surgeons, are skilful in replacingdislocations, in repairing fractures, and in curing wounds and ulcers : thej are called gutting, possess real merit, and often perform wonderful cures. But this is by no means the case with the others, called cupove, from the verb cupon, to ana- 
|CHILE. 
415 
tomize : these, infatuated with machiism, dissect bodies in order to show the entrails, which they say are infected with magic poison. Nevertheless, by means or this practice, they acquire ideas, by no means contemptible, respecting the conformation of the human body, for the different parts of which they have appropriate names. Before the arrival of the Spaniards, the Araucanians made use of, bleeding, blistering, clysters, emetics, cathartics, and sudorifics, all which remedies have their pe culiar names in their language. They let blood with the sharp point of a flint fixed in a small stick. This instrument they prefer to a lancet, as they think it less liable to fail. Instead of a syringe they make use, like the inhabitants of Kamschatka, of a bladder, to which they apply a pipe. Their eme tics, cathartics, and sudorifics, are almost all ob tained from the vegetable kingdom. 
21. Commerce. Their internal and extcral com merce is very limited : not having yet introduced among them the use of money, every thing is con ducted by means of barter. This is regulated by a kind of conventional tariff, according to which all commercial articles are appraised, under the name ofcullen. Thus a horse or a bridle for/ins one pay ment ; an ox two, &c. Their external commerce is carried on with the Spaniards, with whom they exchange ponchos and animals for wine, or the merchandize of Europe, and their good faith in contracts of this kind 1ms always been highly ap plauded. u The Spaniard," says Raynai in his history, " who engages in this trade, applies directly to the heads of families. When he has obtained the necessary permission, he proceeds to all the houses, and distributes indiscriminately his merchandize to all those who present themselves. When he has completed his sale, he gives notice of his departure, and all the purchasers hasten to de liver to him, in the first, village he arrives at, the articles agreed upon ; and never has there been an instance of the least failure of punctuality." We cannot help extracting also the following from the Compendium of the Geographical, Natural, and Civil History of Chile, printed in Bologna, 1776. " The Spaniards who live in the province of Maule, and near the frontiers of Araucania, carry on a commerce with these people, which consists in supplying them with iron ware, bits for bridles, cutlery, grain, and wine. This trade is conducted altogether by the way of barter, as it is not pos sible to persuade the Araucanians to open the gold mines, nor to produce any of that metal. The re turns therefore are in ponchi, or Indian cloaks, of which they receive more than 40 5 000 an 
nually ; in horned cattle, horses, ostrich feathers, curiously wrought baskets, and other trifles of a similar kind. This commerce, although generally prohibited, is carried on in the Indian country, whither the traders go with their merchandize by bye-roads, and deposit it in the cabins of the na tives, to whom they readily trust whatever they wish to sell, certain of being punctually paid at the time agreed upon, which is always the case, these Indians observing the greatest faith in their con tracts." 
22. National pride. The Araucanians, proud of their valour and unbounded liberty, believe themselves the only people in the world deserving the name of men. From hence it is, that, besides the appellation of auca, or free, which they value so highly, they gire themselves metaphorically the names of che, or the nation ; of rechc, pure or undegenerated nation; and of huentn
 men, a word of similar signification with the vir of the Latins ; and as the latter is the root of the word virius, so from the former is derived huentugen, which signi fies the same thing. From this ridiculous pride proceeds the contempt with which they regard all other nations. To the Spaniards they gave, on their first knowledge of them, the nickname of cliiapi, vile soldiers ; from whence proceeded the denomination of chiapeton, by which they are known in South America. They afterwards called them huinca; this injurious appellation, which from time and custom has lost its odiousness, comes from the verb luiincim, which signifies to assassi nate. It is true that in their first battles the Spa niards grtve them too much reason for applying to them, these opprobrious epithets, which serve to the present time to denote one of that nation. Esteeming themselves fortunate in their barbarity, they call those Indians who live in the Spanish settlements culme-huinca, or wretched Spaniards. To the other Europeans, the English, French, and Italians, whom they readily distinguish from each other, they give the name of maruche, which is equivalent to the term nwro, used by the common people of Spain, to denote all strangers indiscrimi nately. They call each other pegni, that is, bro thers, and even apply the same name to those born in their country of foreign parents. 
23. Kindness towards each other. The benevo lence and kindness with which these people treat each other is really surprising. For the word friend, they have six or seven very expressive terms in their language ; among others, that of canay
 which corresponds to the alter ego of the Latins. Those who have the same name call each 
416 
C H I L E. 
other laca, and those who bear but a part of the name apellaca : these denominations incur an obli gation of mutual esteem and aid. Relations by consanguinity are called in general wonmague, and those of affinity quillan. Their table of genealogy is more intricate than that of the Europeans ; all the conceivable degrees of relationship -being indi cated therein by particular names. From the mu tual affection which subsists between them, pro ceeds their solicitude reciprocally to assist each other in their necessities. Not a beggar or an in digent person is to be found throughout the whole Araucanian territory; even the most infirm and most incapable of subsisting themselves are de cently clothed. This benevolence is not, however, confined only to their countrymen : they conduct themselves with the greatest hospitality towards all strangers of whatever nation, and a traveller may live in any part of their country without the least ex pence. 
24. Mode of salutation. Their usual expression whenever they meet is marimari ; and when they quit each other, ventempi or venteni. They are rather tiresome in their compliments, which are generally too long, as they take a pride upon such occasions, as well as every other, in making a dis play of their eloquence. The right hand is among them, as with the Europeans, the most honourable station, contrary to the practice of the Asiatics, uith whom the left enjoys that privilege. They are naturally fond of honourable distinction, and there is nothing they can endure with less jKitience than contempt or inattention. From hence, if a Spaniard speaks to any one of them wifij his hat on, he immediately says to him in an indignant tone, end/go tamic.urtcsia y " take oft your hat." By attention and courtesy any thing may be obtained from them, and the favours which they receive make an indelible impression upon their minds ; while, on the contrary, ill treatment exasperates them to such a degree, that they proceed to 1 ,he greatest excesses to revenge themselves. 
25. Proper names. The names of the Araucanians are composed of the proper name, which is generally cither .;n adjective or a numeral, and the family appellation or surname, which is always placed after the proper name, according to the Eu ropean custom, as Cari-femu, green bush ; Meiia/ttu, four suns. Nor is there scarcely a material object which does not furnish them with a discri minative name. From hence, we meet among them with the families of Rivers, Mountains, Stones, Lions, &c. These families, which are called Cvja or Elpa, are more or less respected ac 
cording to their rank, or the heroes they have given to their country. The origin of these sur names is unknown, but is certainly of a period much earlier than that of the Spanish conquests. 
26. Matrimony. By the admapu, polygamy is allowed among the Araucanians, whence they marry as many wives as they can furnish with a dower, or more properly purchase, as to obtain them they must give to their fathers a certain amount of pro perty, as has been, and still is, the practice in most countries of both continents. But in their mar riages they scrupulously avoid the more immediate degrees of relationship. Celibacy is considered as ignominious. Old bachelors are called by way of contempt vitchiaprn
 and old maids cttdepra, that is, old, idle, good for nothing. Their marriage ceremonies have little formality, or, to speak more accurately, consist in nothing more than in carry ing off the bride by pretended violence; which is considered by them, as by the Negroes of Africa, an essential prereqniste to the nuptials. The hus band, in concert with the father, conceals himself with some friends near the place where they know the bride is to pass. As soon as she arrives, she is seized and put on horseback behind the bride groom, notwithstanding her pretended resistance and her shrieks, which arc far from being serious. In this manner she is conducted with much noise to the house of her husband, where her relations are assembled, and where they receive the presents agreed upon, after having partaken of the nuptial entertainment. Of course, the expcnces of an Araucanian wedding are by no means inconsider able ; from whence it happens that the rich alone can maintain any considerable number of wives. The poor content themselves with one, or two at most. Nor does there arise any inconvenience from the scarcity of women, as the number of fe males is much greater than that of males, which is, however doubtful, said to be the case in those countries where polygamy is permitted. The first wife, who is called wiendomo, is always respected as the real and legitimate one by all the others, who are called inandomo, or secondary wives. She has the management of the domestic concerns, and regulates the interior of the house. The husband has much to do to maintain harmony among so many women, who are not a little inclined to jea lousy; and each night, at supper, makes known his choice of her who is to have the honour of sharing his bed, by directing her to prepare it. The others sleep in the same room, and no one is permitted to approach them. Strangers, on their arrival, are lodged in a cabin entirely separate from 
|CHILE. 
417 
fthis seraglio. The wives have the greatest respect for their husbands, and generally give him the title ofbuta, or great. Besides female occupations, they are obliged to employ themselves in many which in civilized countries are considered as the pecu liar province of the men, according to the esta blished maxim of all barbarous nations, that the weaker sex are born to labour, and the stronger to make war and to command. Each of them is obliged to present to her husband daily a dish prepared by herself in her separate kitchen or fire-place ; for this reason the houses of the Araucanians have as many fires as there are women in habiting them; whence, in inquiring of any one how many wives he has, they make use of the fol lowing phrase, as being the most polite, muri onthalgcimi, " how many fires do you keep." Each wife is also obliged to furnish her husband yearly, besides his necessary clothing, with one of those cloaks already described, called ponchos, which form one of the principal branches of the Araucanian commerce. 
26. Domestic employments. The greatest at tention is paid by the women to the cleanliness of their houses, which they sweep, as well as their courts, several times in the course of a day ; and whenever they make use of any utensil they im mediately wash it ; their houses being so situated as to be always readily supplied with an abund ance of running water. The same attention to cleanliness is paid with regard to their persons : they comb their heads twice a day, and once a week wash them with a soap made from the bark of the quillai, which keeps the hair very clean, and which is also much used by the Spaniards, espe cially those who live in the country. There is never to be seen a spot of dirt on the clothes of an Araucanian woman. The men are likewise equally fond of cleanliness; they never fail to comb their heads every day, and are also accustomed fre quently to wash them. Bathing, as among the an cients, is in common use with those people, who think it necessary for the sake of preserving their health and of strengthening their bodies ; and in order to have it convenient, they are careful to place their houses on the banks of rivers. In warm wea ther they bathe themselves several times a day, and it is rare, even in winter, that they do not bathe themselves at least once a day : by means of this continued exercise they become excellent swim mers, and give wonderful proofs of dexterity in this art. They will swim for a great distance under water, and in this manner cross their largest rivers, which renders them some of the best divers in the world. The women are also fond of fre
|TOL. I. 
quent bathing, and for this purpose select the most obscure solitary places, at a great distance from the men. Even on the very day of the birth of a child, they take the infant to the river and wash it, and also themselves, and within a short time return to their customary avocations, without experiencing any inconveTiience ; so true it is, that the human constitution is not naturally delicate, but is rendered so by our customs and living. Child-birth is with them attended with little pain ; which must be at tributed to the strength of their constitutions ; for a similar reason, the women of the lower classes in Europe, according to the statement of Doctor Bland, in the Philosophical Transactions, experi ence a more easy delivery than the ladies, and are less subject to sickness in consequence. Whether directed by an impulse of simple nature, or actu ated by their solicitude to furnish strong men to the state, they rear their children in a very dif ferent manner from what is practised in civilized countries. When they have washed them in run ning water, as has been already observed, they neither swathe nor bandage them, but place them in a hanging cradle, called chigua
 lined with soft skins, where they merely cover them with a cloth, and swing them from time to time by means of a cord attached to the cradle, which leaves them more at liberty to attend to their domestic con cerns. When their children begin to walk, which is very soon, they neither put them into stays, nor any other confined dress, but keep them loosely clad, and let them go anywhere, and eat what they please. Formed thus, as it were, by themselves, they become well shaped and robust, and less sub ject to those infirmities that are the consequence of a tender and a delicate education. Indeed, the maladies which prevail among the Araucanians are but few, and are for the most part reducible to in flammatory fevers, originating cither from intem perance in drinking, or to the excessive exercise which they sometimes use. If the physical edu cation of the Araucanian children is in a certain degree laudable, the moral education which they receive will not certainly meet with our entire ap probation. It is, nevertheless, conformable to the ideas of that high-minded people respecting the innate liberty of man, and such as may be ex pected from an uncivilized nation. Their fathers are satisfied in insructing them in the use of arms, and the management of horses, and in teaching them to speak their native language with elegance. In other respects they leave them to do whatever they please, and praise them whenever they see them insolent, saying, that in this manner they learn to become men. It is very unusual for them 
418 
|CHILE. 
to chastise or correct them, as they hold it as an established truth, that chastisement only renders men base and cowardly. 
27. Food. The usual diet of the Araucanians is very simple ; their principal subsistence is several kinds of grain and pulse, which they prepare in a variety of different modes. They are particularly fond of maize, or Indian corn, and potatoes; of the, last they have cultivated more than 30 different kiiuls from time immemorial, esteeming them a very healthy nutriment. Although they have large and small animals and birds in plenty, yet they eat but little flesh, and that is simply boiled or roasted. They have the same abstemiousness in the use of pork, from which they know very well how to pre pare black puddings arid sausages. Their seas and rivers abound with excellent fish, but they do not much esteem this kind of aliment. Instead of bread, which they are not accustomed to eat, ex cept at their entertainments, they make use of small cakes of maize or roasted potatoes with a little salt. Their usual drinks consist of various kinds of beer, and of cider made from Indian corn, from apples, and other fruits of the country. They nevertheless are extremely fond of wine, which they purchase from the Spaniards, but hitherto, either for political reasons, or more probably from carelessness, they have paid no attention to the raising of vines, which, as has been proved by ex periment, produce very well in all their provinces. The master of the house eats at the same table with the rest of his family. The plates are earthen, of their own manufactory, and the spoons and cups are made of horn or wood. The ulmenes have in general wrought plate for the service of their tables, but they only make use of it when they en tertain some stranger of rank : upon such occa sions they ostentatiously display it, being naturally fond of show, and of being considered rich. Their seasonings are made of Guinea-pepper, of madi
 and salt. In summer they are fond of dining in the shade of trees, which for this purpose are al ways planted around their houses. They do not use the flint for the purpose of obtaining fire, but employ, like the Kamschatdales, two pieces of dry wood, one of which they place upon another, and turn it in their hands until it takes fire, which is very soon. Besides dinner, supper, and breakfast, they have every day without fail their luncheon, which consists of a little flour of parched corn, steeped in hot water in the morning, and in cold in the evening. But they often deviate from this simple mode of living when at their public enter tainments, which they give each other on occasion of funerals, marriages, or any other important 
event. At such times no expencc is spared, and they are profuse of every thing that can promote festivity. In one of these banquets, at which it is common for 300 persons to be present, more meat, grain, and liquor is consumed, than would be suf ficient to support a whole family for two years. It is usual for one of these feasts to continue two or three days : they are called cahu iti
 or circles, from the company seating themselves in a circle around a large branch of cinnamon. Such enter tainments are made gratuitously, and any person whatever is permitted to partake of them without the least expence. But this is not the case with the mingaroS) or those dinners which they are ac customed to make on occasion of cultivating their land, threshing their grain, building a house, or any other work which requires the combined aid of several. At such times all those who wish to partake in the feast, must labour until the work is completed. But as these people have abundant leisure, the labourers collect in such numbers, that in a very few hours the work is finished, and the rest of the day is devoted to feasting and drinking. The Spaniards who live in the country have also adopted a similar plan, availing themselves of the same kind of industry to complete their rural la bours. Fermented liquors, in the opinion of the Araucanians, form the principal requisites of an entertainment ; for whenever they are not in plenty, whatever may be the quantity of provisions, they manifest great dissatisfaction, exclaiming golinge/ai, " it is a wretched feast, there is no drink." These bacchanalian revels succeed each other al most without interruption throughout the year, as every man of property is ambitious of the honour of giving them; so that it may be said, that the Araucanians, when not engaged in war, pass the greater part of their lives in revelry and amuse ment. 
28. Music and other diversions. Music, danc ing, and play, form their customary diversions. As to the first, it scarcely deserves the name ; not so much from the imperfection of the instruments, which are the same they make use of in war, but from their manner of singing, which has some thing in it harsh and disagreeable to the ear, until one has been accustomed to it for a long time. They have several kinds of dances, which are lively and pleasing, and possess considerable va riety. The women are rarely permitted to dance with the men, but form their companies apart, and dance to the sound of the same instruments. If what the celebrated Leibnitz asserts is true, that men have never dicovered greater talents than in the invention of the different kinds of games, the 
|CHILE. 
419 
Araucanians may justly claim the merit of not be ing- in this respect inferior to other nations. Their games are very numerous, and for the most part very ingenious ; they are divided into the seden tary and gymnastic. It is a curious fact, and worthy of notice, thnt among the first is the game of chess, which they call comicon, and which has been known to them from time immemorial. The game of quechu
 which they esteem highly, has a great affinity to that of back-gammon ; but instead of dice they make use of triangular pieces of bone marked with points, which they throw with a little hoop or circle, supported by two pegs, as was probably the fritilius of the Romans. The youth exercise themselves frequently in wrestling and running. They are fond of playing at ball, which is made from a species of rush, and called pilma. All their gymnsatic games, many of which re semble those of the European youth, require strength, are well suited to their genius, and for the most part serve as an image of war. What has been said of the Araucanians does not altoge ther apply to the Puelches, or inhabitants of the fourth uthal-mapu, situated in the Andes. These, although they conform to the general custom of the nation, always discover a great degree of rude ness and savageness of manners. Their name sig nifies eastern-men. They are of lofty stature, and are fond of hunting, which induces them fre quently to change their habitations, and extend their settlements, not only to the eastern skirts of the Andes, but even to the borders of the lake Naguelguapi, and to the extensive plains of Patago nia, on the shores of the Atlantic. The Araucaii ians hold these mountaineers in high estimation for the important services which they occasionally render them, and for the fidelity which they have ever observed in their alliance with them. 
|CHAP. IV. 
The wars of the Araucanians with the Spajiiards
 
and concomitant events. SECT. I. Comprising a period of nine years, 
from 1550 to 1559. 
1. The Toqui Aillavila. It was in the year 1550, that the Araucanians, having resolved to send succours to the inhabitants of Penco, who were at that time invaded by the Spaniards, gave orders to the Toqui Aillavila to march immediately to their assistance at the head of 4000 men : he accordingly passed the great river Biobio, which separates the Araucanian territory from that of the Pencones, and boldly offered battle to these new enemies, who had advanced to meet him to the shores of the Andalien. After the first discharge 
of musketry, which the Araucanians sustained without being terrified or disconcerted, thus early manifesting how little they would regard it when rendered familiar by habit, Aillavila, with a rapid movement, fell at once upon the front and flanks of the Spanish army. The Spaniards were con sequently thrown into much disorder, and their , general was exposed to imminent danger, having had his horse killed under him, when Aillavila, hurried forwards by a rash courage, received a mortal wound. The Araucanians having lost their general, with many of their most valiant officers, then retired, but in good order, leaving the field to the Spaniards, who had no disposition to pur sue them. Vaklivia, who had been in many bat tles in Europe as well as America, declared that he had never been exposed to such imminent ha zard of his life as in this engagement. 
2. The Toqui Lincoyan. In the following year the Araucanians were again led on to the attack by a new toqui, Lincoyan ; when such was the ter ror inspired by their approach, that the Spaniards, after confessing themselves, and partaking of the sacrament, thought proper to take shelter under the cannon of their fortifications. The event of this battle was the cause of the foundation of the chapel dedicated to St. James, which chapel was built by the Spanish soldiers from sentiments of gratitude, and from their supposition that the re treat of Lincoyan, who was unsuccessful in his first attack, was caused by the supernatural agency of the apostle St. James himself, whom they declared to have seen riding upon a white horse with a flaming sword, and striking terror into his enemies. The governor, after the elapse of nearly a year, resolved to attack them with a reinforcement he had just received from Peru : he accordingly, unobstructed by the tardy operations of Lincoyan, bent his way towards the -shorts of the Cauten, which divides the Araucanian terri tory into two nearly equal parts. 
3. Imperial founded. At the confluence of tin s river and that of Damns, he founded the city of Imperial, so called in honour of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, or, as it is said by some, in con sequence of finding there eagles with two heads cut in wood, and placed as ornaments upon the tops of houses. This city was situated in a beau tiful spot, abounding with every convenience of life; and during the short period of its existence became the most flourishing of any in Chile. Its position on the shore of a large river, of sufficient depth for vessels to lie close to the walls, rendered it a highly advantageous situation for commerce, and would enable it to obtain immediate succour! 
3 u 2 
420 
|CHILE. 
in case of a siege. Modern geographers speak of it as a city not only existing in the present time, but as very stongly fortified, and the seat of a bishopric, when it has been buried in ruins for more than 200 years. 
4. Villarii a founded. About the same time lie dispatched Alderete, one of his officers, with 60 men, to form a settlement on the shore of the great lake Lauquen, to which lie gave the name of V r illarica, from the great quantity of gold that he found in its environs. In the mean time, having received fresh reinforcements, he commenced his inarch towards the s. still kept in view by Lincoyan, whom timid caution constantly pre vented from offering himself to his enemy. 
5. The Clinches. In this manner the Spanish commander traversed, with little loss, the whole of Araucania from n. to s. ; but at his arrival at the Calacalla, which separates the Araucanians from the Clinches, he found the latter in arms determined to oppose his passage. While he was deliberating what measures to pursue, a woman of the country, called Recloma, had the address to persuade the Clinch esc general to fa vour the strangers ; and without foreseeing the consequences, he permitted them to pass unmo lested. The Cunches form one of the most valiant nations of Chile: they inhabit that tract of country which lies upon the sea, between the river Calacalla, at present called Valdivia, and the Archi pelago of Chiloe. They are the allies of the Araucanians, and mortal enemies to the Spaniards, and arc divided into several tribes, which, like those in the other parts of Chile, are governed by their respective ulmenes. 
6. Valdivia founded. The Spanish com mander having passed the river with his troops, founded upon the southern shore the sixth city, called Valdivia, being the first of the American conquerors who sought in this man ner to perpetuate his family name. This settlement, of which at present only the fortress re mains, in a few years attained a considerable de gree of celebrity, not only from the superior fine ness of the gold dug in its mines, which obtained it the privilege of a mint, but from the excellence of its harbour, one of the most secure and plea sant in the S. sea. The river is very broad, and so deep, that ships of the line may anchor within a few feet of the shore ; it also forms seve ral other harbours in the vicinity. 
"7. -Fortresses of Puren, Tucapel, and Arauco built. Valdivia, satisfied with the conquests, or rather incursions, that he had made, turned back, and in repassing the provinces of Puren, Tucapel, 
and Arauco, built in each of them, in 1553, a for tress, to secure the possession of the others ; as he well knew that from these provinces alone he had to apprehend any attempt that might prove fatal to his settlements. Ercilla says, that in this expe dition the Spaniards had to sustain many battles with the natives ; which is highly probable, as the continuance of Lincoyan in command can on no other principle be accounted for. Without re flecting- upon the imprudence of occupying so large an extent of country with so small a force, Valdivia had the farther rashness, on his return to Santiago, to dispatch Francis de Aguirre, with 200 men, to conquer the provinces of Cujo and Tucuman, situated to the e. of the Andes. 
8. City of the Frontiers founded. The Spanish general, indefatigable in his plans of conquest, re turned also himself to Araucania; and in the province of Encol founded the seventh and last city, in a country feitile in vines, and gave it the name of the City of the Frontiers. This name, from events which could not possibly have been in the calculation of Valdivia, has become strictly applicable to its present state, as its ruins are, in reality, situated upon the confines of the Spanish settlement in that part of Chile. It was a rich and commercial city, and its wines were trans ported to Buenos Ay res by a road over the cordilltras. 
9. Three principal military offices instituted at Concepcion. After having made suitable provi sions for this colony, Valdivia returned to his fa vourite city of Concepcion, where he instituted the three principal military offices ; that of quar ter- master-general, of serjeant-major, and of com missary ; a regulation which has, till within a few years, prevailed in the royal army of Chile. At present only two of these offices exist ; that of the quarter-master-general, who is also called the intendant, and resides in the city of Concepcion, and that of the serjeant-major. 
10. The Toqui Caupolican. The next toqui who distinguished himself in the Araucanian wars, and who succeeded Lincoyan in command, was Caupolican ; he evinced a spirit of much en terprise and cunning, and succeeded in driving the Spaniards from the forts of Arauco and Tuca
el, which were by his orders completely destroyed. 
n a succeeding battle we find this commander, from the loss of a number of his men, flying in confusion before the Spanish artillery, and suffer ing all the horror and disgrace attendant upon an apparent defeat, when, in a momentous crisis, a young Araucanian, called Lautaro, whom Valdi via in one of his incursions had taken prisoner,J 
|CHILE. 
I, and made his page, instigated by shame For his countrymen, quitted the victorious party, and by encouragement and entreaties prevailed upon the Araucariians to return to the conflict. Thus was changed the fate of the day : of the Spanish army only two Promaucians had the for tune to escape: and this may be considered an epoch in the history of Araucanian valour, not only from the event of the battle itself, but as be ing the dawn of that glory which ever after signa lized the armies of that nation under the happy auspices of the Araucanian Hannibal, the great and valiant Lautaro. 
11. Valdivia slain ; I
aittnro appointed lieute nant-general. After the death of Valdivia, who was taken prisoner in the battle, and dispatched by an old ulmen whilst pleading for his lite in an assembly of ulmenes, the young I.autaro was ap pointed lieutenant-general extraordinary to Catipolican, with the privilege of commanding in chief another army, which he intended to raise to protect the frontiers from the invasion of the Spa niards. In the mean time the Spanish inhabitants of the City of the Frontiers and of Puren, think ing themselves insecure within their walls, retired to Imperial. The same was the case of those of Viilarica, who abandoned their houses, and took refuge in Valdivia. Thus had the Araucaniaris only these two places to attack. Canpolican having determined to besiege them, committed to Lautaro the care of defending the ti. fron tier. 
12. The mountain Mariguenu. The young vicc-toqui fortified himself upon the lofty moun tain of Marigucnu, situated on the road which leads to the province of Arauco, supposing, as it happened, that the Spaniards, desirous of reveng ing the death of their general, would take that road in search of Caupolican. This mountain, which on several occasions has proved fatal to the Spaniards, lias on its summit a large plain inter spersed with shady trees. Its sides are full of clefts and precipices ; on the part towards the w. the sea beats with great violence, and the e. is secured by impenetrable thickets. A wind ing bye-path on the n. was the only road that led to the summit of the mountain. 
13. The G or em or I ilfagran. Villagran, who had succeeded Valdivia in the government, was not able to cope with the valour and militarj prowess of Lautaro. Without entering into particulars of a desperate battle which was fought between these two commanders, we shall content ourselves with observing, that the result was the immediate eva cuation of Conccpcion ; as Villagraiij thinking it 
impossible to defend that city, embarked precipi tately the old men, the women, and children, on board of two ships which were then fortunately in the harbour, with orders to the captains to con duct part of them to Imperial, and part to Val paraiso ; while with the rest of the inhabitants he proceeded by land to Santiago. 
11. Conccpcion destroyed. Lautaro, on enter ing the deserted city, found in it a very great booty, as its commerce and mines had rendered it very opulent ; and the citizens, more attentive to save their lives than their riches, had, on their de parture, taken scarcely any thing with them ex cept a few provisions. After having burned the houses, and razed the citadel to its foundation, the victor returned with his army to celebrate his triumph in Arauco. But although Lautaro was thus successful, Caupolican was obliged to raise the siege of Imperial and Valdivia ; these places having had strong reinforcements thrown into them by Villagran. 
1.5. The small-pox appears. It was at this aw ful period, when he, availing himself of the ab sence of his enemy, was ravaging the country in the vicinity of Imperial, and burning the houses and crops, that the Araucanians were visited by that baneful enemy of mankind, the small-pox, sup posed to have been communicated by some of the Spanish soldiers, who were either infected at the time, or who had but recently recovered from it. It made the greatest ravages ; and we hear that of the several districts of the country there was one Avhose population amounted to 12,000 per sons, of which number not more than 100 escaped with life. This pestilential disorder had, to be sure, already made its appearance a few years before in some of the n. provinces, but those of the s. had been for more than a cen tury exempt from its ravages, from the precautions employed by the inhabitants to prevent all com munication with the infected countries. Whilst Villagran was employ ing all his attention in main taining, as far as possible, the Spanish power, his attention was drawn off to the claims of Francis Aguirre, who, in Valdivia s instructions, had been named the second as governor : and who, on learning the death of that general, determined to possess himself of the government either by favour or force. 
16. Decision c,f the audienct of Lima respecting the governors. His pretensions must infallibly have produced a civil war between Villagran and himself, had they not both consented to submit their claims to the decision of the royal audience of Lima. This court, whose jurisdiction at that 
423 
|CHILE. 
time (1555) extended over the whole of S. America, did not think proper to commit the go vernment to either, but in their place directed that the corregidors of the city should have the com mand, each in his respective district, until further orders. 
17. Conception rebuilt , and destroyed by Lautar&. Upon a remonstrance of the inhabitants to the court of audience, Villagran was afterwards appointed to the command, but merely, however, w ith the title of corregidor, receiving orders at the same time to rebuild the city of Concepcion. No sooner was this order executed, than the young Lautaro rallied his army, and, exasperated against what he termed " obstinacy," passed the Biobio without delay, and attacked the Spaniards, who imprudently confiding in their valour, awaited him in the open plain. The first encounter de cided the fate of the battle. The Arancanians en tered the fort with those citizens who fled with precipitation, and killed a great number of them ; some indeed embarked in a ship which was in the port, and others fled into the woods. Thus Lau taro, having plundered and burned the city as before, returned laden with spoils to his wonted station. Continued victories had so heightened the confidence of this commander, that nothing appeared to him impossible, and he formed the determination of attacking the Spaniards in their very capital, of carrying his arms against Santiago itself. He accordingly passed with a chosen band of 600 followers through the country of the Promaucians, where his indignation did not fail to vent itself upon these people ; a people detested by him for having submitted to the Spanish yoke. The inhabitants of Santiago could not at first be lieve it possible that he should have had the bold ness to undertake a journey of 300 miles in order to attack them ; but being undeceived as to the fact, thought proper to make some preparations of defence. 
18. Lautaro arrives at Santiago. Lautaro had now encamped his army in a low meadow, on the shore of the Matiqnito ; a measure lie had been obliged to adopt from repeated loss he had sus tained in some skirmishes with young Villagran, who had taken the command on account of his fa ther being confined by sickness ; but the father bavin? recovered his health, and being strongly solicited by the citizens, who every moment ex pected to see the Araucanians at their gates, at length, in 1556, began his march with 196 Spa niards, and 1000 auxiliaries, in search of Lautaro; but too well remembering the defeat of Mariguenu, he resolved to attack him by surprise. With this 
intent he quitted the great road, secretly directed his march by the sea-shore, and under the guid ance of a spy, by a private path, came at day break upon the Araucanian encampment. 
19. Death of l.autaro. Lautaro, who at that moment had retired to rest, after having been upon guard, as was his custom during the night, leap ed from his lied at the first alarm of the sentinels, and ran to the entrenchments to observe the enemy ; at this moment a dart, hurled by one of the Indian auxiliaries, pierced his heart, and he fell lifeless in the arms of his companions. It would seetn that fortune, hitherto propitious, was desirous by so sudden a death to save him from the mortifica tion of finding himself, for the first time in his lite, defeated. It is, however, not improbable that his genius, so fertile in expedients, would have sug gested to him some plan to have baffled the at tempts of the assailants, if this fatal accident had not occurred. Encouraged by this unexpected success, Villagran attacked the fortifications on all sides, and forced an entrance, notwithstanding the obstinate resistance of the Araucanians, who, retiring to an angle of the works, determined ra ther to be cut to pieces than to surrender them selves to those who had slain their beloved general. In vain the Spanish commander repeatedly offered them quarter: none of them accepted it, excepting a few of the neighbouring Indians who happened to be in their camp. The Araucanians perished to a man, after having fought with such obstinacy, that a few of the last sought their death by throw ing themselves on the lances of their enemies. This victory, which was not obtained without great loss by the victors, was celebrated for three (lays in succession in Santiago, and in all the other Spanish settlements, with the utmost demonstra tions of joy. The Spaniards felicitated themselves on being at last freed from an enemy, wJio at the early age of 19 had already obtained so many victories over their nation, and who possessed ta lents capable of entirely destroying their establish ments in Chile, and even harassing them in Peru, as he had resolved upon, when he had restored the liberty of his native country. The Araucanians for a long time lamented the loss of their valiant countryman, to whom they owed all the success of their arms, arid on whose conduct and valour they entirely relied for the recovery of their liber ties. His name is still celebrated in their heroic songs, and his actions proposed as the most glo rious model for the imitation of their youth. 
20. C aupolican raises the siege of Imperial."" But above all, Caupolican felt this fatal loss; as he was a sincere lover of his country, far from 
|CHILE. 
423 
thinking he had freed himself from a rival, he be lieved he had lost his chief co-operator in the glo rious work of restoring his country. As soon as he received the mournful news, he quitted the siege of Imperial, which was reduced to the last extremity, and relumed with his army to the frontiers to protect them from the incursions of the enemy. 
21. The Governor Don Garcia Hitrlado de Jlfendoza. fhc next person this general had to encounter, proved more formidable than any of the former Spanish chiefs; it was Don Garcia Hurtado de Mendoza, who was appointed to the government by his father, the Marquis of Canete, viceroy of Peru. 
22. Caupolican taken prisoner and impaled. He took possession of the island of Quriquina, and during his stay there, which was almost the whole winter, lie did not fail to send embassies to the Araucanians, expressing the wish of coming to an amicable accommodation ; but they were not in clined to listen to any proposals, and on the 6th of August military operations again commenced, and the result of several battles which were fought on this occasion was, that the Araucanians were ge nerally defeated, and that they eventually lost their leader Caupolican, who being taken prisoner by the Spaniards was, by the command of Don Garcia, and with the entire disapprobation of the Spanish army, put to an ignominious death. 
23. Canete founded. But it should be remark ed, that the Spanish general having proceeded in his marches to the province of Tucapel, and hav ing come to the place where Valdivia had been defeated, built there, in contempt of his con querors, a city which he called Canete, from the titular appellation ov his family ; and that, con sidering the Araucanian war as already terminated, lie gave orders for the rebuilding of the city of Concept- ion. 
24. The Clinches, their curious embassy and stratagem. ---It was in 1558 that the above com mander first marched with a numerous body of troops against the Cunches, a people who had not yet been opposed to the Spanish arms. These, when they first heard of the arrival of the strangers, met to deliberate whether they should submit, or resist their victorious forces ; and an Araucanian exile, called Tunconobal, who was present at the assembly, and who was desired to give his opinion upon the measures proposed, replied in the fol lowing terms : " Be cautious how you adopt either of these measures ; as vassals you will be despised, and compelled to labour ; as enemies, you \vili be exterminated. If you wish to free your 
selves of these dangerous visitors, make them be lieve you are miserably poor ; hide your pro perty, particularly your gold ; they will not re main where they have no expectation of finding that sole object of their wishes ; send them such a present as will impress them with an idea of your poverty, and in the mean time retire to the woods." The Cunches approved the wise counsel of the Araucanian, and commissioned him, with nine natives of the country, to carry the present which he had recommended to the Spanish gene ral. Accordingly, clothing himself and compa nions in wretched rags, he appeared with every mark of fear before that officer, and after compli menting him, in rude terms, presented him a bas ket containing some roasted lizards and wild fruits. The Spaniards, who could not refrain from laugh ter at the appearance of the ambassadors and their presents, began to dissuade the governor from pur suing an expedition which, from all appearances, would prove unproductive. But although he was persuaded that these people were poor and wretch ed, yet, lest he should discover too great facility in relinquishing his plan, he exhorted his troops to prosecute the expedition he had undertaken, assuring them, that further on, according to the information he had received, they would find a country that abounded in all the metals. Having therefore inquired of the Cunches the best road to the s. Tunconobal directed him towards the w. which was the most rough and mountainous; and the same, being applied to for a guide, gave him one of his companions, whom he charged to con duct the army by the most desolate and difficult roads of the coast. The guide pursued so strictly the instruction of the Araucanian, that the Spa niards, who in their pursuit of conquest were ac customed to surmount with ease the severest fatigues, acknowledged that they had never before, in any of their marches, encountered difficulties comparable with these. 
25. Archipelago of Chifae discovered. Having at length overcome all obstacles, they came to the top of a high mountain, from whence they dis covered the great Archipelago of Anced, more commonly called Chiloe, whose channels were covered with a great number of boats navigated with sails and oars. From these islanders the Spa niards experienced every mark of politeness and humanity, and constantly regaled by them, they coasfcd the Archipelago to the bay of Reloncavi, when some went over to the neighbouring islands, where they found land well cultivated, and women employed in spinningwool mixed with feathers of sea birds, with which they made their clothes. 
424 
|CHILE. 
The celebrated poet Ercilla was one of the party, and solicitous of the reputation of having pro ceeded further s. than any other European, he crossed Ihe gulf, and upon the-opposite shore in scribed on toe bark of a tree" some verses contain ing his name, and the time of the discovery, the olst January 1559. 
26. City of Osorno founded. Don Garcia satisfied with having been the first to discover by land the Archipelago ofChiloe, returned, taking for his guide one of those islanders, who conduct ed him safely to Imperial through the country of the Huilliches, which is for the most part level, a d abounds in provisions. The inhabitants, who are similar in every respect to their western neigh bours the Clinches, made no opposition to his passage. He there fonnded, or, according to some writers, rebuilt the city of Osorno, which increas ed rapidly, not less from its manufactures of woollen and linen studs, than from the fine gold procured from its mines, which were afterwards destroyed by the Toqui Paillamacu. 
SI:CT. II. Comprising a period of 27 years, from 1559 to 1586. 
27. Coupolican //. The campaign of the following year was rendered still more memorable by the numerous battles thnt were fought between the two armies ; that of the Araucanians wns com manded by Caupolican, the eldest son of the gene ral of that name ; but though he possessed the celebrated talents of his father, he was not equally successful in defeating his enemy. But of all his contests, that of Quipeo was the most unfortunate ; for here he lost all his most valiant officers, and being pursued by a detachment of Spanish horse, he slew himself to avoid the melancholy fate of his father. 
28. The Gtiarpcs subjected.- T)on Garcia, con sidering this battle decisive in every point of view, and finding himself provided with a good number of veteran troops, sent a part of them, under the command of Pedro Castillo, to complete the con quest of Cujo, which had been commenced by Francis de Aguirre. That prudent officer sub jected the Guarpes, the ancient inhabitants of that province, to the Spanish government. 
29. St. Juan and Mendoza founded. -We found ed on the e. limits of the Andes two cities, one of which he called Jt. Junn, and the other Mendoza, from the family name of the governor. This ex tensive and fertile country remained for a consider able time under the government of Chile, but has since been transferred to the viceroyalty of Buenos Ayres, to which, from its natural situation, it ap 
pertains. Whilst in this manner Don Garcia took advantage of the apparent calm that prevailed in the country, he heard of the arrival at Buenos Ayres of the person appointed his successor by the court of Spain. Inconsequence of this informa tion, confiding the government for the present to Rodrigode Quiroga, he returned to Peru, where, as a reward for his services, he was promoted to the exalted station which his father had filled. 
SO. Villagran reinstated. The governor ap pointed in place of Don Garcia was his predeces sor, Francis Villagran, who having gone to Eu rope after he had been deprived of the government, procured his reinstatement therein from th
 court of Spain. On his arrival at Chile, supposing, from the information of Don Garcia and Quiroga, that nothing more was necessary to be done with the Araucanians, and that they were in no condi tion to give him trouble, Villagran turned his at tention to the re-acquisition of the province of Tucuman, which, after having been by him, in 1549, subjected to the government of Chile, had been since attached to the viceroyalty of Peru. 
31. The province of Tucuman restored, after" Kards retaken. Gregor i Castaneda, who had the charge of this enterprise, defeated the Peruvian commander, Juan Zurita, the author of the dis memberment, and restored the country to the obedience of the captains-general of Chile ; it was, however, retained under their government but a short time, as they were obliged by the court of Spain, before the close of the century, to cede it again to the government of Peru. But neither Don Garcia nor Quiroga, notwithstanding the long time they had fought in Chile, had formed a cor rect opinion of the temper of the people whom they pretended they had conquered. The invincible Araucanian cannot be made to submit to the bit terest reverses of fortune. The few ulmenes who had escaped from the late defeats, more than ever determined to continue the war, assembled, imme diately after the rout of Quipeo, in a wood, where they unanimously elected as toqui an officer of inferior rank, called Antigucnu, who had signa lized himself in the last battle. He, with a few soldiers, retired to the inaccessible marches of Lumaco, called by the Spaniards the Rochela, where he caused high scaffolds to be erected to secure his men from the extreme moisture of this gloomy retreat. The youth, who were from time to time enlisted, went thither to be instructed in the science of arms, and the Araucanians still consi dered themselves free, since they had a toqui. 
32. Canete destroyed. Antiguenu began now to make incursions iu the Spanish territory, in 
|CHILE. 
425 
{"order to practise his troops, and subsist them at the ex pence of the enemy ; and after defeating one of Villagran s sons, who, with a large force, came to give him b:\ttle, he marched against Ca nete ; but Villagran, convinced of the imposibility of defending i1, anticipated him by withdrawing all the inhabitants, part of whom retired to Impe rial, and part (o Coucepcion. The Araucanians, on their arrival, did not fail to destroy this city ; they set it on fire, and in a short time it was entirely consumed. 
33. Pedro Fillagran."-ln the mean time Villagran, more the victim of grief and mental anxiety than of his disorder, died, universally regretted by the colonists, who lost in him a wise, humane, and valiant commander, to whose prudent con duct they had been indebted for the preservation of their conquests. Before his death he ap pointed as his successor, by a special commis sion from the court, his eldest son Pedro, whose mental endowments were no way inferior to his father s. The death of the governor appeared to Antiguenu to present a favourable opportunity to undertake some important enterprise. Having formed his army, which consisted of 4000 men, into two divisions, he ordered one, under the com mand of his vice-toqui, to lay siege to Concepcion, in order to attract thither the attention of the Spaniards, while with the other he marched against the fort of Arauco. The siege was protracted to a considerable length ; the commanders therefore determined to settle the affair by single combat ; but after having fought, with the greatest obstinacy for the space of two hours, they were separated by their men. But what force had not been able to effect, was performed by famine. Several boats loaded with provisions had repeatedly attempted in vain to relieve the besieged : the vigilance of the besiegers opposed so insuperable an obstacle, that Bernal, the commander, saw himself at length compelled to abandon the place. The Araucanians permitted the garrison to retire without molestation, and contented themselves with burning the houses and demolishing the walls. The capture of Angol, after that of Canete and Arauco, appeared easy to Antiguenu, but the attempt cost him his life ; for after the most brilliant feats of valour and intrepidity, he was forced along with a crowd of soldiers who fled, and, falling from a high bank into a river, was drowned. 
34. The Toqui Paillataru Antiguenu had for successor in the toquiate Paillataru, the brother or cousin of the celebrated Lautaro. During the same time a change was made of the Spanish governor. Rodrigo de Quiroga, who had been appointed to 
|VOL. i. 
that office by the royal audience of Lima, began his administration by arresting his predecessor, and sending him prisoner to Peru. Having re ceived a reinforcement of 300 soldiers in 1665, he entered the Araucanian territory, rebuilt the fort of Arauco, and the city of Canete, con structed a new fortress at the celebrated post of Quipeo, and ravaged the neighbouring provinces. Towards the end of the following year he sent the Marshal Ruiz Gamboa with CO men to subject the inhabitants of the Archipelago of Chiloe ; that officer encountered no resistance, and founded in the principal island the city of Castro and the port of Chacao. 
35. Archipelago of Chiloe subjected ; description of the same) its 
inhabitants, &c. The Islands of the Archipelago amount to 80, and have to all ap pearance been produced by earthquakes, owing to the great number of volcanoes, with which that country formerly abounded. Every part of them exhibits the most unquestionable marks of fire. Several mountains in the great island of Chiloe, which has given its name to the Archipe lago, are composed of basaltic columns, which some authors strongly urge could have been pro duced only by the operation of fire. The native inhabitants, though descended from the continental Chilians, as their appearance, their manners, and their language all evince, are nevertheless of a very different character, being of a pacific, or rather a timid disposition. They made no opposition, as we have already observed, to the handful of Spa niards who came there to subjugate them, although their population is said to have exceeded 70,000 ; nor have they ever attempted to shake oft 1 the yoke until the beginning of the last century, when an in surrection of no great importance was excited, and soon quelled. The number of inhabitants at present amounts to upwards of 11,000; they are divided into 76 districts or ulmenates, the greater part of which are subject to the Spanish commanders, and are obliged to render personal service for fifty days in the year, according to the feudal laws, which are rigidly observed in this province, notwithstand ing they have been for a long time abolished throughout the rest of the kingdom. These islanders generally possess a quickness of capacity, and very readily learn whatever is taught them. They have a genius for mechanical arts, and excel in carpentry, cabinet-making, and turnery, from the frequent occasions which they have to exercise them, all their churches and houses being built of wood. They are very good manufacturersot linen and woollen, with which they mix the feathers of sea-birds, and form beautiful coverings for theirj 3 i 
426 
|CHILE. 
beds. From their swine, which are very nume rous, they make excellent hams, the most esteemed of any in S. America. Notwithstanding the great quantity of timber taken from them, these islands are covered with thick woods ; and as it rains there almost incessantly, the cultivated grounds continue wet the whole year. From hence it follows that the inhabitants, although they have cattle, make no use of them for ploughing, but till the earth in a very singular manner. About three months before sowing time they turn their sheep upon their lands, changing their situation every three or four nights. When the field is sufficiently manured in this manner, they strew the grain over it. One of their strongest men then attempts to harrow it by means of a machine formed of two large sticks of hard wood, made sharp, and fas tened together, which he forces against the ground with his breast, and thus covers the seed. Not withstanding this imperfect tillage, a crop of wheat will yield them ten or twelve for one. They also raise great, quantities of barley, beans, peas, qnitwa, and potatoes, which arc the largest and best of any in Chile. From the excessive moisture of the at mosphere, the grape never acquires sufficient ma turity to be made into wine, but its want is supplied by various kinds of cider, obtained from apples and other wild fruits of the country. The neces sity they are under of often going from one island to another, where the sea is far from deserving the name of the Pacific, renders the Chilotes excellent sailors. Their piragues are composed of three or five large planks sewed together, and caulked with a species of moss that grows on a shrub. These arc in great numbers throughout the whole of the Archipelago, and are managed with sails and oars, and in these frail skiffs the natives will frequently venture as far as Concepcion : and here it may not be improper to observe, that the Indians, who form the principal part of the sailors of the S. seas, are very active and docile, and excellent seamen. These people are fond of fishing, an occupation to which they are led from the great variety of fish with which their coasts abound. Large quantities of these are dried and sent to foreign countries. They likewise dry the testaceous kinds, particularly the conchs, the clamps, and the pint ts. For this purpose they arrange them in a long trench, co vering them with the large leaves of the paiike tinctoria. Over these they place stones, on which they make a libt fire for several hours. They (hen take the roasted animals from tlieir shells, and s-tring them iipon" threads, which thoy hang for some time in the smoke : in this manner they find them to keep very well, and so carry them to Cujo, 
and other places at a distance from the sea. As soon as the Christian religion was preached in Chiloe, it was readily embraced by the natives, who have ever since continued faithful and obedient to its precepts. Their spiritual concerns are under the direction of the bishop of Concepcion, and their temporal were administered by a governor appointed by the captain-general of Chile ; but in 1792 it was vested in the viceroyalty of Lima. The Spaniards at present established in this Archi pelago amount to about 15,000, and its commerce is conducted by means of three or four ships which trade there annually from Peru and Chile. These purchase of the natives large quantities of red cedar boards, timber of different kinds, suitable for carriages, upwards of 2000 ponchos of various qualities, hams, pilchards, dried shell-fish, white cedar boxes, cloaks, embroidered girdles, and a small quantity of ambergris, which is found upon the shores ; giving in exchange wine, brandy, to bacco, sugar, herb of Paraguay, salt, and several kinds of European goods. Independently of the above trade, Chiloe has of late years been made an entrepot of illicit commerce between the Spanish colonies, and English and N. American ships engaged in the S. sea fishery. 
36. The court of audience established. But to return to our history, the continuation of the war, and the great importance of the conquest, finally induced Philip II. to erect a court of royal audi ence in Chile, independent of that of Peru. This supreme tribunal, embracing the political, as well as military administration of the kingdom, and being composed of four judges of law, and a fiscal, made, on the 13th of August 1567, its solemn entry into Concepcion, where it fixed its residence. Im mediately on assuming its functions, it removed Quiroga from the government, and gave the com mand of the army, with the title of general, to Ruiz Gamboa. The military government of the royal audience was soon found to be inadequate to the purpose of its establishment, and accordingly Don Melchor de Bravo was, in 1568, invested with the triple character of president, governor, and cap tain-general of Chile. Between him and Paillataru some serious battles were fought, though not such as (o alter the general state of affairs, when, until the death of the latter commander, (a period of about four years), the two belligerent nations ob served a truce or suspension of arms. This was probably owing in a great measure to the general consternation caused by a dreadful earthquake which wasfeltthroughout the country, and did great injury to the Spanish settlements, particularly the city of Concepcion, which was entirely destroyed. 
C II I L E. 
437 
("37. Suppression of the tribunal of audience. in 1575 the tribunal of audience was suppressed, as it is asserted, on the sole principle of economy, and Rodri
o Quiroga was reinstated in the government by order of Philip II. This experienced officer, having received a reinforcement of 2000 men from Spain, gave directions to his father-in-law, Ruiz Gamboa, to found a new colony at the foot of the Cordilleras, between the cities of Santiago and Concepcion, which has since received the appella tion of Chilian, from the river on whose shore it stands, and has become the captial of the fertile province of that name. Shortly after the establish ment of this settlement, in 1580, the governor died at a very advanced age, having nominated Gamboa as his successor. The three years of Gamboa s government were occupied on one side in opposing the attempts of Ptfynenancu. the then existing toqui, and on the other in repelling the Pelmenches and Chiquillanians, who, instigated by the Araucariians, had begun to molest the Spanish settlements. 
38. Description of the Pehuenches. The Pehuenches form a numerous tribe, and inhabit that part of the Chilian Andes lying between lat. 34 and 37 s. to the e. of the Spanish provinces of Calchagua, Manle, Chilian, and Huilqniiemu. Their dress is no way different from that of the Araucanians, except that instead of drawers or breeches, they Avear around the waist a piece of cloth like the Japanese, which falls down to their knees. Their boots or shoes are all of one piece, and made from the skin of the hind leg of an ox. taken off at the knee ; this they fit to the foot while green, turning the hair within, and sewing up one of the ends, the skin of the knee serving for the heel. These shoes, from being worn, and often rubbed with tallow, become as soft and pliable as the best dressed leather. Although these moun taineers have occasionally shown themselves to be valiant and hardy soldiers, they are nevertheless fond of adorning and decorating themselves like women. They wear ear-rings and bracelets of glass beads upon their arms : they also ornament their hair with the same, and suspend little bells around their heads. Notwithstanding they have numerous herds of cattle and sheep, their usual food is horse-flesh, which, like the Tartars, they prefer to any other ; but, more delicate than that people, they eat it only when boiled or roasted. They dwell in the manner of the Bedouin Arabs, in tents made of skins, disposed in a circular form, leaving in the centre a spacious field, where their -cattle feed during the continuance of the herbage.. When that begins to fail, tbey transport themselves 
to another situation, and in this manner, continu ally changing place, they traverse the valleys of the cordilteras. Each village or encampment is go verned by an ulmen or hereditary prince. In, their lang-uage and religion they differ not from the Araucanians. They arc fond of hunting, and often, in pursuit of game, traverse the immense plains which lie between the great river of Plata and tho straits of Magellan. These excursions they sometimes extend as far as Buenos Ayrcs, and plunder the country in the vicinity. They fre quently attack the caravans of merchandize going from tlicnce to Chile ; and so successful have they been in their enterprises, that, owing to thalcause, the commerce in that quarter was once almost eritirely stopped, though very lately resumed with a to lerable degree of vigour. They have, nevertheless, for many years abstained from committing hostilities within the Chilian boundaries in time of peace ; induced either by the advantages which they de rive from the trade with the inhabitants, or from the fear of being roughly handled by them. Their favourite weapon is the laque, which they always carry with them fastened to their girdles. It is very probable that the ten Americans conducted by the valiant Orellana, of whose amazing courage mention is made in Lord Anson s voyage, were of this tribe. Notwithstanding their wandering and restless disposition, these people are the most in dustrious and commercial of any of the savages. When in their tents they are never idle. The wo men weave cloths of various colours : the men occupy themselves in making baskets and a variety of beautiful articles of wood, feathers, or skins, which are highly prized by their neighbours. They assemble every year on the Spanislj. frontiers, where they hold a kind of fair, which usually conti nues for 15 or 20 days. Hither they bring fos sil salt, gypsum, pitch, bed-coverings, ponchos y skins, wool, bridle-reins beautifully wrought of plaited leather, baskets, wooden vessels, feathers, ostrich eggs, horses, cattle, and a variety of other articles; and receive in exchange wheat, wine, and the manufactures of Europe. They are very skilful in traffic, and can with difficulty be over reached. l or fear of being plundered by those who believe every thing is lawful against infidels, they never all drink at the same time, but separate themselves into several companies; and while some keep guard, the others indulge themselves in the pleasures of wine. They are generally humane, complacent, lovers of justice, and possess all those good qualities that are produced or perfected by commerce. 
39. Description of the Chiquillamans, The i Si 2 
428 
|CHILE. 
Chiquillanians, whom some have erroneously sup posed to be a part of the Pehuenches, live to the n. e. of them, on the e. borders of the Andes. These are the most savage, and of course the least numerous of any of the Chilians ; for it is an esta blished fact, that the ruder the state of savage life, the more unfavourable it is to population. They go almost naked, merely wrapping around them the skin of the guanaco : their language is guttural, and a very corrupt jargon of the Chilian. It is observable that all the Chilians who inhabit the e. valleys of the Andes, both the Pehuenches, the Pudches, and the Huilliches, as well as the Chi quillanians, are much redder than those of their countrymen who dwell to the zi). of that mountain. All these mountaineers dress themselves in skins, paint their faces, live in general by hunting, and lead a wandering and unsettled life. They are no other, as we have hitherto observed, than the so much celebrated Patagonians, who have occasion ally been seen near the straits of Magellan, and have been at one time described as giants, and at an other as men a little above the common stature. It is true, that, they are, generally speaking, of a lofty stature and great strength. 
40. Landing and defeat of the Engish. Now whilst the Araucanians endeavoured to oppose the progress of the Spaniards in their country, and whilst Don Alonzo Sotomayor, who succeeded Rodrigo Quiroga in the government, was strenuously exerting his influence to [suppress the Pehuenches and the Chiquillanians on the e. the English also had planned an expedition to these remote parts. On the 21st July 1586, Sir Thomas Cavendish sailed with three ships from Plymouth, and in the following year arrived on the coast of Chile. He landed in the desert port of Quintero, and endea voured to enter into a negociation with the natives of the country. But his stay there was of short continuance ; he was attacked by Alonzo Molina, the corregidor of Santiago, and compelled to quit the coast with the loss of several of his soldiers and seamen. 
|SECT. III. Comprising a period of 201 years-) 
from 1586 to 1787. 
The history of the Araucanians, with regard to their wars with the Spaniards in the above period, would form little more than a recapitulation of battles similar to those already described, but bear ing, nevertheless, a corroborative testimony to the exertions which a brave and generous people will ever exhibit for the just maintenance of their na tural rights. The interest of these wars must, therefore, have been in a great measure anticipated, 
and they will consequently be treated of in a man ner much more general than those which have been already mentioned; and this, since they will allovr space for the more free detail of other political events. 
41. Nature of the war in anno 1589. In the toquiate of Guanoalca, in 1589, the Spanish go vernor, Don Alonzo Satomayor, apprehensive that he should not be able to defend them, or not con sidering them of sufficient importance, evacuated the forts of Puren, Trinidad, and Spirito Santo, transferring the garrison to another fortress which he had directed to be built upon the river Puchanqui, in ordei to protect the city of Angol : so that the war now became in a great measure reduced to the construction and demolition of fortifications. To the Toqui Gruanoalca succeeded Quintuguenu and Paillaeco, and it has been observed that the repeated victories gained over them by the Spa niards, and which they held as the cause of such exultation, were but the preludes of the severest disasters that they had ever experienced in Chile. 
42. Independence restored. After the death of the last mentioned toqui, the Araucanians appointed to the chief command the hereditary toqui of the se cond uthal-mapu, called Paillamaclui, a man of a very advanced age, but of wonderful activity. Fortune, commonly supposed not to be propitious to the old, so far favoured his enterprises, that he surpassed all his predecessors in military glory, and had the singular felicity of restoring his coun try to its ancient state of independence. Owing to the continued successes of this general, on the 22d of November 1598, and under the government of Loyola, not only the Araucanian provinces, but those of the Curichese and Huilliches were in arms, and even the whole of the country to the Archipelago of Chiloe. It is asserted, that every Spaniard who had the misfortune of being found without the gar risons was put to death ; and it is certain that the cities of Osorno, Valdivia, Villarica, Imperial, Canete, Angol, Coya, and the fortress of Arauco, were all at once invested with a close siege. But not content with this, Paillamachu, without loss of time, crossed the Biobio, burned the cities of Concepcion and Chilian, laid waste the provinces in their dependence, and returned loaded with spoil to his country. In some successive battles he like wise caused the Spaniards to evacute the fort of Arauco, and the city of Canete, and obliged the in habitants to retire to Concepcion. On the 14th of November 1599, he caused his army to pass the broad river Calacalla or Valdivia, by swimming, stormed the city at day -break, burned the houses, 
|CHILE. 
420 
killed a great number of the inhabitants, and at tacked the vessels at anchor in the harbour, on board of which many had taken refuge, who only effected their escape by immediately setting sail. After this he returned in triumph to join Millacalquin, one of his officers, to whom l)e had entrusted the guard of the Biobio, with a booty of 2.000,000 of dollars, all the cannon, and upwards of 400 pri soners. 
43. Expedition of the Dutch. Ten days after the destruction of Valdivia, Colonel Francisco Campo arrived there from Peru with a reinforce ment of 300 men ; but finding it in ashes, he en deavoured, though ineffectually, to introduce those succours into the cities of Osorno, Villarica, and Imperial. Amidst so many misfortunes, an expe dition of five ships of war from Holland arrived in 1600 upon the coast of Chile, which plundered the island of Chiloe, and put the Spanish garrison to the sword. Nevertheless, the crew of the commo dore having landed in the little island of Talca or Santa Maria, was repulsed with the loss of 23 of their men, by the Araucanians who dwelt there, and who probably supposed them to be Spaniards. After a siege of two years and 11 months, Villa rica, a very populous and opulent city, fell at length, in 1602, into the hands of the Araucanians. A similar fate, after a short interval, was experi enced by Imperial, the metropolis of the s. colo nies ; indeed, this city would have fallen some months before, had not its fate been protracted by the courage of a Spanish heroine, called lues Aguilera. This lady perceiving the garrison to be dis couraged, and on the point of capitulating, dis suaded them from surrendering, and directed all the operations in person, until a favourable oppor tunity presenting itself, she escaped by sea with the bishop and a great part of the inhabitants. She had lost during the siege her husband and bro ther, and her valour was rewarded by the king with an annual pension of 2000 dollars. 
44. All the Spanish settlements destroyed. Osorno, a city not less rich and populous than the preceding, was not able much longer to resist the fate that aw r aited it. It fell under the violent ef forts of the besiegers, who, freed from their .atten tion to the others, were able to bring their whole force against it. Thus, in a period of little more than three years, were destroyed all the settlements "which Valdivia and his successors had established and preserved at the expence of so much blood, in the extensive country between the Biobio and the Archipelago of Chiloe, none of which have been since rebuilt, as what is at present called Valdivia is no more than a fort or garrison. The sufferings 
of the besieged were great, and can scarcely be ex ceeded by Ihose endured in the most celebrated sieges recorded in history. They were compelled &lt;o subsist on the most loathsome food, and a piece of boiled leather was considered a sumptuous re past by the voluptuous inhabitants of Villarica and Osorno. The cities that were taken were de stroyed in such a manner, that at present few ves tiges of them remain, and those ruins arc regarded by the natives as objects of detestation. Although great numbers of the citizens perished in the de fence of their walls, the prisoners of all ranks and sexes were so numerous, that there was scarcely an Araucanian family who had not one to its share. The women were taken into the seraglios of their conquerors. Husbands were, however, permitted for the most part to retain their wives, and the un married to espouse the women of the country ; and it is not a little remarkable that the Mustees, or offspring of these singular marriages, became in the subsequent wars the most terrible enemies of the Spanish name. The ransom and exchange of pri soners was also permitted. By this means many escaped from captivity. Some, however, induced by the love of their children, preferred to remain with their captors during their lives ; others, who acquired the affection of the people, by their plea sing manners or their skill in the arts, established themselves advantageously in the country. Among the latter were Don Basilio Roxas and Don An tonio Bascugnan, both of noble birth, who acquired high reputation among the natives, and have left interesting memoirs of the transactions of their own times. But those who fell into brutal hands had much to suffer. Paillamachu did not long enjoy the applause of his countrymen : he died at the end of the year 1603, and was succeeded by Hunecura. In consequence of the disasters the Spa niards encountered during the reign of the last mentioned toqui, and under the second govern ment of Garcia Ramon, in 1608, the court of Spain issued orders, that hereafter there should con stantly be maintained on the Araucanian frontier a body of 2000 regular troops, for whose support an appropriation of 292,279 dollars annually was made in the treasury of Peru. 
45. Court of audience re-established. On the 8th of September in the following year, the royal court of audience, which had been suppressed for 34 years, was again established, though not in its ancient situation, but in the city of St. Jago, to the great satisfaction of the inhabitants ; since which period it has continued to exist with a high reputation for justice and integrity. According to the royal decree establishing the court of audience, 
430 
C il I L E. 
thfc government now devolved upon the eldest son of
iie auditor, Don Louis Merle de la Fuente. 
Ineffectual efforts of P hit in ITT. to estnb Wi a lasting peace. Among the missionaries about this time charged with the conversion of the Chili ans,, there was a Jesuit called Luis Valdivia, who perceiving that it was impossible to preach to the Ayaucanians during: the tumult of arms, went ta Spain, and represented in the strongest terms to : JpifcirKp III. who was then on the throne, the great jnjury done to the cause of religion by the continuance of the war. That devout prince, who had more at heart the advancement of religion than the augmentation of his territories, sent orders im mediately to the government of Chile, to discon tinue the war and settle a permanent peace with the Araucauians, by establishing the river Biobio as the line of division between the two nations. The articles of peace had been discussed, and were about to be mutually agreed upon, when an unex pected event rendered abortive all the measures that had been taken. Among the wives of Ancanamon, the existing toqui, was a Spanish lady, who, taking advantage of his absence, fled for re fuge to the governor, with two small children, and four women, whom she had persuaded to become Christians, two of whom were the wives, and the others the daughters of her husband. The indig nation of the toqni on this occasion was carried to such an extreme, that, upon some missionaries being sent under the superintendence of Valdivia to preach the gospel among the Arancanians, he hastened to meet them at Illicura, where, without deigning to listen to their arguments, he put them all to the sword. Thus were all the plans of paci fication rendered abortive ; Ancanamon incessantly harassed the Spanish provinces, and the war was recommenced in 1617, with greater fury than be fore. From the above-mentioned period to the year J 037, nothing material occurred in our his tory, saving the enterprises of the Toquis Leintur a-d Putapichion ; these, however, did not serve materially to change the state of affairs. 
47. Second expedition of the Dutch. In the fol lowing year the Dutch attempted a second time to foim an alliance with the Araucanians, in order to obtain possession of Chile; but this expedition was not more fortunate than the first. The squa dron, which consisted of four ships, was dispersed by a storm on its arrival on the coast, in 1638. A boat well manned and armed, being afterwards dis patched to the island of Mocha, belonging to the Araucanians, the inhabitants supposing that they came to attack them, fell upon the crew, put the whole to death, and took possession of the boat. 
Another crew experienced n similar misfortune in the little island of Talca or Snnta Maria. The Araucani.v.is, ;;s has been already observed, were equally je alons, and not (a-; may be readily imagined) without, reason, of every European nation. 
48. Second expedition of the English. Notwith standing the ill success of the Dutch, Sir John Narborough, an English naval commander, un dertook some years after a similar enterprise, by order of his sovereign Charles II. ; but in pass ing the straits of Magellan, he lost his whole fleet, which was much better equipped than that of the Dutch. The war continued to rage with undiminished fury until the year 1640, the time when the reins of government were assumed by Don Francisco Zuniga, Marquis de Baydes. It was under his milder auspices, that, in January of the following year, the articles of peace were agreed upon, the day of its ratification being fixed for the sixth of that month, and the place of meeting, the village of Qnillin, in the province of Puren. 
49. Peace at length concluded. At the time prefixed, the marquis appeared at the appointed place, with a retinue of about 10,000 persons, from all parts of the kingdom. Lincopichion, the existing toqui, at the head of the four hereditary toquis, and a great number of ulmenes and other natives, opened the conference with a very elo quent speech. He then, according to the Chilian, custom, killed a llama, and sprinkling some of the blood on a branch of cinnamon, presented it in token of peace to the governor. The articles of the treaty were next proposed and ratified, and in one of these the marquis stipulated that the Arau canians should not permit the landing of any strangers upon the coast, or furnish supplies to any foreign nation whatever ; which being conform able to the political maxims of the nation, was readily complied with. Thus was a period put to a war of 90 years duration, and this grand negociation was terminated by a sacrifice of 28 camels, and an eloquent harangue from Antignenu, chief of the district, upon the mutual advantages which both nations would derive from the peace. 
50. Last expedition of the Dutch. In 1643, two years after the peace, the importance of the article inserted by the governor in the treaty was rendered very apparent to the Spaniards, by a last attempt made by the Dutch to possess themselves of Chile. Their measures were so well taken, that had they been in the least seconded by the Arancanians, they must have infallibly succeeded. Having left Bra zil, which they had conquered, with a numerous fleet, well provided with men and cannon, they took possession of the harbour of Yaldivia, which 
|CHILE. 
431 
had been deserted for more than 40 years, where they intended to form an establishment in order to conquer the rest of the kingdom. With this view they immediately began building three strong forts at the entrance of the river, in order to secure its possession. The Araucanians were invited, with the most flattering promises, to join them ; this they not only declined, but strictly adhering to the sti pulations of the treaty, refused to furnish them with provisions, of which they were greatly in want. The Cunchesc, to whom the territory which they had occupied belonged, following the counsel of their allies, refused also to treat with them or sup ply them. In consequence of this refusal, the Dutch, pressed with hunger, and hearing that a combined army of Spaniards and Araucanians were on their march against them, were compelled to abandon the place in three months after their land ing. The Marquis de Mancura, son to the vice roy of Peru, having soon after arrived there in search of them, with 10 ships of war, fortified the harbour, and particulary the island, which has siuce borne the titular name of his family. On the termination of the sixth year of his govern ment, Baydes was recalled by the court, and Don Martin Muxica appointed in his place. 
51. Dreadful earthquake. He succeeded in preserving the kingdom in that state of tranquil lity in which he found it, no other commotion oc curring during his government, but that produced by a violent earthquake, which, on the 8th of May 1617, destroyed part of the city of St. Jago. The fortune of his successor, Don Antonio Acugna, was very different. During his government the ivar was excited anew between the Spaniards and Araucanians ; but contemporary writers have left us no accounts of the causes that produced it. Clcntaru, the hereditary toqui of Lauquernapu, being, in 1655, unanimously elected general, sig nalized his first campaign by the total defeat of the Spanish army. He, moreover, continued to persecute the Spaniards \vilh great violence for a period of 10 years, under the governments of Don Pedro Porte! Casanate, and Don Francisco Meneses. The last, who was a Portuguese by birth, had the glory of terminating it, in 1665, by a peace more permanent than that made by Baydes. All the succeeding governors appear to have kept up a good understanding with the Araucanians until the year 16b6, when Garro was nearly breaking it, on occasion of removing the inhabitants of the island of Mocho to the n. shore of the Biobio, in order to cut oft all communication with foreign enemies. 
52. Commerce tcllh the French. The com 
mencement of the present aera was marked in Chile by the deposition of the Governor Don Francisco Ibancz, the rebellion of the inhabitants of Chiloe, and the trade with the French. The islanders of Chiloe were soon restored to obedience, through the prudent conduct of the quarter-master-general of the kingdom, Don Pedro Molina, who succeeded in reducing them rather by mild measures than by useless victories. The French, in consequence of the war of the succession, possessed themselves for a time of all the external commerce of Chile. From J707 to 1717, its ports were filled with their ships, and they carried from thence incredible sums in gold and silver. It was at this period that the learned Father Feuille, who remained there three years, made his botanical researches and meteorolo gical observations upon the coast. His amiable quali ties obtained himthe esteem of the inhabitants, who still cherish his memory with much affection. It was in 1722 that the Araucanians, impatient at the insolence of those who were designated by the title of captains of the friends; and who having been introduced under pretence of guarding the missionaries, arrogated to themselves a species of authority over the natives, resolved to create a toqui, and have recourse to arms. A war in con sequence ensued, but it soon became reduced to little skirmishes, which were finally terminated by the celebrated peace of Negrete, a place situated at the confluence of the rivers Biobio and Lara, where the treaty of Quillan was reconfirmed, and the odious title of captain of friends wholly abo lished. 
53. How the Pehuenches became inimical to the Spaniards. The Governor Gonzaga was the next who excited the flames of war by endeavour ing to effect more than his predecessors. He un dertook to compel the Araucanians to live in cities. This chimerical scheme was ridiculed by those who knew the prejudices of this people, and it was finally abandoned, not, however, till it had pro cured another powerful, and for ever after impla cable enemy to the Spaniards. This was no other than the Pehuenches, who being in the above war in alliance with the Spaniards, and who suffered a considerable defeat whilst fighting against the Araucanians, resolved all at once to change t&gt;ides, and have ever since been the firm allies of 4h fat ter. They have a practice of attacking the Spa nish caravans from Buenos Ay res to ChitF, and every year furnishes some melancholy information of that kind. We shall not proceed particularly to notice several actions, and among others- a bloody battle which was fought in the -beginning of the year 1773 ; mention of which was made in fhe 
|CHILE. 
European gazettes of that period, at which time the war had cost the royal treasury and individuals 1,700,000 dollars. 
54. Peace restored. The same year an accom modation was agreed on; and by this it was al lowed that the Araucanians should afterwards have a minister resident in the city of St. Jago. With respect to the other articles of the peace, it is suf ficient to state, that the treaties of Qnillan and Negrete were by mutual consent revived. On the death of Gonzaga, the court of Spain sent Don Augustin Jauregui to govern Chile, who has since filled with universal approbation the important of fice of viceroy of Peru. His successor, Don Ambrosio Benavides, has rendered the country happy by his wise and beneficent administration. 
|CHAP. V. 
Present slate of Chile. 
|FROM the brief relation that we have given of the occurrences in Chile since its discovery, it will be seen that its possession has cost Spain more blood and treasure than all the rest of her settle ments in America. The Araucanians, occupying but a small extent of territory, have with far in ferior arms not only been able to counterbalance her power, till then reputed irresistible, but to endanger the loss of her best established possessions. Though the greater part of her officers had been bred in that school of war, the Low Countries, and her soldiers, armed with those destructive wea pons before which the most extensives empires of that continent had fallen, were considered the best in the world, yet have these people succeeded in resisting them. The Spaniards, since losing their settlements in Araucania, have prudently confined their views to establishing themselves firmly in that part of Chile which lies between the 5. confines of Peru and the river Biobio, and extends from lat. 24 to 3Q\ s. : this they have divided into 13 provinces. They also possess the fortress of Valdivia, in the country of the Cunchcse, the Archipelago of Chiloe, and the island of Juan Fernandez. 
1. Civil government. These provinces are go verned by an officer, who has usually the rank of lieutenant-general, and combines the title of pre sident, governor, and captain-general of the king dom of Chile. He resides in the city of St. Jago, and is solely dependent upon the king, except in case of war, when, in certain points, he receives his directions from the viceroy of Peru. In qua lity of captain-general he commands the army, and has under him riot only the three principal officers of the kingdom, the quarter-master, the serjeant
major, and the commissary, but also the four go vernors of Chiloe", V r aldivia, Valparaiso, and Juan Fernandez. As president and governor, lie has the supreme administration of justice, and presides over the superior tribunals of that capital, whose jurisdiction extends all over the Spanish province* in those parts. The principal of these is the tri bunal of audience, or royal senate, whose decision is final in all causes of importance, both civil and criminal ; and is divided into two courts, the one for the trial of civil, and the other for the trial of criminal causes. Both are composed of several respectable judges, called auditors, of a regent, a fiscal or royal procurator, and a protector of the Indians. All these officers receive large salaries from the court. Their judgment is final, except in causes where the sum in litigation exceeds 10,000 dollars, when an appeal may be had to the supreme council of the Indies. The other su preme courts are those of finance, of the cruzada, of vacant lands, and the consulate or tribunal of commerce, which is wholly independent of any other of that kind. The provinces are governed by prefects, formerly called corregidors, but at present known by the name of sub-delegates ; these, according to the forms of their institution, should be of royal nomination, but owing to the distance of the court they are usually appointed by the captain-general, of whom they style themselves the lieutenants. They have jurisdiction both of civil and military affairs, and their emoluments of office depend entirely upon their fees, which are by no means regular. In each capital of a province there is, or at least should be, a munici pal magistracy, called the cabildo, Avhich is com posed, as in other parts of the Spanish dominions, of several members, called regidores, who are ap pointed for life, of a standard-bearer, a procura tor, a forensic judge, denominated the provincial alcalde, an alguazil or high sheriff, and of two consuls or burgo-mastcrs, called alcaldes. The latter are chosen annually from among the princi pal nobility by the cabildo itself, and have juris diction both in civil and criminal causes in the first instance. 
2. Military force. The inhabitants are divided into regiments, which are obliged to inarch to the frontiers or the sea-coast in case of war. In 1792 there were 15,856 militia troops enrolled in the two bishoprics of Santiago and Concepcion ; 10,218 in the first, and 56S8 in the latter. Besides this re gular milhia, there are a great many city militias, that are commanded by commissaries, who act as colonels. A sufficient force also of regular troops for the defence of the country is maintained by 
|CHILE. 
43* 
the king. All the veteran troops in Chile do not exceed 2000, and these consist of artillery, dra goons, and infantry. The infantry as well as the artillery is under the command of two lieutenantcolonels. 
3. Ecclesiastical srorermnent. As respects the ecclesiastical government, Chile is divided into the two large dioceses of St. Jago and Concepcion, which cities are the residencies of the bishops, who are suffragans to the archbishop of Lima. The first diocese extends from the con fines of Peru to the river Maule, comprehending the province of Cujo upon the other side of the Andes. The second comprises all the rest of Chile, with the islands, although the greater part of this extent is inhabited by pagans. The cathedrals are sup plied with a proper number of canons, whose re venues depend upon the tithes, as do those of the bishops. The court of inquisition at Lima has at St. Jago a commissioner with several subaltern officers. Pedro Valdivia, on his first entering Chile, brought with him the monks of the order of Mercy; and about the year 1553, introduced the Dominicans and strict Franciscans. The Augustins established themselves there in 1595; and the Hospitallers of St. John of God, about the the year 1615. These religious orders have all a number of convents, and the three first form dis tinct jurisdictions. The brothers of St. John of God have the charge of the hospitals, under a commissary, who is dependent upon the provin cial of Peru. These are the only religious frater nities now in Chile. The Jesuits, who came into Chile in 1593, with the nephew of their founder, Don Martin de Loyola, formed likewise a separate province. Others have several times attempted, but without success, to form establishments, the Chilians having always opposed the admission of new orders among them. In St. Jago and Con cepcion are several convents of nuns ; but they are the only cities that contain them. 
4. The cities and dwellings. The cities are built in the best situations in the country. Many of them, however, would have been better placed, for the purposes of commerce, upon the shores of the large rivers. This is particularly the case with those of more recent construction. The streets are straight, intersecting each other at right angles, and are 36 French feet in breadth. On account of earthquakes the houses are generally of one story ; they are, however, very commodious, whitewashed without, and generally painted within. Each is accommodated with a pleasant garden, ir rigated by an aqueduct which furnishes water for the use of the family. Those belonging to the 
|VOL. I. 
wealthier classes, particularly the nobility, are furnished with much splendour and taste. The inhabitants perceiving that old buildings of two stories have resisted the most violent shocks, have of late years ventured to reside in the upper rooms, and now begin to construct their houses in the European manner. In consequence of this the cities have a better appearance than formerly ; and the more so, as instead of forming their houses of clay hardened in the sun, which was supposed less liable to injury, they now employ brick and stone. Cel lar?, sewers, and wells, were formerly much more common than at present ; a circumstance which may have contributed to render the buildings more secure from earthquakes. The churches are ge nerally more remarkable for their wealth than their style of architecture. The cathedral and the church of the Dominicans in the capital, which are built of stone, are however exceptions. The first was constructed at the royal expcnce, under the direction of the Bishop Don Manuel Alday, an excellent and learned prelate: it is built in a masterly style, and is 384 French feet in front. The plan was drawn by two English architects, who superintended the work : but when it was half finished they refused to go on, unless their wages were increased. In consequence of this th n building was suspended, when two of the Indians who had worked under the Englishmen, and had secretly found means of instructing themselves in every branch of the art, offered to complete it: which they did with as much skill and perfection as their masters themselves could have displayed. In thccapitalthe following edifices are also worthy of remark : the barracks for the dragoons, the mint, which has been lately built by a Roman ar chitect, and the hospital for orphans. 
5. Population. Spanish Chile, in consequence of the freedom granted to its maritime trade, is peopling with a rapidity proportioned to the salu brity of its climate and the fertility of its soil. Its population in general is composed of Europeans, Creoles, Indians, Negroes, and Mustees. The Europeans, except a few French, English, and Italians, are Spaniards, who for the most part are from the s. provinces of Spain. D. Cosme Bueno, whose manuscript account of Peru is stated byRobertson, as having been drawn up in 1764, (though the copies which we have seen of this work contain facts of a later date by at least 20 years), gives to Chile a population of 240,000 souls. Malespina, \\ho visited that country in 1790, is of opinion that this estimate is greatly under the truth : and we have been lately informed, on good authority, that tbc present population of Chile 
i 3 K. 
434 
|CHILE. 
amounts to 720,000 souls, including 70,000 inde pendent Araucanos. 
6. Chilian Creoles. The Creoles, who form the greater number, are the descendants of Europeans. Their character, with some slight difference, pro ceeding from climate or government, is precisely similar to that of the other American Creoles of European origin. The same modes of thinking, and the same moral qualities, are discernible in them all. This uniformity, which furnishes much subject for reflection, has never yet been considered by any philosopher in its full extent. Whatever intelligent and unprejudiced travellers have ob served respecting the characters of the French and English Creoles, will perfectly apply to that of the Chilian. They are generally possessed of good talents, and succeed in any of the arts to which they apply themselves. They would make as great progress in the useful sciences as they have done in metaphysics, if they had the same motives to stimulate them as are found in Europe. They do not readily imbibe prejudices, and are not tena cious in retaining them. 
7. State of arts and sciences. As scientific books and instruments, however, are very scarce, or sold at an exorbitant price, their talents are either never developed, or are wholly employed upon trifles. The expences of printing are also so great, as to discourage literary exertion, so that few aspire to the reputation of authors. The knowledge of the civil and canonical laws is held in great esteem by them, so that many of the Chilian youth, after having completed their course of academical edu cation in Chile, proceed to Lima, which is highly celebrated for its schools of law, in order to be in structed in that science. The fine arts are in a very low state in Chile, and even the mechanical are as yet very far from perfection. We may ex cept, however, those of carpentry, and the work ing of iron and the precious metals, which have made considerable progress, in consequence of the information obtained from some German artists, who were introduced into the country by that worthy ecclesiastic, Father Carlos, of Hainhausen in Bavaria. In a word, the arts and sciences of Chile have for these latter years much engaged the attention of the inhabitants, and it is affirmed that the state of the country has already assumed a very different appearance. 
8. The peasantry. The peasantry, though for much the greater part of Spanish origin, dress in the Araucanian manner. Dispersed over that ex tensive country, and unencumbered by restraint, they possess perfect liberty, and lead a tranquil and happy life, amidst the enjoyments of that de 
lightful climate. Raynal observes, * the principal part of these robust men live dispersed upon their possessions, and cultivate with their own hands a greater or less extent of ground. They are in cited to this laudable labour by a sky always clear and serene, and a climate the most agreeably tem perate of any in the two hemispheres, but more especially by a soil whose fertility has excited the admiration of all travellers." They are naturally gay and fond of all kinds of diversion. They have likewise a taste for music, and compose verses after their manner, which, although rude and in elegant, possess a certain natural simplicity more interesting than the laboured compositions of cul tivated poets. Extemporaneous rhymes, or improvisatori, are common among them, and are called in their language palladorcs. Those known to possess this talent are held in high estimation, and apply themselves to no other occupation. In the countries dependent on the Spanish colonies, there is generally no other language than the Spa nish spoken, but on the frontiers the peasants speak the Araucanian or Chilian, as well as the former. 
9. Dress, Sfc. The men dress in the French, and the women in the Peruvian fashion, except that the women of Chile wear their garments longer than those of Peru. In point of luxury, there is no difference between the inhabitants of the two coun tries ; Lima prescribes the fashions for Chile, as Paris does for the rest of Europe. Those who are wealthy make a splendid display in their dress, their servants, coaches, or titles. Chile alone, of all the American provinces, has enjoyed the supe rior privilege of having two of its citizens exalted to the dignity of grandees of Spain ; the one Don Fernando Irrazabal, Marquis of Valparaiso ; the other, Don Ferrnin Caravajal, Duke of St. Carlos. 
10. Diseases ; small-vox, hoio cured. The sa lubrity of the air, and the constant exercise on horseback to which they accustom themselves from childhood, render them strong and active, and preserve them from many diseases. The small-pox is not so common as in Europe, but it makes ter* rible ravages when it appears. This disease was, in the year 1766, for the first time introduced into the province of Maule, where it became very fatal, A countryman who had recovered from it, con* ceived the idea of attempting to cure a number of unhappy wretches, who had been abandoned, by cow s milk, which he gave them to drink, or ad ministered to them in clysters. With this simple remedy he cured all those whom he attended ; while the physicians, with their complicated prescriptionS) saved but a very few. This anecdote is supported by, at the same time that it tends strongly 
|CHILE. 
435 
to confirm, the experiments of M. Las
one, phy sician to the queen of France, in the cure of the small-pox with cow s milk, published by himself in the Medical Transactions of Paris for the year 1779. The countryman, however, employed milk alone, whereas M. De Lassone thought it advisable to mix it with a decoction of parsley roots. These instances would seem to prove that milk has the singular property of lessening the virulence of this disorder, and repressing its noxious and deadly qualities. It is for the Jennerians to consider how far these facts may corroborate, or what may be their analogy to the principles that are inculcated by the vaccine institutions of this country. 
11. Manners, moral and physical. The inhabi tants of the country arc generally very benevolent. Contented with a comfortable subsistence, they may be said scarcely to know what parsimony or ava rice is, and are very rarely affected with that vice. Their houses are open to all travellers that come, whom they freely entertain without any idea of pay, and often on these occasions regret that they are not more wealthy, in order to exercise their hospitality to a greater extent. This virtue is also common in the cities, and Feuille observes, that u the ill return that they have frequently met with from individuals of our nation, has never been able to produce a diminution of their native hospi tality." vol. II. To this hospitality it is owing that they have not hitherto been attentive to the erection of inns and public lodging houses ; which will, however, become necessary when the com. merce of the interior is more increased. Lord Anson, in his voyage, gives a particular descrip tion, of the dexterity of the South American pea sants in managing the laqin\ with which they take animals, either wild or domestic. In Chile, the inhabitants of the country constantly carry this Jaqui with them, fastened to their saddles, in order to have it ready upon occasion, and are very skil ful in the use of it. It consists merely in a strip of leather several fathoms in length, well twisted in the manner of a cord, and terminated by a strong noose of the same material. They make use of it both on foot and on horseback, and in the latter case with equal certainty, whether amidst woods, mountains, or steep declivities. On these occa sions one end of it is fastened under the horse s belly, and the other held by the rider, who throws it over the flying animal with a dexterity that scarcely ever misses its aim. Herodotus makes mention of a similar noose which was used in battle by the Sagartians. " The Sagartii," he observes, 4&lt; were originally of Persian descent, and use the Persian language : they have no offensive weapons 
either of iron or brass, except their dagger*? : their principal dependence in action is upon cords made of twisted leather, which they use in this manner : when they engage an enemy, they throw out these cords, having a noose at the extremity ; if they entangle in them either horse or man, they without difficulty put them to death." Beloe s Herodotus, Yol. III. Polymnia, p. 205. The Chilians have also employed the laqui with much success against the English pirates who have landed upon their coast. They are also skilful in the management of horses, and in the opinion of travellers, who have had an opportunity of witnessing their dexterity and courage in this exercise, they might soon be formed into the best body of cavalry in the world. Their attachment to horses renders them particu larly fond of horse-racing, which they conduct in the English manner. The Negroes, who have been introduced into Chile wholly by contraband means, are subjected to a state of servitude, which may be considered as tolerable in comparison to that which they endure in many parts of America, where the interest of the planter stifles every sentiment of hu manity. As the planting of sugar and other ar ticles of West Indian commerce has not been esta blished in Chile, the slaves are employed in do mestic services, where by attention and diligence they may readily acquire the favour of their mas ters. Those in most esteem are either such as are born in the country of African parents, or the Mulattoes, as they become more attached to the fa mily to which they belong. The humanity of the government or the inhabitants has introduced in favour of this unfortunate race a very proper regu lation. Such of them as by their industry have obtained a sum of money sufficient for the purchase of a slave, can ransom themselves by paying it to their masters, who are obliged to receive it, and set them at liberty ; and numbers who have in this manner obtained their freedom, are to be met with throughout the country. The same law subsists in all the Spanish colonies ; and a slave who can not redeem himself entirely, is allowed to redeem one or more days in the week, by paying a pro portion of his price. Those who are ill treated by their owners can demand a letter of sale , which is a written permission to them to seek a purchaser. In case of the master s refusal, they have the pri vilege of applying to the judge of the place, who examines their complaints, and if well founded, grants them the permission required. Such in stances are, however, very unusual, either because the master, on account of his reputation, avoids re ducing his slaves to this extremity, or that the slaves themselves contract such an attachment tol 3K 2 
436 
|CHILE. 
their masters, that the greatest punishment inflicted on them would be to sell them to others. Masters nevertheless exercise the rights of fathers of fami lies over their slaves, in correcting them for their faults. 
12. Internal and external commerce, mines, imports, and exports. The internal commerce of Chile has been hitherto of very little importance
 notwithstanding the advantages that the country offers for its encouragement. Its principal source, industry, or more properly speaking, necessity, is wanting. An extensive commerce is correlative with a great population, and in proportion as the latter increases, the former will also be augmented. Hitherto it may be said, that of the two branches that in general give birth to commerce, agriculture and industry, the first is that alone which animates the internal commerce of Chile, and even that part of the external which is carried on with Peru. The working of mines also occupies the attention of many in the provinces of Copiapo, Coquimbo, and Quillota ; but the industry is so trilling that it does not deserve the name. Not withstanding the abundance of its fruits and materials of manufacture, as flax, wool, hemp, skins and metals, which might produce a flourishing commerce, it is conducted but languidly. The inhabitants employ themselves only in making ponchos, stockings, socks, carpets, blankets, skin-coats, saddles, hats, and other small articles chiefly made use of by the common or poorer class of people, since those of the middle rank employ those of European manufacture. These, but more particularly the sale of hides and tanned leather, which they have in great plenty, with that of grain and wine, form the whole of the internal commerce of the kingdom. The external, which is carried on with all the ports of Peru, par ticularly Callao, arises from the exportation of fruits ; this amounts to 700,000 dollars annually, according to the statements giren in the periodical publications at Lima. The commerce between Chile and Buenos Ayres is quite otherwise, since for the herb of Paraguay alone, it is obliged to ad vance 300,000 dollars annually in cash ; the other articles received from thence are probably paid for by those sent thither. In the trade with Spain, the fruits received from Chile go but a little way in payment of more than a million of dollars, which are received from thence annually in Euro pean goods, either directly, or by the way of Buenos Ayres, and sometimes from Lima. Gold, silver, and copper, are the articles which form nearly the whole of this commerce, since the hidei and vicuna wool are in such small quantities as to render them of little importance. 
Notwithstanding the workingof the mines in Chile has in a great measure been relinquished from the expence,and from the impediments offered by the war like spirit of the Araucanians, there are more than a thousand now in work between the cities of Co quimbo and Copiapo, besides those of the province of Aconcagua ; and it is a matter of fact that the produce of i(j mines has been increasing ever since that the passage into the S. sea by cape Horn was frequented by the Spanish merchants. The gold coined in the capital was lately regulated at 5200 marks annually ; but the present yearly pro duce of the mines, as calculated from the amounts of the royal duties, and therefore considerably under the truth, amounts to 10,000 Spanish marks of pure gold, and 29,700 do. of pure silver. The value in dollars of both is 1,7,37,380; the gold being estimated at 14.&gt; ; J o% dollars, and the silver at 9 7 *o dollars the Spanish mark. Besides this, we must add for contraband 322,620 dollars ; and the total produce will then be 2,060,000. Accord ing to Hurnboldt, the dollars imported into Chile and Peru in 1803 amounted to 11,500,000, and the exports consisted of produce to the value of 4,000,000 dollars, besides 8,000,000 dollars in specie. The receipts of Chile, Guatemala, and Ca racas, are consumed within the country. The re mittances of gold and silver to Spain are usually made from Buenos Ayres ; the first being les* bulky, is carried by the monthly packets in sums of 2 or 3000 ounces ; as to the second, it has, till within a very late period, been sent in two convoy ships in the summer, by which con veyances gold is also remitted. The copper which is extracted from the mines is estimated from 8 to 10,000 quintals. From these data it will not be difficult to form a general estimate of all that Chile produces annually. A communication by water, which greatly facilitates the progress of commerce, has been already commenced. In se veral of the ports, barks are employed in the trans portation of merchandize, which was before carried by land upon mules. Several large ships have also been built in the harbour of Concepcion and the mouth of the river Maule. The external com merce is carried on with Peru and Spain. In the first, 23 or 24 ships, of 5 or 600 tons each, are em ployed, which are partly Chilian and partly Peru vian. These usually make three voyages in a year ; they carry from Chile wheat, wine, pulse, almonds, nuts, cocoa-nuts, conserves, dried meat, tallow, lard, cheese, sole-leather, timber for build ing, copper, and a variety of other articles, t and bring back in return silver, sugar, rice and cotton. The Spanish ships receive in exchange for Euro-"} 
C H I L E. 
43? 
pean merchandise gold, silver, copper, vicugna wool, and hides. A trade with the East Indies would be more profitable to the Chilians than any other, as their most valuable articles have either become scarce, or are not produced in that wealthy part of Asia ; and the passage, in consequence of the prevalence of the s. winds in the Pacific, would be easy and expeditious. No money is coined or has currency in Chile except gold and silver, a circumstance very embarrassing to the internal traffic. Their smallest silver coin is one sixteenth of a dollar, and their weights and measures are the same that are used in Madrid. 
13. Natural divisions. Chile, properly called, or that part which is situated between the Andes and the sea, and within lat. 24 and 45 5. is at least 120 miles in breadth. It is commonly divided into two equal parts, that is, the maritime country, and the midland country ; the maritime country is in. tersected by three chains of mountains, running parallel to the Andes, between which are numerous valleys watered by delightful rivers. The midland country is almost flat ; a few insulated hills only are to be seen, which diversify and render the appear ance of it more pleasing. The Andes, which are considered as the loftiest mountains in the world, cross the whole continent of America, in a direction from s. to n. for we cannot consider the mountains in North America in any other light than as a con tinuation of the cordilleras. The part appertaining to Chile may be 120 miles in breadth ; it consists of a great number of mountains, all of them of a prodigious height, which appear to be chained to each other, and where nature displays all the beauties and all the horrors of the most picturesque situations. Although it abounds with frightful precipices, many agreeable valleys and fertile pas tures are to be found there ; and the rivers, which derive their sources from the mountains, often ex hibit the most pleasing as well as the most terrify ing features. That portion of the cordilleras which is situated between lat. 24 and 33 is wholly de sert ; but the remainder, as far as the 45, is in habited by some colonies of Chilians, who are called Chiquillanes, Pehuenches, Puelches, and Huilliches, but are more generally known by the name of Patagonians. The surface of Chile is estimated at 378,000 square miles. There are about eight or nine roads which cross its cordillera; of which that leading from the province of Acon cagua to Cuyo, although dangerous, as being nar row, and having on either side lofty and perpendi cular mountains, is the most travelled. Mules are often precipitated from these roads into the rivers beneath. 
14. Political divisions. The political divisions of Chile consist of the part occupied by the Spa niards, and that which is inhabited by- the Indians. The Spanish part is .situalcd between. \?&_ t Q& and 37 s. and is divided into 13 provinces, -,-viz. Copiapo, Coquimboj -Quillota, Aconcagua, Melipilla,and St. Jago, (which contains the capital city of the country of the same name), Kancagua, Calchagua, Maule, Ytata, Chilian, Pucbacuy, and Iluilquelemu. The Indian country is situated be tween the river Biobio and the Arehipelagov.of Chiloe, or lat. 3G and 41". It is inhabited by three different nations, the Araucanian.s, the Cuncues, and the Huilliches. The Araucanians do not, as Mr. DC Paun pretends, inhabit the barren rocks of Chile, but, on the contrary, the iiuest plains in the whole country, situate between the rivers Biobio and Valdivia. 
15. Climate. Chile is one of the best countries in America. The beauties of its sky, the constant mildness of its climate, and its abundant fertility, render it, as a place of residence, extremely agree able ; and with respect to its natural productions, it may be said, without exaggeration, not to be in ferior to any portion of the globe. The seasons suc ceed each other regularly, and are sufficiently marked, although the transition from cold to heat is very moderate. The spring in Chile commences, as in all the countries of the s. hemisphere, the 22d September, the summer in December, the autumn in March, and the winter in June. The following account is from Robertson s History of America
 vol. IV. c. 7. " That part of Chile which may properly be deemed a Spanish province, is a narrow district, extending along the coast from the desert of Atacamas to the island of Chiloe, above 900 miles. Its clinuite is the most delicious of the new world, and is hardly equalled by that of any region on the face of the earth. Though border ing on the torrid zone, it never feels the extremity of heat, being screened on the e. by the Andes, and refreshed from the to. by cooling sea-breezes. The temperature of the air is so mild and equable, that the Spaniards give it the preference of that of the s. provinces in their native country. The fertility of the soil corresponds with the benignity of the climate, and is wonderfully accommodated to European productions. The most valuable of these, corn, wine, and oil, abound in Chile, as if they had been native in the country. All the fruits imported from Europe attain to full maturity there. The animals of our hemisphere not only multiply, but improve in this delightful region. The horned cattle are of larger size than those of Spain. Its breed of horses surpasses, both in beauty and in 
438 
|CHILE. 
spirit, the famous Andaluciau race, from which they sprang. Nor has Nature exhausted her bounty on the surface of the earth ; she has stored its bowels with riches: valuable mines of gold, of silver, of copper, and of lead, have been discovered in various parts of it. A country distinguished by so many blessings, we may be apt to conclude, would early become a favourite station of the Spaniards, and must have been cultivated with peculiar predilection and care ; instead of this, a great part of it remains unoccupied. In all this extent of country there are not above 80,000 white inhabitants, and about three times that number of Negroes and people of a mixed race. The most fertile soil in America lies uncultivated, and some of its most promising mines remain umvrought." 
16. Of rain. From the beginning of spring until autumn, there is throughout Chile a con stant succession of fine weather, particularly be tween the 24 and 36 D of latitude ; but in the islands, which for the most part are covered with woods, the rains are very frequent, even in summer. The rainy season on the continent usually commences in April, and continues until the end of August. In the n. provinces of Coquimbo and Copiapo it very rarely rains ; in the central ones it usually rains three or four days in succession, and the pleasant weather continues 15 or 20 days ; in the s. the rains are much more frequent, and often continue for nine or ten days without cessation. These rains are never accompanied with storms or hail, and thunder is scarcely known in the country, particularly in places at a distance from the Andes, where, even in summer, it is seldom ever heard. Lightning is wholly unknown in the province of Chile; and although, in the abovementioned mountains, and near the sea, storms occasionally arise, yet they, according to the di rection of the wind, pass over, and take their course to the . or s. In the maritime provinces snow is never seen. In those nearer the Andes it falls about once in five years ; sometimes not so often, and the quantity very trifling ; it usually melts while falling, and it is very uncommon to have it remain on the ground for a day. In the Andes, however, it falls in such quantities from April to November, that it not only lies there con stantly during that time, but even renders them wholly impassable during the greater part of the year. The highest summits of these mountains, which are constantly covered with snow, are dis tinguishable at a great distance by their whiteness, and form a very singular and pleasing appear ance. Those of the inhabitants who are not suf ficiently wealthy to have ice-houses, procure 
4 
snow from the mountains, which they transport upon mules. The consumption of this article is very considerable, as a general use is made of it in summer to cool their liquors. The maritime countries being at a distance from the Andes, do not enjoy this advantage, but they feel the priva tion of it less, as the heat is much more moderate upon the coast than in the interior. In the mid land provinces is sometimes seen, in the month of August, a white frost, accompanied by a slight de gree of cold, which is the greatest that is expe rienced in those districts. This coldness continues two or three hours after sun-rise ; from which time the weather is like that of a fine day in spring. The dews are abundant throughout Chile in the spring, summer, and autumnal nights, and in a great measure supply the want of rain during those seasons. Although the atmosphere is then loaded with humidity, its salubrity is not injured thereby, for both husbandmen and travellers sleep in the open air with perfect security. Fogs are common on the coast, especially in the au tumn ; they continue but a few hours in the moming, and as they consist only of watery particles, are not prejudicial eilher to the health of the inha bitants, or to the vegetation. 
17. Winds. The n. and n.w. winds usually bring rain, and the s. and s. e. a clear sky ; these serve as infallible indications to the inhabitants, who are observant of them, and furnish themselves with a kind of barometer to determine previously the state of the weather. The same winds produce directly contrary effects in the s. and in the n. hemispheres. The n. and northerly winds, be fore they arrive at Chile, cross the torrid zone, and there becoming loaded with vapours, bring with them heat and rain ; this heat is, however, very moderate, and it would seem that these winds, in crossing the Andes, which are constantly covered with snow, become qualified, and lose much of their heat and unhealthy properties. In Tucuman and Cujo, where they are known by the name of sonda, they are much more incom modious, and are more suffocating than even the siroc in Italy. The s. winds coming immediately from the antarctic pole, are cold and dry ; these arc usually from the s.w. and prevail in Chile during the time that the sun is in the 5. hemis phere ; they blow constantly towards the equator, the atmosphere at that period being highly rare fied, and no adverse current of air opposing itself to their course: as they disperse the vapodrs, and drive them towards the Andes, it rains but seldom during their continuance. The clouds collected upon these mountains, uniting with those 
|CHILE. 
439 
which cornefrom the n. occasion very heavy rains, accompanied with thunder, in all tiie provinces beyond the Andes, particularly in those of Tucuman and Cujo, while at the same time the atmos phere of Chile is constantly clear, and its inhabi tants enjoy their finest season. The contrary takes place in winter, which is the fine season in these provinces, and the rainy in Chile. The s. wind never continues blowing during the whole day with the same force ; as the sun approaches the meridian, it falls very considerably, and rises again in the afternoon. At noon, when this wind is scarcely perceptible, a fresh breeze is felt from the sea, which continues about two or three hours ; the husbandmen give it the name of the twelve o clock breeze, or the country man s watch, as it serves to regulate them in determining that hour. This sea-breeze returns regularly at midnight, and is supposed to be produced by the tide; it is stronger in autumn, and sometimes accompanied with hail. The e. winds rarely prevail in Chile, their course being obstructed by the Andes. Hur ricanes, so common in the Antilles, are unknown here ; there exists indeed a solitary example of a hurricane, which, in 1633, did much injury to the fortress of Caremalpo, in the .v. part of Chile. The mild temperature which Chile almost always enjoys must depend entirely upon the succession of these w inds, as a situation so near the tropic would naturally expose it to a more violent degree of heat. In addition to those, the tide, the abundant dews, and certain winds from the Andes, which are distinct from the e. wind, cool the air so much in summer, that in the shade no one is ever in commoded with perspiration. The dress of the inhabitants of the sea-coast is the same in the win ter as in the summer ; and in the interior, where the heat is more perceptible than elsewhere, Reau mur s thermometer scarcely ever exceeds 25. The nights, throughout the country, are generally of a very agreeable temperature. Notwithstand ing the moderate heat of Chile, all the fruits of warm countries, and even those of the tropics, arrive to great perfection there, which renders it probable that the warmth of the soil far exceeds that of the atmosphere. The countries bordering on the e. of Chile do not enjoy these refreshing winds ; the air there is suffocating, and as oppres sive as in Africa under the same latitude. 
18. Meteors. Meteors are very frequent in Chile, especially those called shooting stars, which are to be seen there almost the whole year ; also balls of fire, that usually rise from the Andes, and fall into the sea. The aurora aitslralis, on the the contrary, is very uncommon ; that which was 
observed in 1640 was one of the largest; it was visible, from the accounts that have been left us from the month of February until April. During this century they have appeared at four different times. This phenomenon is more frequently vi sible in the Archipelago of Chiloe, from the greater elevation of the pole in that part of the country. 
19. Volcanoes. That a country producing such an abundance of sulphureous, nitrous, and bitu minous substances, should be subject to volcanic eruptions, is not to be wondered at. The nume rous volcanoes in the Cordilleras would, of them selves, furnish a sufficient proof of the quantity of these combustible materials ; there are said to be 14 which are in a constant state of eruption, and a still greater number that discharge smoke only at intervals. These are all situated in that part of the Andes appertaining to Chile, and nearly in the middle of that range of mountains ; so that the lava and ashes thrown out by them never ex tend beyond their limits. These mountains and their vicinities are found, on examination, to con tain great quantities of sulphur and sal-ammoniac, marcasite in an entire and decomposed state, cal cined and crystallized stones, and various metallic substances. The greatest eruption ever known in Chile was that of Peteroa, which happened on the 3d of December 1760, when that volcano formed itself a new crater, and a neighbouring mountain was rent asunder for many miles in extent ; the eruption was accompanied by a dreadful explo sion, which was heard throughout the whole country ; fortunately it was not succeeded by any very violent shocks of an earthquake : the quan tity of lava and ashes was so great that it filled the neighbouring valleys, and occasioned a rise of the waters of the Tingeraca, which continued for many days. At the same time the course of the Lontue, a very considerable river, was impeded for 10 days, by a part of the mountain which fell and filled its bed ; the water at length forced itself a passage, overflowed all the neighbouring plains, and formed a lake which still remains. In the whole of the country not included in the Andes, there are but two volcanoes ; the first, situate at the mouth of the river Rapel, is small, and dis charges only a little smoke from time to time ; the second is the great volcano of Villarica, in the country of Arauco. This volcano may be seen at the distance of 150 miles ; and although it appears to be insulated, it is said to be connected by its base with the Andes. The summit of the moun tain is covered with snow, and is in a constant state of eruption ; it is 14 miles in circumference at its base, which is principally covered with 
|CHILE. 
I pleasant forests : a great number of rivers derive 
leir sources from it, and its perpetual verdure furnishes a proof that its eruptions have never been very violent. 
20. Earthquakes. The quantity of inflammable substances with which the soil of Chile abounds, rendered active by the electric fluid, may be con sidered as one of the principal causes of earth quakes, the only scourge that afflicts this favoured country. Another, however, not less capable of producing this terrible phenomenon, is the elas ticity of the air contained in the bowels of the earth, in consequence of the water which, insinuat ing itself by subterranean passages from the sea, becomes changed into vapour. This hypothesis will explain why the provinces to the e. of the Andes, at a distance from the sea, are so little in commoded by earthquakes. Two, however, Copiapo and Coquimbo, although near the sea, and as rich in minerals as the others, have never suf fered from earthquakes ; and whilst the other parts of the country have been violently shaken, these have not experienced the least shock, or been but slightly agitated. It is a general opinion that the earth in these provinces is intersected by large caverns. The noises heard in many places, and which appear to indicate the passage of waters, or subterraneous winds, seem to confirm this opinion, and it is highly probable that by affording a free rent to the inflamed substances, these caverns may serve to counteract the progress of those convul sions to which the neighbouring country is subject. The inhabitants usually calculate three or four earthquakes at Chile annually, but they are very slight, and little attention is paid to them. The great earthquakes happen but rarely, and of these not more than five have occurred in a period of 244 years, from the arrival of the Spaniards to the present period, 1812. From a course of accurate observations it has been ascertained, that earth quakes never occur unexpectedly in this country, but are always announced by a hollow sound pro ceeding from a vibration of the air ; and as the shocks do not succeed each other rapidly, the in habitants have sufficient time to provide for their safety. They have, however, in order to secure themselves at all events, built their cities in a very judicious manner ; the streets are left so broad that the inhabitants would be safe in the middle of them, should even the houses fall upon both sides. In addition to this, all the houses have spacious courts and gardens, which would serve as places of refuge ; those who are wealthy have usually in their gardens several neat wooden barracks, where they pass the night whenever they are 
threatened with an earthqnake. Under these cir cumstances the Chilians live without apprehension, especially as the earthquakes have never been hitherto attended with any considerable sinking of the earth, or falling of buildings ; this is probably owing to subterranean passages communicating with the volcanoes of the Andes, which are so many vent-holes for the inflamed substances, and serve to counteract their effects. Were it not for the number of these volcanoes, Chile would, in all probability, be rendered uninhabitable. Some pretend that they can foretel an earthquake from certain changes in the atmosphere: although this does not appear to be impossible, it is altogether discredited by many of the best writers on Chile* these, observe that they will occur both in the rainy and dry seasons, during a storm as well as a calm. 
21. Some detail of productions. Chile pro duces none of those dangerous or venomous auimals which are so much dreaded in hot countries ; and it has but one species of small serpent, which is perfectly harmless, as the French academicians ascertained when they went to Peru, in 17.%, to measure a degree of the meridian. Ulloa also, in his Voyage, part II. vol. 111. observes, " This country is not infested by any kind of insect ex cept the chiguas 3 or pricker, or any poisonous reptile ; and although in the woods and fields some snakes are to be found, their bite is by no means dangerous ; nor does any savage or ferocious beast excite terror in its plains. The puma, or American lion, which is sometimes met with in the thickest and least frequented forests, is distinguish ed from the African lion, both by its being with out a mane and its timidity ; there is no instance of its ever having attacked a man, and a person may not only travel, but lie down to sleep with perfect security, in any part of the plain, and even in the thickest forests of the mountains. Nei ther tigers, wolves, nor many other ferocious beasts that infest the neighbouring countries, are known there. Probably the great ridge of the Andes, which is every where extremely steep, and covered with snow, serves as a barrier to their passage. The mildness of the climate may also be unfavourable to them, as the greater part of these animals are natives of the hottest countries. Horses, asses, cattle, sheep, goats, many kinds of dogs, cats, and even mice, have been brought hither by the Spaniards. A II these animals have multiplied exceedingly, and increased in size. The price of the best horses is from JOO to 500 crowns ; the asses are strong and stately, though hunted chiefly for their skins ; and the mules are j 
C HI 
distinguished for being very sure-footed and active. The horned cattle have, through the favourable temperature of the climate, acquired a larger size, while their flesh has become better and more nu tritive ; the sheep imported from Spain retain a wool as beautiful as that of the best Spanish sheep, each sheep yielding annually from 10 to 15 Ibs. of wool ; they breed twice a-year, and have gene rally two at a birth. The common price of cattle throughout the country is from three to four filippi (fifteen or twenty francs), but in the sea ports the price is fixed hy an ancient regulation, at 10 crowns ; of which the commandant of the port receives four, and the owner six. 
The different kinds of trees known in Chile amount to 97, and of these only 13 shed their leaves : amongst the plants, there are SOOO not mentioned in botanical works. The melons here are, according to Molina, three feet long, and the only fruits unknown are medlars, service apples, three-grained medlar, and the jujubre. Of the indigenous worms, insects, &c. are 36 species, and thetunicated cuttle-fish found here is of 150 Ibs. weight. There are 13 species of crabs and craw fish found on the sea-coast, and four species in the fresh waters. There are 135 species of land-birds, and of quadrupeds 36, without those imported. The various kinds of esculent fish found upon the coast are computed by the fishermen at 76, the most of them differing from those of the n. hemisphere, and appearing to be peculiar to that sea. 
Amongst the earths of this country is a clay thought to be very analogous to kaolin of the Chinese ; another kind called roro, producing an excellent black dye, and represented by Feuille and Frazier as superior to the best European blacks. The membraneous mica, otherwise Mus covy grass, is also found here in the greatest per fection, both as respects its transparency and the size of its laminae ; of this substance the country people manufacture artificial flowers, and like the Russians, make use of it for glazing their houses. The thin plates which are used for windows are by many preferred to glass, from their being pliable and less fragile, and possessing what appears to be a peculiar property, of freely admitting the light and a view of external objects to those within, while persons without are prevented from seeing any thing in the house. 
22. Present revolution. In Chile, the autho rity of the mother country has been superseded by the aristocracy of the colony. The govern ment has fallen, peaceably and without resistance, into the hands of the great Creole families, who 
|TOL. 1, 
|CHI 
441 
seem hitherto to have used their power with tem per and moderation. See LA PLATA. 
|CHILK, a river of the former kingdom, in the district of Tolten Baxo. It runs zo. and enters the sea between the rivers Tolten and Budi. 
|CHILE, a point of the coast of the province and corregim iento of A req u i pa . 
|CHILE, a small island of the S. sea, in the same province and corregimicnto. 
|CIIILENO, PASO DEL, a ford of the river Jazegua, in the province and government of Buenos Ayres, close to the river Cordobcs. 
CHILERIOS, a river of the province and go vernment of Buenos Ayres. It runs n. and outers the river Negro. 
|CHILES, a settlement of the province and corre%imiento of Pasto in the kingdom of Quito. 
"[CHILHOWEE Mountain, in the s. e. pnrt of the state of Tennessee, and between it and the Cherokee country. 
|CHILI A, a settlement of the province and corregimicnto of Caxamarquilla and Collay in Peru. 
|CHILINTOMO, a mountain of the province and government of Guayaquil in the kingdom of Quito ; inhabited by some Indians, who, although reduced to the Catholic faith, are nevertheless of such vile habits as constantly to manifest how deeply idolatry is rooted in them. 
|CIIILIPUIN, a settlement of the province and corregim iento of Chachapoyas in Peru. 
CHILISQUAQUE, a township on Susquehannah river, in Pennsylvania. 
CHILLAHUA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Carangas in Peru, and of the archbishopric of Charcas. 
|CHILLAKOTHE, an Indian town on the Great Miami, which was destroyed in 1782 by a body of militia from Kentucky. General liarmat supposes this to be the " English Tawixtwi," in Kutchins s map. Here are the ruins of an old fort, and on both sides of the river are extensive mea*. dows. This name is applied to many different places, in honour of an influential chief who for* inerly headed the Shawanoes. See TAWIXTWI. 
|CHILLAKOTHE, OLD, is an Indian town des troyed by the forces of the United States in 1780. It lies about three miles s. of Little Mimia river ; the country in its vicinity is of a rich soil, and is beautifully chequered with meadows. 
CHILLAN, a city, the capital of the district and corregimiento of this name in the kingdom of Chile. It is very small and poor, although it 
contains some families of distinction. It consists, 
SL 
442 
C H 1 
at tho most, of SCO houses : for having been des troyed by the Araucanians, in 1599, it has never since been able to reach its former degree of splen dour. It lies between the river Nuble to the n. and the Itata to the s. in lat. 35 56 s. 
|CHILLAN, a mountain or volcano of the same province and corregimiento, at a little distance from the former city. On its skirts are the Indian nations of the Puelches, Pehuenches, and Chiquillanes, who have an outlet by the navigation ol the river Dcmantc. 
|CHILL AN, a small river of the same pro vince. 
|CHILLAOS, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of this name in Peru. It is of a hot temperature, and produces some tobacco and almonds. 
|CHILLOA, or CHILLO, a llanura of the king dom of Quito, near this capital, between two chains of mountains, one very lofty towards the e . and the other lower towards the s. It is watered by two principal rivers, the Pita and the A maguana, which at the end of the llanura unite themselves at the foot of the mountain called Guangapolo, in the territory of the settlement of Alangasi, and at the spot called Las J untas. In this plain lie the settlements of Amaguafia, Sangolqui, Alangasi, andConocoto, all of which are curacies of the jurisdiction of Quito. Itisofamild and pleasant temperature, although sometimes rather cold, from its proximity to the mountains or paramos of Pintac, Antisana, Ruminavi,and Sincholagua. Here was formerly celebrated the caw/gata, by the col legians of the head college and seminary of San Luis de Quito, during the vacations. The soil produces abundance of wheat and rnaize. It is much resorted to by the gentlemen of Quito as a place of recreation. It is eight or nine leagues in length, and six in width. 
CHILLOGALLO, a settlement of the king dom of Quito, in the district of Las Cinco Leguas de su Capital. 
|CHILMARK, a township on Martha s Vine yard island, Duke s county, Massachusetts, con taining 771 inhabitants. It lies 99 miles s. by e. of Boston. See MARTHA S VINEYARD. 
|CIIILOE, a large island of the Archipelago or Ancud of the kingdom of Chile, being one of the 18 provinces or corregimientos which compose it. Jt is 38 leagues in length, and nine in width at the broadest part ; and varies until it reaches only two leagues across, which is its narrowest part. It is of a cold temperature, being very subject to heavy rains and fresh winds ; notwithstanding 
which its climate is healthy. Around it are four other islands ; and the number of settlements in these are 25, which are, 
Achau, Quehuy, 
Lin-lin, Chelin, 
Llifma, Limuy, 
Quenac, Tanqui, 
Meulin, Chiduapi, 
Cahuac, Abtau, 
Alau, Tabor, 
Apiau, Quenu, 
Chaulinec, Llaycha, 
Anihue, Huar, 
Chegniau, Calbuco, 
Vuta-Chauquis, Isla Grande. 
Caucahue, 
All of these are mountainous, little cultivated, and produce only a small proportion of wheat, barley, flax, and papas, esteemed the best of any in America ; besides some swine, of which hams are made, which they cure by frost, and are of so delicate a flavour as not only to be highly esteemed here, but in all other parts, both in and out of the kingdom, and are in fact a very large branch of commerce. The principal trade, however, con sists in planks of several exquisite woods, the tree* of which arc so thick, that from each of them ara cut in general 600 planks, of 20 feet in length, and of 1| foot in width. Some of these trees have measured 24 yards in circumference. The natives make various kinds of woollen garments, such as ponchos, quilts, coverlids, baizes, and iordillos. The whole of this province is for the most part poor ; its natives live very frugally, and with little communication with any other part of the world, save with those who are accustomed to come hither in the fleet once a-year. Although it has some small settlements on the continent, in Valdivia, yet theSe are more than 20 or 30 leagues dis tant from this place, and are inhabited by infidel Indians. These islands abound in delicate shell fish of various kinds, and in a variety of other fish ; in the taking of which the inhabitants are much occupied, and on which they chiefly sub sist. This jurisdiction is bounded on the n. by the territory of the ancient city of Osorno, which was destroyed by the Araucanian Indians, s. by the extensive Archipelagoes of Huayaneco and Huaytecas, and others which reach as far as the straits of Magellan and the Terra del Fuego, e. by the cordilleras and the Patagonian country, and a&gt;. by the Pacific or S. sea. On its mountains are found amber, and something resembling gold dust, which is washed up by the rains, although no 
|CHI 
mines have as yet been discovered here. These islands have some ports, but such as are small, in secure, and without any defence, with the excep tion of that of Chacao. The inhabitants should amount to 22,000 souls, and these are divided into 41 settlements or parishes, being formed by the reducciones of the missionaries of St. Francis, and consisting at the present day, for the most part, of Spaniards and Creoles. The capital is the city of Santiago de Castro, in the large island of Chiloe. [For further account, see index to addi tional history of CHILE, chap. IV. 35. 
CHILON, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Santa Cruz de la Sierra in Peru ; situate in a valley which is beautiful and fertile, and which abounds in wheat. Twenty-eight leagues from the settlement of Saraaypata. 
|CHILOSTUTA, a settlement of the province and alcaldia mayor of Zedales in the kingdom of Guatemala. 
CHILPANSINGO, or CHILPANTZINCO, a settlement of the intendancy of Mexico, surrounded with fertile fields of wheat. Elevation 1080 me tres, or 3542 feet. 
CHILQUES Y MASQUES, a province and corregimiento of Peru, bounded by the province of Quispicanchi ; s. e. by that of Chumbivilcas ; 5. and s. z0. by that of Cotabambas ; w. by that of Abancay ; and n.w. by Cuzco. Its temperature is various, the proportion of heat and cold being regulated by its different degrees of elevation ; so that in the quebradas or deep glens, it is warm, and in the sierras or mountains, cold. It is 13 leagues in length, and 25 in width ; is watered by three rivers, which are the Cusibamba, passing through the valley of this name, the Velille, and the Santo Tomas ; over these rivers are extended seven bridges, which form a communication with the other provinces. It has likewise eight small lakes, and in some of these are found water-fowl. The hot parts abound in all kinds of fruits ; in wheat, maize, pulse, potatoes, and are well stocked with some sorts of cattle, and great herds of deer. Its natives fabricate the manufactures of the coun try ; such as cloths, baizes, and coarse frieze, by means of chorillos, or running streams, as they have no mills for fulling, since a royal licence is necessary for the making use of the same. Al though the appearance of mines has in many places been discovered amongst the mountains, yet no mines have as yet been worked, and two only have been known to have been opened in former times. This province has suffered much from earthquakes ; and the greatest of these hap pened in 1707, when many settlements were made 
443 
desolate. It is composed of 27 settlements, and these contain 16,000 inhabitants. The capital is Paruro ; and the repartimiento of the corregimiento used to amount to 84,550 dollars, and the alca-oala to 676 dollars per ann. The other settlements are, Colcha, Pocoray, 
Araipalpa, Hanoquite, 
San Lorenzo, Corca, 
Pampacucho, Paucartambo, 
Ceapa, Amacha, 
Cuchirihuay, Antapalpa, 
Tucuyachi, QuilH, 
Coron, Acca, 
Pacopata, Vilque, 
Aicha-Urinzaba, Capi, 
Pilpinto, Cavabamba, 
Huayaconga, Huancahuanca, 
Accha-Amansaia, Yaurisque. 
Parco, 
|CHILQUES, another settlement of the province and corregimiento of Lucanas in the same king dom ; annexed to the curacy of Pucquin. 
|CHILTAL, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Atacames or Esmeraldas in the kingdom of Quito ; situate in the valley of Chota, on the shore of the river Mira. 
CHILTEPEC, a settlement of the head settle ment of Tepalcatepec in Nueva Espana. Its tem perature is the mildest of any part of its jurisdic tion. It is situate in the middle of a plain, ex tending over the top of a hill, on two sides of which are large chasms, so immensely deep, that it is really astonishing to observe how the Indians contrive to cultivate the napoleras on their edges. It contains 67 families of Indians, and isfive leagues to the s. of its head settlement. 
|CHILTEPCC, a river of the province and alcal~ diamat/or of Tabasco, which runs into the sea. 
|CHILUA, SAN MARCOS DE, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Huanta in Peru ; annexed to the Curacy of Huamanguilla. 
|CHIMA, a mountain of the kingdom of Quito, in the government and corregimiento of Chimbo or Guaranda, to the zo. of the settlement of Asancoto. It is entirely covered with woods and with streams, which flow down from the heights into the plains of Babahoyo. The river named De la Chima runs from e. tow. until it joins the Caracol. A way has been opened through this mountain which leads to Guaranda or Guayaquil ; but it is passable in the summer only. There is also an other pass equally difficult and dangerous, called Angas. The cold is great at the top of the moun tain, and at the skirts the heat is excessive. It is in lat. 44 s. 
14-i 
|CHIMALAPA, SANTA MARIA DE, a settle ment of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tehuantepec in Nueva Espana. It is of a cold temperature, and the whole of its district is covered with very large trees, especially firs fit for ship-building. Twenty. five leagues n. a&gt;, of its capital. 
CFI1AMLHUACAN, a settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Coatepec in Nueva Espana. It contains a good convent of the religious order of St. Domingo, 300 families of Spaniards, I\fustees 9 and Mulattocs, who employ themselves in labour, and in the commerce of seeds and large and small cattle, which are bred in the estates contiguous ; but the latter in no great de gree, owing to the scarcity of water and pasture which prevails here. 
|CHIMALHUACAN, another settlement and head settlement of the district in the alcaldia mayor of Chalco, of the same kingdom. It contains 166 families of Indians, and a convent of the religious order of St. Domingo. Five leagues n. of its capita. 
|CHIMALTEN YNGO, a province and corre gimiento of the kingdom of Guatemala ; situate in the valley of this capital. It is very pleasant and fertile, and peopled with Indians. 
|CHIMALTEPEC, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Tlapa in Nueva Espana. It contains $9 families of Indians, and is two leagues from the real of the mines of Cairo. 
|CHIMALTEPEC, another small settlement of the head settlement of Malcatepcc, and alcaldia mayor of Nexapa, very near its head settlement. 
|CIIIMAN, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Darien, in the kingdom of Tierra Firme ; situate near the coast of the S. sea, and on the shore of the river of its name, having a small port, which is garrisoned by a detachment from Panama, for the purpose of restraining the inva sions which are continually made by the Indians. 
|CHIMAN, a river of this province and govern ment, which rises in the mountains on the s. coast, and runs into the sea opposite the island of Narranjal. 
|CHIMBA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Coquimbo in the kingdom of Chile. It has the celebrated talc gold-mine which was discovered 36 years ago by a fisherman, who pulling up a plant of large and prickly leaves, called car don , or fuller s thistle, for the purpose o fuel for his fire, observed that particles of gold dropped from its roots; and having more narrowly inspected it, found pieces amidst the mould of considerable size and of very fine qualify* Thus 
|CHI 
a mine became established here, and when it was first dug it yielded from 300 to 500 dollars each caxon. 
|CHIMBA, another settlement of the province and corregimiento of Caxatambo in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Andajes. 
|CHIMBACALLE, or SAN JUAN EVANGEI,ISTA, a settlement of the kingdom of Quito, in the corregimiento of the district of Las Cinco Leguasde la Capital, (of the Five Leagues from the Capital), of which this is looked upon as a suburb from its proximity. 
|CHIMBARONGO, a river of the kingdom of Chile. It rises in the mountains of its cordillera, and unites itself with that of Tinguiragua to enter the Napel. This ri\*er waters and fertilizes some very pleasant and delightful valleys, abounding in pastures, whereon breed and fatten an infinite num ber of cattle. On its shores are two convents, one of the religious order of Nucstra Senora dela Mer ced, for tlie instruction of the Indians in the Chris tian faith : and another a house for novices, which belonged to the regulars of the society of Jesuits; and also within a league s distance from the latter, is a convent of the order of St. Domingo. 
|CHIMBARONGO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Colchagua in the same king dom ; situate in the former valley, between the rivers Tinguiririca and Teno. There is also another small settlement annexed, with a chapel of ease. In its district is a convent of the religious order of La Merced. 
|CHIMBO, a jurisdiction in the province of Zinto in South America, in the torrid zone. The capital is also called by the same name. 
|CHIMBO Y ALAUSI, a province and corregimienfoofthe kingdom of Quito; bounded n. by the scrrania of the asiento of Ambato ; s. by the government and jurisdiction of Guayaquil ; e. by the district of the point of Santa Elena of this govern ment ; and w. by the province of Riobamba. its dis trict is barren and poor, arid the country being mountainous, the inhabitants have no resource for getting their livelihood other than by acting as carriers between the provinces of Riobamba and Tacunga on the one hand, and the warehouses of Babahoyo on the other, where also are the royal magazines ; and thus they bring back goods from the provinces of Peru, having for this traffic a number of rcqtias, or droves of mules, amounting in the whole to 1500 head. This commerce can only be carried on in the summer, the roads being impassable in the winter through the mountains, when they say that these are shut up : at the same season the rivers become swollen to such a degree 
|CHI 
|CHI 
445 
as to render it impracticable to cross them. In the road they usunlly take lies the steep declivity of San Antonio, extremely difficult to be passed. The mules however are so well versed in the man ner of letting themselves slide down it, that there has never been an instance of these animals falling. The vegetable productions of this province are confined to bark, and from this no emolument is derived, although it was discovered, after much search and solicitude, by the Lieutenant-colonel Don Miguel de Santistevan. It accordingly pro vides itself with all that it may require in this way from the adjoining provinces of Riobamba and Tacunga. It is of a very cold temperature, from its being so near to the mountainous desert of Chimborazo. Its natives amount to 2000 souls, the greater part of them being Mustees, and the whole are .divided into seven settlements, of which the capital bears the same name ; and although this was formerly the residence of the corregidor, yet has it of late been deserted for the settlement of Guaranda. The seven settlements are, San Lorenzo, Guaranda, 
Asancoto, Guanujo, 
Chapacoto, Tomabelas. 
San Miguel, 
|CHIMBORAZO, or CHIMBORASU, a very lofty mountain or desert of the cordillera of the province and corregimiento of Riobamba, in the kingdom of Quito ; which, in the language of the country, signifies mountain of the other side. It is covered with everlasting snow, and is the loftiest mountain in the known world, since its height, taken by the academicians of the sciences of Paris, is 3220 toises from the level of the sea to its top, which terminates in a cone or truncated pyramid. Its sides arc covered with a kind of white sand or calcined earth with loose stones, and a certain herb called pajon, which affords pas ture for the cattle of the neighbouring estates. The warm streams flowing from its n. side should seem to warrant the idea that within it is a volcano. From its top flow down many rivers, which take different winding courses ; thus the Guaranda runs s. the Guano s
e. and the Machala e. Oil its skirt lies the road which leads from Quito to Guayaquil ; and in order to pass it in safety, it is requisite to be more cautious in choosing the proper season than were the Spanish conquerors of this province, who were here frozen to death. North of the town of Riobamba, in lat. 1 21 18" 5. ac cording to the observations of M. La Condamine. ("This mountain was visited, on the 23d of June 1797, byHumboldt; who with his party readied its e. slope on that day, and planted their instru 
ments on a narrow ledge of porphyritic rock which projected from the vast field of tin fat homed snow. A chasm, 500 feet wide, prevented their further ascent. The air was reduced to half its usu;il density, and felt intensely cold and piercing. Respiration was laborious, and blood oozed from their eyt 4 s, their lips and their gums. They stood on the highest spot ever trod by man. Its height, ascertained from barometrical observation, was 3485 feet greater than the elevation attained in 1745 by Condamine, and 19,300 feet above the level of the sea. From that extreme station, the top of Chimborazo was found, by trigonometrical measurement, to be 2140 feet still higher. 
|CHIMBOTE, a small pointed island of the S. sea, on the coast of Peru, and province and corre gimiento of Santa. It lies close to another called Corcobado. 
|CHIMBUZA, a large lake of the province and government of Harbacoas, of the kingdom of Quito, to the s. w. of the river Patia, formed by a narrow canal, through which the water of this river enters, and so forms the same lake into a sheet of water of an oblong figure, two leagues in length, and half a league in breadth. This lake has another narrow canal, through which the wa ter issues, and re-unites itself with the same river. 
|CHIMENE, a port of the e. coast of the island of San Juan in Nova Scotia. 
CM I MIC A, a small province of the govern ment of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Rcyno de Gra nada. It is almost as it were desert and aban doned, notwithstanding that it produces a trooi! quantity of maize. The climate is hot and un healthy ; and although it was formerly peopled by the Chimicas Indians, none of these are now found to reside here. 
|CHIMILAS, a barbarous nation of Indians of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, in the province of Santa Marta. They inhabit the woods to the e. of the large river Magdalena, go naked, and have no fixed abodes. They are cruel and treacherous, and are bounded by the nation of the Guaxiros. 
|CHIMIRAL, a river of the province and corregimienlo of Copiapo in the kingdom of Chile. It rises in the Snowy sierra
 runs w. and enters the sea in the point of its name. It in many parts runs in so inconsiderable a stream as frequently to be in all appearance lost before it enters the srti. - CHIMIUAL, ALTO, a settlement of this pro vince and kingdom ; situate on the shore of tlu&gt; former river. 
|CHIMIRAL, ALTO, a point of the coast of the same kingdom. 
446 
|CHIMOR, a settlement of the province and forregimiento of Paucartambo in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of ChaHabambn. 
|CHINA, a small river of the province and go vernment of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; one of those which enter the great ciencga, or quagmire, on the e. 
|CHINA, a point of land of the coast of Peril, in the province and corregimiento of Canete. 
|CHINA, a settlement of Indians of the province and colony of Georgia ; situate on the shore of the river Apalachicola. 
|CHINACATES, a settlement of the province of Tepeguana, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya. 
|CIIINACOTA, a small settlement of the juris diction and government of Pamplona in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of a hot tempe rature, produces sugar-cane, plantains, maize, and is extremely fertile in wheat ; but this not without Cultivation. The natives amount to about 90 poor families, and as many Indians. It is situate in an extensive valley, from whence it derives its title, and which is also called, Of Meer Ambrosio, from the Indians having killed here the German General Ambrosio de Alfinger, by whom it was dis covered in 1531. Four leagues n. e. of Pam plona. 
|CHINANTLA, a settlement and head settle ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Cozamaloapan in Nueva Espaua. It contains 40 fami lies of Chinantecas Indians, and is very fertile, and abounding in maize and cotton. Eighty leagues s. of Mexico. 
CHINANTEPEC, SANTA CATALINA DE, a settlement and head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Guayacocotla in Nueva Espana. Its territory is somewhat extensive, and the settlements or wards belonging to it are far re moved from each other, the greater part of them being situate within the deep glens, or on the heights, so that the roads to them are very diffi cult. It contains, in all, 1340 families of Indians. 
|CHINAPA, a settlement of the province and government of La Sonora ; situate on the shore of the river of its name, between the settlements of Arispo and Bacuachi. 
|CHINAS, a settlement of the province and government of Popayan. 
|CHINATAGUAS, a barbarous nation of Indians of Peru ; situate to the n. of the city of Guanuco. They are descendants of the Panataguas, of whom few remain at the present day, and of whom but little is known. 
e H i 
|CHINATECA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; situate on the skirt of a mountain. 
|CHINATOS, a barbarous nation of Indians of tjie Nuevo Reyno de Granada, who inhabit the forests to the n. e. * to the e. of the city of Pam plona. They are relics of the Chitareros, who have been always found very troublesome, from their proximity to the aforesaid city. 
|CHINAUTLA, a settlement and head settle ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Teuzitlan in Nueva Espana ; annexed to the curacy of this capital. It contains 108 families of Indians, and lies a league and an halPs distance from the same capital. 
|CHINCHA, SANTO DOMINGO, EL REAL DE, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Canete in Peru ; situate on the sea-coast. 
|CHINCHA, an island of the S. sea, near the coast, in the same province and corregimiento, opposite the port of Sangallo. 
|CHINCHA, formerly the name of the province or district now called Chunchasuyu in Peru, to the to. of Cuzco. Its natives were valorous, and resisted for eight months the Emperor Pachacutec, who subjected it to his controul. The country is pleasant, fertile, and abounding in cattle. Here are to be seen vestiges and ruins of some magnifi cent fabrics, which belonged to the Incas, and which strike the imagination with wonder and sur prise, at viewing the immense stones used in their architecture, and when it is considered that the Indians knew not the use of engines, whereby they might raise them. 
|CHINCHAIPUCQUIO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Abancay in Peru. 
CHINCHAN, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Tarrna in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Huariaca. 
CHINCHAO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Iluanuco in Peru; annexed to the curacy of Santa Maria del Valle ; situate on the confines of the infidel Pataguas Indians. 
|CHINCHA YCOCH A, a large lake of the province and corregimiento of Tarma in Peru. It is more than nine leagues in length and three in width ; and from it rises the river Pari or Paria, also called Xauxa, towards the n. side. This river runs s. dividing the province of Xauxa, and giving it its name, both in Xauxa Alta, or High, and Baxa, or Low ; it then turns e. and after run ning for more than 40 leagues, flows back to the n. until it enters the Maranon on the s. side. M. De la Martiniere, with his accustomed error, says that 
the river Maranon lias its rise in this lake ; its real origin being in the lake Lauricocha, as may be ieen under that article. 
|CHINCHERO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Calca y Lares in Peru. The cemetery of its church is composed of some large, thick \valls of wrought stone, well fitted together, and having in them certain niches similar to sentry boxes ; so that they appear as having formerly be longed to some fortress. 
|CHINCHERO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Andahuailas in the same king dom. 
|CHINCHERO, a lake in the province of Cuzco, five leagues distant from this city. 
|CHINCHILCA, or CHUNCHILCA, as others will have it, a river of the district of Guadalabquien and kingdom of Chile ; it runs n. n. w. and enters the river Callacalla. 
|CHINCHIPE, a settlement of the province and government of Jaen de Bracamoros in the king dom of Quito. 
|CHINCHIPE, a river of this province, which rises from the mountain desert or paramo of La Sabanilla. It washes the city and territory of Valladolid, and on its e. side receives the rivers Numballa, Vergel, Patacones, Sangalla, San Francisco, and Nambacasa ; and on its w. side those of Palanda, Simanchi, Namballc, and Guancabamba; when, being swelled to a considerable size by all of these, it enters the Maranon on the n. shore, to the n. w. of the settlement of Tompenda. 
|CHINCHIRU, a large lake of the province and corregimiento of Cuzco in Peru, from whence it lies two leagues to the n. 
|CHINCHULAGUA, a very lofty desert moun tain or paramo , covered with eternal snow, in the province and corregimiento of Tacunga in the kingdom of Quito. It lies five leagues to the n. of Tacunga, with a slight inclination to the n. e. 
CHlNCONTLA, a settlement of the head settlement of Olintla, &nd alcaldia mayor of Zacatlan, in Nueva Espana ; situate in a delightful defile or narrow tract, watered by various rivers. Eight leagues from its head settlement. 
CHINCOTEAG, a small island near the const of the N. sea, in the province and colony of Mary land, between the Cedar isle and the river Siwanscut. 
|CHINGA, a fortress of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; one of the six which were held by the tip as or kings of Bogota, against the Panches na tion, who border upon their country; 10 leagues to the s. w. of Bogota. 
CH INGOS, a settlement of the province and 
44? 
corrcgimienlo of Caxatambo in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Gongor. 
|CHINI, a small island of the S. sea ; situate close to the coast of the province and government of Costarica in the kingdom of Guatemala, within the gulf of Nicoya, and in the innermost part of it. 
|CHINIJO, a settlement of the missions which were held by the religious order of St. Augustin, in the country of the Gran Paititi, of the province and corregimiento of Larecaja in Peru. 
|CHINlPAS, a settlement of the missions of the province and government of Cinaloa. 
|CHINIPAS, some sierras of this province. 
|CHINGUINTILEA, a settlement of the pro vince and corregimiento of Huamanga in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Aneo. 
|CHINU, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Cartagena in the kingdom of Tierra Finne ; founded in the sabanas, and formed by a re-union of other settlements, in 1776, by the Go vernor Don Juan Pimiento. 
|CHIPACO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Huamalies in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Chavin de Pariarca. 
|CHIPALO, a river of the province and govern ment of Nciva in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; one of those which enter the great river Magdalena. 
|CHIPALZINGO, a settlement and head settlementofthe district of the alcaldia mayor ofTixtlan in Nueva Espana. It contains 353 families of Indians, and 22 of Spaniards, Mustecs, and Mulattoes, and lies three leagues from the settlement of Zumpango. 
|CHIPAN, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Lucanas in Peru. 
|CHIPANGA, a river of the province and go vernment of Quixos and Macas in the kingdom of Quito. It rises in the sierra, which divides the district of Macas from the province of Mamas, runs from n. to *. and enters the Morona. 
|CHIPAQUE, a settlement of the corregimiento of Ubaque in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of a mild temperature, and abounds in fruits and seeds peculiar to a warm climate. It consists of 150 housekeepers, and of as many Indians. It i&lt; so infested with snakes, that it is impossible to find any part of it clear of them. Eight leagues s.:?, of Santa Fe, in the road which leads to San Juan de los Llanos. 
|CHIPASAQUE, a settlement of the corrfgimiento of Guatavita in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of an hot temperature, lying 4 leagues to the s. e. of Santa Fe, and close to the settlement of Chaqueta, in the road which leads to San Juan d 
448 
los Llanos. Its inhabitants amount to about 200, besides 100 Indians. 
CHIPATA, a settlement of the corregimiento of the jurisdiction of V elez in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of a n hot temperature, and it is healthy, though by no means abounding in the productions peculiar to its climate. Its inhabi tants are very few, and the number of Indians is 50. It was one of the first settlements entered by the Spaniards, and where the first mass ever celebrated in that part of the world was said by the Friar Do mingo de las Casas, of the order of St. Domingo ; and is situate very close to the city of Velez. 
|CHIPAWAS. See CHEPAWAS. 
CfllPAYA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Carangas in Peru, and of the archbishopric of Charcas ; annexed to the curacy of Huachacalla. 
|CHIPEOS, a barbarous nation of Indians, of the country of Las Amazonas, who inhabit the fo rests near the river Ucayala. V r cry little is known of their customs. 
|CHIPPAWYAN Fort, in N. America, from whence M Kenzie embarked, on the lake of the Hills, when he made his way as far as the N. sea, in 1789.1 
|CHJPPEWAY River runs s. w. into Missis sippi river, in that part where the confluent waters form lake Pepin. 
|CHIPURANA, a river of the province and go vernment of Mainas. It rises in the mountains which are to the *. of Yurimaguas; runs in a ser pentine course from s. to n. and enters the Guallaga on the e. side, in lat. 7 8 s. 
|CHIQUALOQUE, a settlement of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Popantla in Nueva Espana ; inhabited by 12 fami lies of* Indians, and lying 12 leagues to the n. w. of its capital. 
CHIQUIAN, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Caxatambo in Peru. 
|CITIQUIGUANITAS, a barbarous nation of Indians in former times, but now reduced to the Catholic religion. It is in Peru, to the s. of Lima, in the province of Condesuyos de Arequipa. 
|CHIQUILIGASTA, a settlement of the pro vince and government of Tucaman, in the district of its capital ; situate to the s. e. of the same. 
|CHIQUILIXPAN, a settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Zayula in Nueva Espana. It contains 50 families of Indians, and in the mountains in its vicinity are &ome mines of copper, which have been worked at different times ; but not having produced a be nefit proportionate with the expences incurred, they 
have been abandoned. It is 15 leagues w. w. of its head settlement. 
|CHIQUILLANIANS. See Index to new mat ter concerning CHILL, chap. IV. 
|CHIQUIMULA Y SACAPA, a province and dlcaldia mat/or of the kingdom of Guatemala. 
|CHIQUINQUIRA, a settlement of the corregimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of a cold temperature, but is healthy ; its situation is delightful, and it abounds in produc tions. It is watered by a river which runs through the centre of it, the waters of which are unwhole some : at a small distance another river passes through a plain ; this is called Balsa, or Raft, since, before the bridge was thrown across it, it was passed by rafts. It rises from the lake Fuguene, and abounds in most exquisite fish. The settlement, which was formerly but small, is now of great note, and its inhabitants are about 500, besides 70 Indians. It has a good convent of the religious order of S. Domingo, and is noted for the sanctuary of the virgin of its title. Under the large altar, at which is placed this image, there is a small foun tain of water, renowned for the curing of infirmities, as is also the earth which is extracted from thence; it being by no means the least part of the prodigy, that although this earth has been constantly taken out for upwards of 200 years, the excavation formed thereby is comparatively exceedingly small. The faith in, and devotion towards this image, are throughout the kingdom very great, and not less so with regard to strangers, who visit it in great numbers from far distant provinces. This settle ment is nine leagues from Tunja, and 15 to the n. w. of Santa Fe. 
CHIQUITI, a river of the province and go vernment of Esrneraldas in the kingdom of Quito. It runs from s. w. to n. e. between the rivers Vichi and Cuche, and enters on the s. side into the river of Las Esmeraldas. 
|CHIQUITOI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Truxillo in Peru. It is at present destroyed, and the few surviving inhabitants after wards collected together at the settlement of San tiago de Cao, and it then became merely a small estate or hamlet, preserving its original name, and being inhabited by a few Indians. 
|CHIQUITOS, a numerous and warlike nation of Indians of Peru, whose country or territory ex tends from lat. 16 to 20 s. It is bounded w. by the province and government of Santa Cruz de la Sierra ; on the e. it extends itself for upwards of 140 leagues as far as the lake of Los Xaraycs ; on the n. as far as the mountains of the Tapacures, the which divide this country from that of Moxos ; 
on the 5. as far as the mountains of Los Zamucos, having in this part a level territory of upwards of 40 leagues long, covered with forests, and in which is found abundance of wild cinnamon trees, honey, wax, resins, and precious balsams ; numbers of stags, tigers, bears, wild boars, and various other quadrupeds and venomous reptiles. This countryis watered by many rivers, which flow down from the mountains, and run from e. to w. forming large lakes, which abound in excellent fish, and parti cularly in tortoises. The climate is very hot and moist : the natives are of a good stature, well made and robust, but extremely indolent. They obtained the name of chiquitos, or little, from the Spaniards, who upon their first arrival in the country were struck with the lowness of their doors or entrances into their houses, it being necessary to crawl in and out of them on all fours : this is a plan they seem to have adopted as a precaution against the attacks of their enemies and wild beasts. Their country was first entered by Nuflo de Chavcs in 1557; and upon an attempt to reduce it to the do minion of Spain, the inhabitants maintained a long and bloody conflict against th&lt;- Spaniards until the year 1690, when, induced by the preaching of the re gulars of the company of the Jesuits, they embraced the Catholic faith, became reduced to the laws of civil society, and were divided into settlements, which these zealous ministers of the gospel con trived, not without incredible exertion and fatigue, to maintain undisturbed until 1767, \vhen they were supplanted in their functions by the secular clergy. The Portuguese of San Pablo have taken away numbers of these Indians to work in their estates, and this is one of the principal causes of their apparent diminution, since they were at first innumerable. They are composed of the following nations : Picocas, Tapacuracas, 
Punajicas, Paunacacas, 
Quimecas, Quidabonecas, 
Huapacas, Curiminacas, 
Baurecas, Veripones, 
Payconecas, Huaycurues, 
Huaravos, Quitemocas, 
Anaporecas, Napecas, 
Meriponecas, Pizocas, 
Zarabecas, Tampicas, 
Otures, Xuberecas, 
Caytoporades, Parisicas, 
Bohococas, Xamanucas, 
Tabacicas, Tapuricas, 
Zebacas, Cupiecas, 
Quinomecas, Chamaros, 
Yarucaricas, Penoquicas, 
Cucicas, Maxamoricas, 
|YOL. I. 
449 
Taos, 
Bazorocas, 
Pequicas, 
ParabacaSj 
Otugues, 
Ecorabecas, 
Curacanecas, 
Batasicas, 
Ubisonecas, 
Boros, 
Mataycas, 
Morotocos, 
All of these nations speak a different language, bu&lt; are now united into settlements, having one idiom which is familiar to them all ; although this is ex tremely difficult, the acquisition of it having puzzled the missionaries, who were engaged in its study for 9 or 10 years or upwards: besides the guttural letters, and those whose sound is given by the palate, teeth, and lips, this language has others, the pronunciation of which is given entirely through the nose ; the dialect also of the men dif fers from that of the women. The continual mois ture which is prevalent here, together with the mul titude of trees, which stand so thick as to impede the free circulation of the air, are the causes why this country is peculiarly subject to epidemic dis orders, which carry away immense numbers of its inhabitants ; as happened in the year 1768, when, out of 24 ,000 inhabitants, more than 4000 perished. They suffer much also from crickets, which dis turb their rest and destroy their clothes. Here are also an infinite variety of spiders, some of which are as large as a man s fist, which live in holes, and others of a smaller sort, which make their web among trees, in so strong a manner as to arrest a man on horseback in his passage : some there are of a very small sort, whose colour is red, and whose web is yellow and as soft as silk, but whose bite is so venomous, that the body of the person bitten immediately swells all over, and this is followed by a flux of blood from the mouth, nostrils, eyes, and nails ; though by means of these violent emotions, the poison itself is sometimes evacuated. Jn the woods are found a great variety of monkeys; some with long beards, and so large and ugly as to strike even the natives with horror. It has been observed, that the people of this province seldom exceed 60 years in age, arid that their life is extremely dissi pated ; taking at the same time into consideration the excessive perspiration and debility caused by their aliments, for the very meat they eat is flabby and insipid, on account of the cattle seldom thriving or growing fat : but with all their disadvantages of food and climate, there never was seen amongst them a blind, dumb, foolish, or any otherwise de fective person. The settlements are regularly built, forming wide and straight streets with a square and large market-place. The furniture of the houses is comprised in a cotton hammoc, and some cups and dishes, and the ornament in some maize and 3 M 
450 
dried flesh, hung up to preserve them from corrup tion. Their garments are a shirt without sleeves, reaching down to the middle of their legs. The married people wear drawers of baize with coloured puckers for festival days, and those who enjoy oflices of state wear a baize jacket : they neither use hat nor shoes, and no one of them ever goes out without slinging round his neck some medals and a rosary. The hair is worn short until they marry, and when they become old they suffer it to grow long. The women wear close gowns which reach down to the ground, and which they call tapoyes: they never swathe or bind themselves round the &gt;vaist, but carry on their necks, on gala-days, some threads strung with glass intermixed with beads made of cacao nuts, and coloured beans ; these threads usually amount to 20 or SO rows : on en tering the church they always loosen their hair. The regulars of the company of the Jesuits taught them olliccs, in which they assisted most dexte rously ; and it really excites admiration that Indians, acquainted only with their own barbarian dialect, should be able to manage the compass of the notes, understand their proportions and num bers, and apply the rules of music to its execution. At certain times of the year they go a meteor, or to hunt for honey among the woods: from thence they bring back wax of two sorts, one which is white and odoriferous, the other of less substance, as the wax of Europe, manufactured by a species of bees without stings, called opernus; also an other kind of wax, made by a still different sort of bees, but which arc all properly denominated wild wax. This wax is delivered to the curate, who preserves it in his house to send to the provinces of Peru ; and from the product of this article, and from that of the cotton, which is made into woofs, to the amount of two pounds weight yearly by each Indian, he procures in exchange whatever is necessary for the settlement, such as baizes, coloured wools, bags, iron and steel articles, chopping knives, wedges, hatchets, scissars, pocket-knives, needles, medals, bugles, and other articles of hard ware and little necessaries, which, being stored up bv him, is distributed amongst the natives accord ing to their necessities, and in a manner that they may want for nothing, but live hnppy and con tented. The settlements are as follows : San Xavier, San Joseph, 
La Concepcion, Santiago, 
San Miguel, San Juan, 
San Ignacio, El Santo, 
Santa Ana, Corazon. 
San Rafael, OHIQUIZA, a settlement of the corregimierto 
|CHI 
of Sachica in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of a cold temperature, and produces wheat, maize, barley, papas, and the other fruits peculiar to its climate. Its inhabitants are so few as scarcely to amount to 30 housekeepers, and about the same number of Indians. Four leagues to the n. w. of Tunja, and somewhat less from Velez. 
CHIRA, a settlement and seat of the silver mines of the province and corregimienlo of Piura in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Paita. 
|CHIKA, another settlement of the province and alcaldia mayor of Nicoya in the kingdom of Guate mala. 
|CHIRAGOW. See PLKIN River. 
|CHIRAMBIRA, an island situate in the large bay of St. Juan, on the coast of the province and government of Choco in the S. sea, which gives its name to a small creek formed by this island and the continent. 
|CHIRCA, a settlement of the province and corrcgimicnto of Sicasica in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Chulurnani. 
CII1RE, SANTA ROSA DE, a city of the govern ment and province of Los Llanos in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; founded by the Governor Francisco Anciso. It is of a very hot and un healthy temperature, but affords the same vegetable productions as the rest of the province. It is so mean and reduced as to contain hardly 100 house keepers, and scarcely deserves the name of a city. Tli is settlement lies the furthest to the n. w. extre mity of any in this kingdom, and is bounded in that quarter by the province and bishopric of Ca racas. 
|CHI HE, SANTA ROSA DE, a river of the above province and government. It rises at the foot of the lomas del Viento, runs e. and enters the Meta, traversing the country of theBetoyes Indians. 
|CHIRGUA, a river of the province and govern ment of Venezuela. It rises in the mountain of Tacazuruma on the s. runs s. and enters the Garnalotal, after having collected the waters of many other rivers. 
|CHIRIBIQUI, SANTA FE DE, a settlement of the province and government of Cumana in the kingdom of Tierra Firme ; situate on the coast, between the rivers Mosina and Marecapana. 
|CHIRiCOAS, a barbarous nation of Indians of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, to the e. of the mountains of Bogota, and at the entrance of the llanos or plains of Cazanare and Meta. They lead a wandering life through the woods in com pany with the Guaibas ; they are crafty and very dexterous thieves, but of a docile and pacific dis position. In 1664 some of them were reduced into 
a settlement founded seven leagues fro;n the place called the Puerto, but in 1663 they fled, all of them, to the mountains, although in the same year they returned hack again to the settlement. 
CHIRIGUANA, a large settlement of the pro vince and government of Santa Maria in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of an hot temperature, and the territory is level, fertile, and beautiful. It has besides the parish church a convent or house of entertainment of the religious order of St. Francis. 
|CHIRIGUANOS, a country and nation of the infidel Indians of the province and government of Santa Cruz de la Sierra in Peru, from whence it lies 20 leagues to the s. It is bounded on the e. by the province of Tomina, and 5. e.by that of Chuquisaca ; is composed of different settlements, each governed by its captain or caziquc, subject, in ascertain degree, to the above government. These people, though they refuse to adopt the Ca tholic religion, are in perfect amity with the Spa niards, trading with them in wax, cotton, and maize. This nation, by the incursions which they made, used at first to give frequent alarm to the province, and once had the address to capture the city of Chiquisaca. The Inca Yupanqui en deavoured in vain to subdue them, and neither he nor the Spaniards could avail aught with them until they were reduced by the missionaries, the regul irs of the extinguished company of the Je suits; since that time they have been stedfast in supporting the Spaniards against the other infidels, serving them as a barrier, and having for their own line ot defencc the river Guapay. They are very valorous, but inconstant and faithless ; they are descended from the nations which are found to the e. of Paraguay ; and fled from thence, to the num ber of 4000, when avoiding the threatened chastise ment of the Portuguese, who were about to inflict condign punishment on them for having treache rously murdered the Captain Alexo Garcia in the time of the King Don Juan 111. of Portugal. They were formerly cannibals, and used to fatten their prisoners that these might become better fare ; but their intercourse and trade with the Spaniards lias caused them by degrees to forget this barbarous practice, and even to give them a disgust at their savage neighbours, who still continue in the same practices. They are at the present day so greatly increased in numbers, that they are one of the most numerous nations of America ; are besides very neat and clean ; and it is not uncommon for them to rush out of their dwellings in the middle of the night to plunge and wash themselves in a river in the most severe seasons ; their wives too, 
|CHI 
451 
immediately after parturition, invariably do the same, and on their return lay themselves on a heap of sand, which they have for this purpose in the house ; but the husband immediately takes to his bed, and being covered all over with very large leaves, refuses to take any other nourishment than a little broth made of maize ; it being an incorri gible error of belief amongst them that those cere monies will be the cause of making their children bold and warlike. They have shewn great power and address in their combats with our troops when these first endeavoured to enter their territories, and they threw themselves in such an agile and un daunted manner upon our fire-arms that it was found necessary, on our part, to insert in the ranks a lance-man between every two fusileers : they are, moreover, so extremely nimble that it is impossible to take them prisoners but by sur prise. 
|CHIRIMICHATE, a river of the province and government of Venezuela. It rises in the sierra opposite the point of Hicacos, and enters the sea in this point. 
|CHIRINOS, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Jaen de Bracamoros in the king dom of Quito. 
|CHIRIQUI, a district of the province and go vernment of Santiago de Veragua in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, the last district of this province; dividing the government from that of Guatemala, and touching upon the province of Costarica. It is of limited extent ; the country is mountainous, and its climate hot and unhealthy, surrounded on all sides by infidel Indians. Here are bred num bers of mules, which are carried to be sold at Pa nama and Guatemala; upon the coast of the S. sea are found crabs which distil a purple colour used for dyeing cotton, which, although it may fade a little, can never be entirely eradicated. They have plenty of swine, and some vegetable pro ductions ; with which they carry on a trade, now fallen much to decay, with the city of Panama. The capital is Santiago de Alanje. 
|CHI RIQI i, a river of the above province, which rises in the. mountains on the s. and enters the sea, serving as limits to that province, and dividing it from that of Costarica in the kingdom of Gua temala. 
|CHIRIS, .a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Castro V
ireyna in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Huachos. 
|CHIRISU, a settlement of the province and 
corrcgimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It is of a rather cold temperature, and 
abounds in wheat, maize, barley, ulberjas., and 
3 M 2 
papas ; likewise in cattle, from (lie fleeces of which .{great quantities of woven cloths are made. Its population amounts to 150 house-keepers and 100 Indians. Four leagues to the s. K. of its capital, and near to the settlement of Turmeque. 
CIIIROBIO, a river of the province and go vernment of Venezuela. It runs c . and enters the sea opposite the island Turata. 
CHIRTA, a settlement of the province and correginrienlo of Chachupoyas in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Yambrasbansba. 
CII1RIJ, a settlement of the alcahlia mayor and jurisdiction of Penonome in the kingdom and government of Tie-rra Firme ; situate on the shore t)f the S. sea, upon an extensive plain. 
|CHIRU, a river of this jurisdiction, which rises in the mountains of Penonome, and enters the S. sea near the settlement of Anton. 
|CHIRU, a very small island of the same juris diction, close upon the coast, and called El Farallon. 
|CHISAHALO, or TOCAZO, a settlement of the province and corregimicnto of Tacunga in the kingdom of Quito. 
|CIIISCAS, a settlement of the province and corregirniento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada; situate at the fool of the Snowy sierra, and therefore of a cold and unpleasant temperature. Its productions correspond with those of a similar climate ; it contains about 80 Indians, with a very few whites. Thirty-two leagues n. e. of Tunja. 
|CHISGAS, PAHAMO !, a very lofty moun tain covered with eternal snow, in the province and government of San Juan de los Llanos of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, between the rivers Apure and Sinaruco. 
CHISLOGA, a settlement of the province and corregimitnlo of Chichas and Tarija in Peru ; be longing to the district of the former. It is annexed to the curacy of Tupisa. 
CFIISME, a settlement of the head settlement of Puxmecatan, and alcaldia mayor of Villalta. It contains 71 families of Indians, and lies 18 leagues from its capital. 
|CHISPA8, PUNTA DE LAS, a point on the s. coast and w. head of the island of St. Domingo, in the territory possessed by the French ; lying between, the settlement and parish of the English, and the point of Burg-ados. 
|CHISQUE, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Canta in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Atabillos Altos. 
CHISQUILLA, a settlement of the province and corres imienlo of Chachapoyas in Peru. 
(5HISSEL, a fort in the state of Tennessee, 
two miles and a half from English ferry, on New river, 43 from Abingdon, and 107 from Long island, on HoIston.J 
|CIHTA, a province and correginuento of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, and vice-royalty of Santa Fe. It was formerly called Chisca. It is bounded w. by the province of Bogota, and n. by the country of the Laches Indians, or province of Cochuy, and e. and s. by the llanuras of the Orinoco. It was discovered by George Spira, a German, and he was the first who entered it with his companions in 1535. Tins territory is fertile, abounds in wheat and maize, the grain of which is extremely large, as also in other seeds, and has goats and neat cattle in plenty. It is of an hot and unhealthy temperature, and has palms similar to those of Palestine and Barbary, producing ex cellent dates. The capital is of the same name. This is situate at the foot of the mountains of Bo gota ; it is a large settlement, and was formerly en titled a city. Its inhabitants consist of upwards of 700 whites and about 200 Indians. Twentyfour leagues to the n. e. of Tunja. 
|CHITA, another settlement, which is the head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Villalta in Nucva Espana. It is of a mild tempe rature, contains 90 families of Indians, and is three leagues and a half to the s. of its capital. 
CII1TAGA, PUNTA DE, a bridge in the pro vince and government of Merida, to the s. of the city of Pamplona, and upon the river of this name. 
|CHITANOS, a barbarous nation of Indians; bounded by that of the Chiscas, but distinct from it, in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. They in habit the woods to the n. e. of the mountains of Bogota and the shores of the rivers Ele, Cuiloto, and Arauca ; are an intractable and cruel people, and dreaded by all their neighbours. In 1535, having joined company with the Jiraras, they took and destroyed the city of Las Palmas. 
CIIITARAQUE, a settlement of the corregimienlo&nd jurisdiction of Velez in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of an hot but healthy temperature, produces yucas, maize, plantains, cotton, and great quantities of sugar, from which are made fine and much esteemed conserves. 
|CHITAREROS, a barbarous and brutal na tion of Indians of the Nuevo Reyno dc Granada, who inhabit the mountains in the vicinity of Pam plona ; they are mixed with some families of the Laches. This nation is extremely numerous, and pass a wandering life without any fixed abode ; they go entirely naked, and are much given to sen sual gratifications ; some of them have embraced 
the Catholic faith, and are reduced to settlements, though the number of these is very small. 
|CHITEPEC, a settlement of the head settle ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa In Nueva Espana. It is of a cold temperature, and contains 39 families of Indians, who live by sowing maize, the only vegetable production of their territory. Five leagues w. n. w. of its capi tal. 
|CHITO, a settlement of the province and eorregimiento of Jaen de Bracamoros in the kingdom of Quito, upon the s. shore of the river SangaSla, and in the royal road of Loxa, which leads to Tomependa. In its vicinity are some gold mines, but which are not worked; its temperature is hot and moist, and consequently unhealthy. 
|CHITTENDEN County, in Vermont, lies on lake Champlain, between Franklin county on the n. and Addison s. ; La Moille river passes through itsw. w. corner, and Onion river divides it nearly in the centre. Its chief town is Burling ton. This county contained, by the census of 1791, 44 townships and 7301 inhabitants. Since that time the n. counties have been taken from it, so that neither its size or number of inhabitants can now be ascertained. 
|CHITTENDEN, a township in Rutland county, Vermont, contains 159 inhabitants. The road over the mountain passes through this township. It lies seven miles e. from the fort on Otter creek, in Pittsford, and about 60 n. by e. from Benmngton.J 
|CHITTENENGO, or CANAGERAGE, a considerable stream which runs n. into lake Oneida, in the state of New York. 
|CHIUAO, or SIBAURI, a small river of the province and colony of Surinam, or the part of Guayana possessed by the Dutch. It rises in the mountain of Sincomay, runs n. and turning w. enters another river which is without a name, and where several others unite to enter the Cuyuni on the s. side. 
|CHIUATA, a river of the province and go vernment of Cumana in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. It rises from some plains in this territory, runs 5. collecting the waters of several other rivers, particularly that of the Suata, and then enters the sea, just as it becomes navigable. 
|CHIUATA, another river of the same province and government, which rises at the foot of the serranias of Paraguay, to the w. of the town of San Fernando, runs 5. and enters the Orinoco. 
CHIUCHA, S. JUAN DE, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Lipes, and arch
453 
bishopric of Ch areas, in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of San Christoval. 
|CHIUCHIN, a settlement of the province and corregimiet&o of Chancay in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Canchas. In its district there is a mineral hot-water spring, much renowned for the curing of various kinds of maladies. 
CHIUCHIU, a settlement of the province and government of Atacama, and archbishopric of Charcas, in Peru. 
|CHIUGOTOS, or CHUIGOTES, a barbarous na tion of Indians of the province and government of Venezuela, bordering upon the settlement of Maracapana. They are very few, and live retired in tlic mountains ; they are cruel even to cannibalism. 
|CHIUICOS, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Buenos Aj res : situate to the s. of its capital. 
|CHIXILA, a settlement and head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Villalta in Nueva Espana. It is of an hot temperature, con tains 134 families of Indians, and lies 12 leagues to the n. of its capital. 
|CHOCAIA, NUEVA, a settlement of the pro vince of Chichas and Tarija in Peru; of the dis trict of the former, and annexed to the curacy of Tatasi. 
|CHOCAMAN, a settlement of the head settle ment of the district of Zacan, and alcaldia mayor of Cordoba, in Nueva Espana. It is of a cold and moist temperature, contains 103 families of Indians, and is five leagues to the n. n. w. of the capital. 
|CHO CAN, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Piura in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Aabaca. 
|CHOCAYAS, a mountain of the province and corregimiento of Chichas and Tarija in Peru, and jurisdiction of Chuquisaca. It is celebrated for its rich gold mines. 
|CHO CO, a large province and government of the jurisdiction of Popayan; by the territory of which it is bounded e. and *. e. ; on the w. by the Pacific or S. sea; n. by the barbarous nations of Indians, and by the province of Darien ; and s. by that of Barbacoas. The whole of this province abounds in woods and mountains, and is crossed by a chain of the Andes, which run as far as the isthmus of Panama. It is watered by several rivers and streams, all of which run w. and enter the S. sea. The districts of Citara and Raposo form a part of this province; very few of their ancient inhabitants remain at the present day ; the greater part of them, having- perished in the war of the 
454 
Spaniards, and the rest haying fled, and thus penetrating w. have confounded themselves with other nations. It abounds in maize, plantains, and cflcoo of an excellent quality; its gold mines render it rich and well peopled ; it also carries on, through this branch of revenue, a great commerce with the province of Popayan, the natives of that placejcoming here to purchase gold, and leaving in exchange whatever is necessary for the comfort and convenience of life. There is no inconsider able number of Negro slaves employed in work ing the mines, and in 1750 they amounted to 20,000, without mentioning the men of colour, such as the iMusteesant Mulatfoes, and even AVhites who are engaged in this lucrative concern. The climale is warm, but moist from the continual rains, and consequently unhealthy. This country abounds in tigers, wild boars, alligators, parrots, monkeys of various sorts, and a multitude of rep tiles and insects, especially in vipers and ve nomous snakes ; such as corales, exis, and rattle snakes. Here are also an infinite variety of beau tiful sorts of wood, curious balsams, herbs, fruits, and flowers. It was subject &lt;o the government of Popayan, until it became divided in the time of Don Fernando Guerrero. All the gold which is taken out of the mines here, and which is the cur rent money, was formerly carried to be coined at the mint of Santa Fe, until that the house of Valencia established another, at its own cost, in the city of Popayan ; this privilege having been first granted that house by the mayoralty, though it was afterwards taken away and added by the king to the crown, upon the payment of a compensation of 100,000 reals per annum to the original pro prietors. This province extends 48 leagues from .t. to n. and is 39 in width from e. to zo. The capital is the city of Nevita. 
Cnoco, Canal of. In the interior of the pro vince of Choco, the small ravine (qttebrada) De la Raspadura unites the neighbouring sources of the Rio de Noanama, called also Rio San Juan, an 1 the small river Quito: the latter, &lt;he Rio Andageda, and the Rio Zitasa, form the Rio d Atrata, which discharges itself into the Atlantic ocean, while the Rio San Juan flows into the S. sea. A monk of great activity, cure of the village of Novita, employed his parishioners to dig a small canal in the ravine De la Raspadura, by means of which, when the rains are abundant, canoes loaded with cacao pass from sea to sea. This interior communication has existed since 1788, unknown in Europe. The small canal of Haspadura unites, on the coasts of the two oceans, 
two points 75 leagues distant from one ano ther. 
Cnoco, SAN JUAN CURISOSTOMO DE, another settlement of the province and corregimienlo of Condesuyos de Arequipa in Peru. 
|CHOCOLATE Creek, a head-water of Tioga river in New York, whose mouth lies 10 miles s. w. of the Painted post. 
|CHOCOLOCO-CA, which the Spaniards call Castro Vireyna, a town of Peru, 60 leagues s. e. of Lima, is very famous for its silver mines, which are at the top of a great mountain always covered with snow, and but two leagues from the town. The stones of the mine are of a dark blue colour ; these being calcined and powdered, then steeped in water and quicksilver, the filth is sepa rated, and the silver melted and formed into bars. These veins are not very rich, but the metal is very fine. They make plenty of wine here, where it attains a greater degree of perfection, owing to the purencss of the air, than it is observed to have else where. 
|CHOCONA, a settlement of the province and corregimienlo of Paria in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Toledo. 
|CIIOCONTA, a settlement of the corregimiento of Guatavita in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of a cold but healthy temperature, being situate upon a llanura. It produces abundance of wheat, maize, papas, barley, and garlic, of the whole of which an abundant crop is gathered ; these indeed form the principal branches of its commerce, as they supply all the neighbouring provinces. It was in the time of the Indians a large, rich, and populous city, and the barrier of the province of Tunja; also the place where the zipas held a garrison of their best troops. This city was entered by Gonzalo Ximinez de Qucsada in 1537, when lie gave it the name of Kspiritu Santo, from this festival having been celebrated here. After the conquest of the Spa niards it became a became a curacy of the relic-ion of St. Domingo, and was one of those which was considered the first step to the advantages to le derived from these missions. It was close to this settlement that the sanguinary conflict took place which was fought between Michua, king of Tunja, and Saguanmachica, zipa or king of Bogota, in which both princes fell dead upon the field ; at present it is a small village of Indians, who amount to the number of 200, besides 400 other inhabi tants, who consist of whites. Ten leagues n. of Santa Fe, and as many from Tunja, just midway betweeen these two jurisdictions. 
|CHOCOPE, SAX T
|EORO Y SAX PABT.O DE, a small settlement of the province and corregimiento of Truxillo in Peru ; situate in the valley of Chicama, watered and fertilized by the river of this name. It produces in abundance grapes, sugar-canes, olives, and every kind of European fruit of the most excellent flavour. It was formerly a large population, since that the few inhabitants who had been left at Concepcion, and those of Licapa in the same valley, have incorporated themselves here. It has a very large and handsome church, although this underwent some damage from an earthquake experienced in this province in 1759 ; thesettlement suffered much also in 1726, as did all the other towns of the coast, as, very contrary to the custom of the climate here, it rained without cessation for a period of 40 days, from five o clock in the evening to the same hour in the following morning, so that the houses were almost all entirely destroyed. It is 10 leagues from the capi tal, in the royal road which leads to Lima, and which is called De Valles. Lat. 7 59 s. 
|CHOCORUA, a mountain in Grafton county, New Hampshire, on the n. line of Strafford county, H. of Tamworth.l 
fCHOCUITO. See CHUCUITO.! CHOCUY. See LACHES. CHOISEUL Bay, on the n. w. coast of the islands of the Arsacides, w. of port Praslin. The inhabitants of this bay, like those at port Praslin, have a custom of powdering their hair with lime, which burns it and gives it a red appearance. 
|CHOIX, a port of the w. coast of the island of Newfoundland. 
|CHOLCHOL, a settlement of the district of Repocura in the kingdom of Chile ; situate at the mouth of the river Rumulhue before it enters the Cauten. 
|CHOLCO-COCHA, a great lake of the pro vince and corrfgimicnto of Castro Vireyna in Peru, upon the heights of the mountains of the Andes. It is navigated by rafts made by the Indians ; fish it has none, from the excesisve cold of its waters ; from it springs the river Caica-mayu. Mr. De la Martiniere confounds this lake, which is called Chocolo-cocha, with the city of Castro Vireyna, maintaining that the Indians call it by the latter name, but which is erroneous. 
|CHOLI, a settlement and establishment of the English in S. Carolina, and country of the Cherokces Indians; situate at the source of the river Apalachicola. 
|CI1OLIQUE, SAX PABLO DE, a settlement of the province ad corregimiento of Caxamarca la G-raude in Peru. 
455 
|CHOLOAPA, SAN BARTOLOME DE, a settle ment of the head settlement of Huitepec, and ulcaldia mayor of Cuernavaca, in Nueva Espana. It contains 8i families of Indians. 
|CHOLOSCOPO, SAN MATLO DP, a settlement of the district, and alcaldia mayor of Mcxilcaltzingo, in Nueva Espafia, somewhat more than half a league s distance to the w. of this place. It contains 102 families of Indians, and has a handsome convent of the strict observers of St. Francis, which is also a college for studies. 
|CHOLULA, a district and jurisdiction of an alcaldia mayor in Nueva Espana. Its extent i* very limited, being only three leagues in length at the widest part ; but it is nevertheless well filled with inhabitants j its territory is level, and very fertile in wheat, maize, and pepper, which is here called ch/le, as also in other seeds, of which abundant crops are gathered ; it formerly acquired agreat emolument from the sale of cochineal, but this is laid aside and entirely abandoned. The Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattoes, busy themselves in making cloths and woven stuffs of cotton, and they have many workshops, by which they supply with these articles the other provinces. Its population consists of 43 settlements of Indians, which are, San Juan Quantlazingo, Sta. Maria Quescomate, Santiago de Momospan, San, Bernardino, Santa Barbara, Sta. Clara Ocovica, 
Todos Santos, Sta. Maria Malacatepe
San Luis, que, 
San Gregorio de Saca- Sta. Maria Coronango, 
pccpan, S. Miguel Coztla, 
S. Francisco de Qua pan, San Francisco Ocotlaa S. Diego Cuaucotla, San Antonio, o j". 
S. Sebastian, San Francisco, 
S. Juan Cuautla, San Mateo, 
Tonanchin, San Gabriel, 
Santa Maria Zacatepeque, San Lucas, San Geronimo, San Martin, 
San Pablo Zochimehua, San Lorenzo, San Andres de Cholula, Tlantenango, San Francisco Acate- Santa Isabel, 
peque, Los Santos Reyes, 
San Bernardo Tlaxcal- S. Pablo Ahuatempa, 
zingo, S. Mateo, distinct from 
S.AntonioCacalotepeque, the other, Santa Ana, S. Miguel Pnpalotla, 
San Martin Tlanapa, S. Andres de Cholula. 
The district of Cholula contained in 1793 a population of 22.423 souls. The villages amount ed to 42, and the farms to 45. Cholula, Tlax-
 clala, and Hwtxocingo, are the three republics which resisted the Mexican yoke for so many cen turies, although the pernicious aristocracy of their 
constitution left the lower people little mote free dom than they would have possessed under the government of the Aztec kings. 
The capital is the city of the same name, founded as far back as the time of the gentilism of the Mexi can empire, when this nation was at enmity with that of Chichimeca ; it was then one of the most populous cities, and contained 30,000 inhabitants and SOO temples, and served as a barrier to Moctezuma, in the attack against the republic of Tlaxclala ; the latter place never having been sub jected to the Mexican yoke. This -was the city which of all others most thwarted the designs of Hernan Cortes, but the inhabitants were discovered in the conspiracy they had laid against him, when they pretended to receive him with open arms and a peaceable and friendly disposition, and were made by him to suffer severely for their hypocrisy ; alter which he and his whole army escaped un injured. This city has many monuments denoting its antiquity ; and although in ancient times idolatry was here carried to its highest pitch, yet the light of the gospel has spread widely around its enliven ing rays. It is of a mild and healthy temperature, rather inclined to cold than heat, being situate on a level, fertile, and beautiful plain. It has a good convent of the order of St. Francis, which is also a house of studies. Its inhabitants are composed of 50 families of Spaniards, 458 of Mustees, Mulattoes and Negroes, and 606 of Indians. On a lofty spot which lies close to the entrance, on the c. side of the city, is a handsome chapel, in which is venerated the image of the blessed virgin, which also bears the dedicatory title of Los Reme dies. It is a little more than 20 leagues to the e. of Mexico, and four from Tlaxclala. Long. 98 14 . Lat. 19 4 . [Its population is at present estimated at about 16,000 souls. 
CM ONE, a settlement which in former times was considerable, but now much impoverished, in the ancient province of Cara, which is at present united to that of Esmerajdas. It lies upon the shore of the river Chones to the n. and is of an hot and moi&t climate, in lat. 33 s. 
|CHONES, a large river of the province of Cara in the kingdom of Quito. It runs to the w. and collects the waters of the Sanchez and the Tossagua on the n. and on the s. those of the Camaron and the Platanal. At its entrance on the n. stood the city of Cara, of which the vestiges still remain. Where it runs into the sea it forms the bay of Cara, between the s. point of Bellaca and the n. point of laca. Its mouth is nearly two miles and an half wide. 
|CHONGO, SAN MIGUEL DE, a settlement of 
the alcaldia mayor of Huamcjula. It is of a yery cold temperature, from its being situate in the vi cinity of the sierra Nti);/da (or Snowy) ofthe Chontales, which lies on the n. side of it. Its inhabi tants amount to 24 families of Indians, who trade in cochineal, seeds, and fruits, of which the coun try, being naturally luxuriant, produces great quan tities. It is watered by rivers which pass at a little distance, and is annexed to the curacy of Tepaltcpec of the jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor ofNexapa, from whence it lies 20 leagues. It is, on account of this great distance, combined with the badness of the roads, that the natives so sel dom can avail themselves of any instruction in the holy faith ; dying, as they often do, without the administration of the sacraments. Indeed, there is only one day in the year, which is the 29th of September, and on which the Indians celebrate the festival of their titular saint Michael, when they are visited by their curate, who then hears their confessions and says mass. At this time this settle ment has somewhat the appearance of a Catholic people; but being all the rest of the year left to themselves, it is not to be wondered that many re lapse into their pristine state of gentilism and idola try. Three leagues w. of its capital. 
|CHONGON, a settlement of Indians of the pro vince and government of Guayaquil in the king dom of Quito; situate near a small torrent, re nowned for the stones which it washes down, of a certain crystallized matter, which being polished, resemble brilliants, and are used as buttons, rings, and other trinkets. 
|CI1ONGOS, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Xauxa in Peru. 
|CIIONTA, a settlement of the province and corregimienfo of Abancay in Peru. 
|CIIONTA, another settlement in the province and corregimiento of Guamalies of the same kingdom, famous for its mine of quicksilver. 
|CIIONTA I, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Huarochiri in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Chorrillo. 
CIIONTALES, a district of the corregimiento or alcaldia mayor of Matagulpa, in the kingdom of Guatemala and province of Nicaragua. It is but small, and its natives have this name from the Spa niards, who would by it express their natural uncouthness and stupidity. 
|CHOPADA, a settlement of the Portuguese, in the kingdom of Brazil and country of the Guayazas Indians ; situate on the bank aud at the source of the river Tocantines. 
|CHOPARE, a river of the province and govern ment of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito. It flow* 
down from the mountains lo the w. of the Raches Indians, and runs 52 leagues from s. to n. e. until it enters the Marmore together with the Guapaix, opposite the settlement and reduction of Loreto, which lies to the s. 
|CHOPO, a settlement of the government and jurisdiction of Pamplona in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of a very mild climate, and abounds in sugar-canes, plantains, maize, and many sorts of vegetables ; these being the principal branch of its traffic with the Indians, who carry them for sale to the capital, which lies at a small distance from hence, in the road leading to Merida and Gibraltar. It contains 50 Indians, and almost as many indigent settlers. 
|CHOPS, THE, in Kennebeck river, are three miles from SWAN Island ; which see. 
|CHOPTANK, a large navigable river of the province and colony of Maryland, [emptying it self into Chesapeak bay. 
|CHOPTANK, LITTLE, another of the same pro vince. It runs w. and enters the sea in the bay of Chesapeak. 
|CHOQUE, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Caxatambo in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Acros. 
|CHOQUECAMATA, a settlement of the pro vince and corregimiento of Cochabamba in Peru. 
|CHOQUELlMPE, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Arica in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Copia. 
|CHOQUES, a barbarous nation of Caribes Indians, of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, dwelling immediately upon the mountains and forests of Fosca. They are ferocious and cruel, and pitch their huts near the river Bcrmejo. But little is known of their customs and of their country. 
|CHORAS, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Huamalies in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Jesus. 
|CHOROMA, a settlement of the province and corrregimiento of Chichas and Tarija, in the dis trict of the former, and annexed to the curacy of Tupisa. 
|CHOROMOROS, a barbarous nation of Indians of Peru, who formerly occupied the plains or llanuras of Calchaqui towards the n. ; touching towards the e. upon the source of the river Mogoles, and extending n. as far as the mountains of the Lules, and w. as far as the Andes. They are at present reduced to the Catholic religion, and are mixed with those of other nations ; but some few of them still persist in their idolatry, and live dispersed upon the mountains. 
|CHORONI, a port of the coast of the kingdom 
|VOL. I. 
457 
of Tierra Firmc, in the province and government of Venezuela, between the mountain of Ocumara and the port of Chuapo. 
|CHORDS, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Coquimbo in the kingdom of Chile. It has the hard lot of being scantily sup plied with water, even as much as is necessary for drinking. 
CuoiioSj a point of the coast of this province and kingdom. 
|CHOROS, an island near the coast and point of its name. 
|CHORRERA, a settlement of the jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor of Nata in the kingdom of Tierra Firme; situate near the coast of the S. sea. 
|CHORRERA, a creek of the island of Cuba, on the n. coast, having a fort for its protection, with a detachment of troops from the Havana. 
|CHORILLO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Iluarochiri in Peru. 
|CHORILLO, another, in the province and corregimiento of Cercado in the same kingdom ; an nexed to the curacy of Surco. 
|CHORRILLOS, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Caiiete in Peru ; situate on the coast, close to the point of China. 
|CHORROS, a settlement of the province and government of Jaen de Bracamoros in the king dom of Quito. 
|CHORROU, CUIKE DU, a rivulet and esta blishment of the French, in their possessions in Guayana. 
|CHORUNGA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Condesuyos de Arequipa in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Andaray ; situate in the valley of its name. 
|CHOSAPACK, or CIIESAPEAK, a large and beautiful bay on the coast of the province and co lony of Virginia. [See CHESAPEAK. 
|CIIOSCHAMA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Lucanas in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Huacana. 
|CHOSCUMUS, a fort of the province and government of Buenos Ayres, near a small lake about 20 leagues s. e. of Buenos Ayres, in Lat. 35 3 33 40". Long. 55 2 15" a&gt;. 
|CHOTA, TODOS SANTOS DE, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Caxamarca in Peru. 
|CHOTA, a valley of the Andes, which, though only two miles wide, is nearly a mile in depth. It was passed by Humboldt and his companions, in 1801, on their way to Quito, when they found its temperature to be intensely sultry.  3 N 
458 
|CHOTE, a settlement of Indians of N. Caro lina ; situate on the shore of the river Tennessee. 
|CHOTECHEL, or El. PASO, a settlement of Indians of the kingdom of Chile; situate in the interior of it, and on the shore of the river ComoLeuvre. 
|CIIOUEE, MONTANAS DE, mountains in the province and colony of N. Carolina, which follow the course of the river Tennessee. 
|CHOUMANS, a settlement or village of the province and colony of Louisiana ; situate on the bank, and at the source of the river Maligna or Sabloniere. 
|CHOUSSIPJ, a small river of the country of Labrador. It runs s. w. and enters that of St. Lawrence. 
|CHOW AN, a district and jurisdiction of the province and colony of Virginia, between that of Pequirna and the river Pansemond. The principal settlement bears the same name. 
|CHOWAN County, in Edenton district, N. Carolina, on the n. side of Albemarle sound. It contains 50 11 inhabitants, of whom 2588 are slaves. Chief town, Edenton. 
|CHOWAN River, m N. Carolina, falls into the n. w. corner of Albemarle sound. It is three miles wide at the mouth, but narrows fast as you ascend it. It is formed, five miles from the Vir ginia line, by the confluence of Meherrin, Nottaway, and Black rivers, which all rise in Vir ginia. 
|CHOXLLA, a settlement of the province and coiregimiento of Cicasica in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Yanacache. 
|CHRIST CHUHCII, a parish in Charleston dis trict, S. Carolina, containing 2954 inhabitants, of whom 566 are whites, 2377 slaves. 
|CHRISTENOES, a wandering nation of N. America, who do not cultivate, nor claim any par ticular tract of country. They are well disposed towards the whites, and treat their traders with re spect. The country in which these Indians rove is generally open plains, but in some parts, parti cularly about the head of the Assinniboin river, it is marshy and tolerably well furnished with timber, as are also the Fort Dauphin mountains, to which they sometimes resort. From the quantity of beaver in their country, they ought to furnish more of that article than they do at present. They are not esteemed good beaver-hunters. They might probably be induced to visit an establishment on the Missouri, at the Yellow Stone river. Their number has been reduced by the small-pox since they were first known to the Canadians. 
|CHRISTIANA, a post-town in Newcastle 
county, Delaware, is situated on a navigable creek of its name, 12 miles from Elkton, nine s. w. of Wilmington, and 37 s. w. of Philadelphia. The town, consisting of about 50 houses, and a Presby terian church, stands on a declivity which commands a pleasant prospect of the country towards the De laware. It carries on a brisk trade with Philadel phia in flour. It is the greatest carrying place be tween the navigable waters of the Delaware and Chesapeak, which are 13 miles asunder at this place. It was built by the Swedes in J640, and thus called after their queen. 
|CHRISTIANA Creek, on which the above town is situated, falls into Delaware river from the s. w. a little below W ilmington. It is proposed to cut a canal of about nine miles in length, in a s. zo. direc tion from this creek, at the town of Christiana (six miles w. s. w. of Newcastle) to Elk river in Mary land, about a mile below Elkton. See DELAWARE and WILMINGTON. 
|CHRISTIANA, ST. one of the Marquesa isles, called by the natives Waitahu, lies under the same parallel with St. Pedro, three or four leagues more to the , . Resolution bay, near the middle of the w. side of the island, is in lat. 9 58 s. long. 139 840 w. from Greenwich ; and the w. end of Do minica 15 n. Captain Cook gave this bay the name of his ship. It was called Port Madre de Dios by the Spaniards. This island produces cot ton of a superior kind. A specimen of it is depo sited in the museum of the Massachusetts Historical Society. 
|CHRISTIANO, SAN, a settlement of the pro vince and captainship of Serigipe in Brazil ; situate on the coast, and at the mouth of the river Cirii. 
|CIIRISTIANSBURG, the chief town of Mont gomery county, Virginia. It contains very few houses ; has a court-house and goal, situated near a branch of Little river, a water of the Kanhaway. Lat. 37 5 n.l 
|CIIRISTIANSTED, the principal town in the island of Santa Cruz, situated on the n. side of the island, on a fine harbour. It is the residence of the Danish governor, and is defended by a stone for tress. 
|CHRISTMAS INLAND, in the Pacific ocean, lies entirely solitary, nearly equally distant from the Sandwich islands on the n. and the Marquesas on the s. It was so named by Captain Cook, on account of his first landing there, on Christmas day. Not a drop of fresh water was found by dig ging. A ship touching at this desolate isle must expect nothing but turtle, fish, and a few birds. It is about 15 or 20 leagues in circumference, and bounded by a reef of coral rocks, ou the w. side of 
which there is a bank of fine sand, extending a mile into the sea, and affording good anchorage. Lat. 1 59 . Long. 157 35 z.J 
|CHRISTMAS Sound, in Tierra del Fuego, S. America. Lat. 55 21 n. Long. 69 48 o&gt;. 
|CHRISTOVAL, SAN, or ST. CHRISTOPHER, a town of the government and jurisdiction of Maracaibo in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; founded by Captain Juan de Maldonado in 1560. It is of a hot but healthy temperature, produces abundance of sugar-canes, of which are made honey, sugar, and conserves, in immense quantities ; also a great proportion of smoking tobacco, which is carried to Maracaibo. It has a good church and a convent of St. Augustin, which latter has fallen much to decay with regard to its establishment. The po pulation of the town consists of 400 housekeepers. It lies 20 leagues n. e. of Pamplona, from the juris diction of which it is divided by the river Pamplonilla. It is the native place of Don Gregorio de Jaimes, archdeacon of Santa Fe, and bishop of Santa Marta. 
|CHUISTOVAL, SAN, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Lipes, archbishopric of Charcas in Peru ; in which took place the following ex traordinary occurrence: The curate of this place f)ing to confess a sick person in the settlement of ahisa of the province of Paria, which was annexed to this, sunk into a spring of water in the pampas or llanos dela Sal, when he was drowned, and with the two Indians who accompanied him on horse back, never more appeared, nor were any vestiges ever found of them : this was the reason why the latter settlement has since been disunited from the curacy of San Christoval. 
|CURISTOVAL, SAN, a capital city of the province and captainship of Sergipe in the kingdom of Bra zil ; being also known by that name. It is founded on the sea-shore, and has a fine and well defended port. It has a magnificent parish church with the title of Nuestra Senora de la Victoria ; two fine convents, the one of the order of the Franciscans, and the other of the Carmelites ; also a chapel of devotion of the Virgin of the Rosary. The councilliouse is a very fine edifice, and in the suburbs is a hermitage of San Gonzalo, which is frequented as a pilgrimage by this and other settlements of the jurisdiction. In this city resides the chief captain, who governs this province, and who is attended by a company of troops as a body-guard. In early times it was filled with nobility, descended from the first families in Portugal ; but it is now reduced to 500 housekeepers. In its district, towards the part called Coninquiva, is a parish with four chapels, and towards the river Vaza-Barris five others. It has also 25 engines, by which abundance of sugar of an excellent quality is manufactured ; this article affords a great commerce with the bay of Todos Santos. Lat. 11 40 s. Long. 37 30 w. CHRISTOVAL, SAN, an island of the N. sea ; one of the Antilles, discovered by Admiral Christopher Columbus, who gave it his name, in 1493. It is five leagues in circumference, an 1 is very fertile, and abounding in productions, particularly in cot ton, tobacco, indigo, sugar, and brandy ; by all of which it carries on a great commerce. Here are some good salines, and in the mountains are some woods of fine timber, well adapted for the building of ships. The English and the French both esta blished themselves here in 1625, holding a divided possession, when they were driven out by the Spa niards. After this the former again returned and re-established themselves in the greatest part of the island, leaving, however, a small share to the French, until the year 1713, when the latter, in conjunction with the Spaniards themselves, ceded it entirely to the English, who from that time have held it and kept it well fortified. [St. Christopher, situate in lat. 17 21 , long. 62 48 w. was called by its ancient possessors, the Charibes, Liamuiga, or the Fertile Island. It was discovered in Novem ber 1493 by Columbus himself, who was so pleased with its appearance, that he honoured it with his own Christian name. But it was neither planted nor possessed by the Spaniards. It was, however, (notwithstanding that the general opinion ascribes the honour of seniority to Barbadoes), the eldest of all the British territories in the W. Indies, and in truth, the common mother both of the English and French settlements in the Charibcan islands. A Mr. Thomas Warner, an Englishman, asso ciated himself with 14 other persons in the year 1622, and with them took his passage on board a ship bound to Virginia. From thence he and his companions sailed from St. Christopher s, where they arrived in January 1623, and by the month of September following had raised a good crop of tobacco, which they proposed to make their staple commodity. By the generality of historians who have treated of the affairs of the W. Indies, it is asserted that a party of the French, under the com mand of a person of the name of D Esnambuc, took possession of one part of this island, on the same day that Mr. Warner landed on the other; but the truth is, that the. first landing of Warner and his associates happened two years before the arrival of D Esnambuc ; who, it is admitted by Du Tertre, did not leave France until J625. Un fortunately the English settlers, in the latter end of 1623, had their plantations demolished by a dreadful hurricane, -which put a sudden stop to their progress. Jn consequence of this calamity, Mr. Warner returned to England to implore succour ; and it was on that occasion that he sought and ob tained the powerful patronage and support of James Hay, Earl of Carlisle. This nobleman caused a ship to be fitted out, laden with all kinds of necessaries. It was called the Hopewell ; and arrived at St. Christopher s on the 18th of May 1624 ; and thus he certainly preserved a settlement which had otherwise died in its infancy. Warner himself did not return to St. Christoper s until the year following. He was then accompanied by a large body of recruits, and D Esnambuc arrived about the same time, perhaps the same day. This latter was the captain of a French privateer ; and having, in an engagment with a Spanish galleon of superior strength, been very roughly handled, he was obliged, after losing several of his men, to seek refuge in these islands. He brought witli him to St. Christopher s about thirty hardy veterans, and they were cordially received by the Knglish, who appear at this time to have been under some appre hensions of the Charibes. Hitherto Warner s first colony had lived on friendly terms with these poor savages, by whom they were liberally supplied with provisions ; but having seized on their lands, the consciousness of deserving retaliation made the planters apprehensive of an attack, when probably none was intended. Du Tertre relates, that the French and English receiving information of a projected revolt, concurred in a scheme for seizing the conspirators beforehand. Accordingly they fell on the Charibos by night, and having mur dered in cold blood from 100 to 120 of the stoutest, drove all the rest from the island, except such of the women as were young and handsome, of whom, says the reverend historian, they made concubines and slaves. Such is the account of a contemporary author, Pere Du Tertre, who relates these trans actions with perfect composure, as founded on common usage, and not unwarrantable in their na ture. He adds, that such of the Charibes as escaped the massacre, having given the alarm to their countrymen in the neighbouring islands, a large body of them returned soon afterwards, breathing revenge ; and now the conflict became serious. The Europeans, however, more from the superiority of their weapons, than of their valour, became conquerors in the end ; but their triumph was dearly purchased, 100 of their num ber having been left dead on the field of battle. After this exploit, which Du Tertre calls a glorious victory, the Charibes appear to have quitted alto gether this and some of the small islands in the neighbourhood, and to have retired southwards. The two leaders, Warner and D Esnambuc, about the same time, found it necessary to return to Europe for the purpose of soliciting succour from their respective nations ; and bringing with them the name of conquerors, they severally met with all possible encouragement. Warner was knighted by his sovereign, and through the interest of his noble patron sent back as governor in 1626, with 400 new recruits, amply supplied with ne cessaries of all kinds ; while D Esnambuc, un der the patronage of Richlieu, (the minister of France), projected the establishment of an exclu sive company for trading to this and some of the other islands. That minister concurred with D Esnambuc in opinion, that such an institution was best adapted to the purposes of commerce ami colonization ; an erroneous conclusion, which D Esnambuc himself had soon abundant occasion to lament ; for the French in general either mis understood or disapproved the project. Subscrip tions came in reluctantly, and the ships which the new company fitted out on this occasion, were so wretchedly supplied with provisions and neces saries, that of 532 recruits, who sailed from France with D Esnambuc, in February 1627, the greater part perished miserably at sea for want of food. 
The English received the survivors with com passion and kindness ; and for preventing contests in future about their respective limits, the com manders of each nation agreed to divide the whole island pretty equally between their followers. A treaty of partition tor this purpose was reduced to writing, and signed, with many formalities, on the third of May 1627. The island was invaded by the Spaniards in 1629 ; after this there took place a serious contest between the -English anil the French possessors; and the conduct of the latter on this occasion was deemed so cruel and treacherous, that it was assigned by King Wil liam and Queen Mary among the causes which induced them to declare war against the French nation. Even fortune herself, inclining at length to the side of justice, from henceforward deserted them ; for, after they had continued about eight months sole masters of the island, the English under the command of General Codrington, returning in great force, not only compelled the French in habitants to surrender, but actually transported 1800 of them to Martinico and Hispaniola. It is true, that reparation was stipulated to be made them by the treaty of Rys\vic, in 1697; but war again breaking out between the two nations, in 1702, the French planters derived but little advantage from (hat clause in their favour. They had, however, in 1705, the gloomy satisfaction to behold many of the English possessions again laid waste by a French armament, which committed such ravages, that the British parliament found it necessary to distribute the sum of 103,000/. among the sufferers, to enable them to resettle their plan tations. Happily this was the last exertion of national enmity and civil discord within this little community ; for at the peace of Utrecht, the island was ceded wholly to the English, and the French possessions publicly sold for the benefit of the English government. In 1733, S0,000/. of the money was appropriated as a marriage por tion with the Princess Anne, who was betrothed to the Prince of Orange. Some few of the French planters, indeed, who consented to take the oatlus, were naturalized, and permitted to retain their estates. Such were the origin and progress of the British establishment in the island of St. Christo pher. The glorious circumstances which attended the French invasion in the beginning of 1782, when a garrison of less than 1000 effective men (including the-militia) was attacked by 8000 of the best disciplined troops of France, supported by a fleet of 32 ships of war ; the consequent surren der of the island, after a most vigorous and noble defence ; and its restoration to Great Britain by the general peace of 1783, will long be in the re collection of every Englishman ; but we cannot forbear to put it upon record, that at the siege of Brimstone hill, the enemy s batteries, consisting of 24 mortars and 23 pieces of heavy artillery, were continually, for five weeks and 34 days, firing on a spot of ground where the greatest diameter was not more than 200 yards, before the British would surrender that Rodney s celebrated victory took place on the 12th of April 1782, lasting from seven in the morning to half past six in the even ing, when five ships, commanded by the Count de Grasse, were taken, another sunk, and the admiral himself made prisoner. 
This island is divided into nine parishes, and contains four towns and hamlets, viz. Basseterre, (the present capital, as it was formerly that of the French, containing about 800 houses), Sandy-point, Old-road, and Deep-bay. Of these, the two first are portsof entry, established by law. The fortifications consist of Charles-fort and Brimsone-hill, both near Sandy-point; three batteries at Basseterre, one at Fig-tree-bay, another at Palmeto-point, and some smaller ones of no great importance. The proportion which St. Christopher s contributes, with the other islands, towards an honourable pro vision for the governor-general, is WOOL cur rency per arm. which is settled on him by the assembly immediately on his arrival. He has be sides some perquisites ; and in time of war they are considerable. Each island within this govern ment has a separate council, and each of them an assembly, or house of representatives. In St. Christopher s, the council should con&gt;L4 of 10 members, but it is seldom that more than seven are present. The house of assembly is composed of 24 representatives, of whom 15 make a quo rum. The requisite qualification is a freehold of 40 acres of land, or a house worth 40/. a year. Of the electors, the qualification is a freehold of 10/. perann. Its government is comprehended under the title of that of the Leeward Charibean islands. The governor of this and the other islands in the same government is chancellor by his office, and in St. Christopher s sits alone. In this island, as in Jamaica, the jurisdiction of both the king s bench and common pleas centres in one superior court, wherein justice is administered by a chief-justice and four puisne judges. The chief is appointed by the crown, the others by the governor in the king s name, and they all hold their commissions during pleasure. The office of chief judge is worth about GOO/, per ann. The emoluments of the assistant judges are trifling. St. Christopher s is about 14 leagues in circuit, and contains 43,726 ncres of land, of which about 17,000 acre* are appropriated to the growth of sugar, and 4000 to pasturage. As sugar is the only commodity of any account that is raised, ex cept provisions and a little cotton, it is probable, that nearly one-half the whole island is unfit for cultivation. The interior part of the couatry con sists indeed of many rugged precipices and bar ren mountains. Of these the loftiest is mount Misery, (evidently a decayed volcano), which rises 3711 feet in perpendicular height from the sea. Nature, however, has made abundant amends for the sterility of the mountains by the fertility she has bestowed upon the plains. No part of the W. Indies possesses even the same species of soil that is found in St. Christopher s. It is in gene ral a dark grey loam, so light and porous as to be penetrable by the slightest application of the hoe. It is thought to be the production of subterraneous fires, the black ferruginous pumice of naturalists, finely incorporated with a pure loam or virgin mould. The wider-stratum is gravel, from eight to 12 inches deep. Clay is no where found, ex cept at a considerable height in the mountains. Canes, planted in particular spots, have been known to yield 8000 Ibs. of Muscovado sugar from a single acre. One gentleman, in a favour able season, made 6400 Ibs. or four hogsheads of 1C cwt, each per acre, on an average return of bis whole crop. It is not, however, pretended that the greatest part, or even a very large proportion, of the cane land throughout the island, is equally productive. The general average produce for a series of years is 16,000 hogsheads of J6 cwt. which, as one-half only of the whole cane land, or 8500 acres, is annually cut, (the remainder being in young canes), gives nearly two hogsheads of 16 cwt. per acre for the whole of the land in ripe canes; but even this is a prodigious return, not equalled, perhaps, by any other sugar country in any part of the globe. 
In the report of the privy council in 1788, the British property vested here is estimated at 43,726 
acres of patented estates, and 26,000 Negroes, at 50/. each Negro. The same report, in a general appraisement of British property vested in the Bri tish colonies, makes the land, buildings, and stock, double the value of the Negroes ; and the towns, stores, and shipping about 
 of the land, &c. In 1770 the exports amounted to above 419, OOO/. sterling, in sugar, molasses, and rum ; and near 8000/. for cotton. Besides cotton, ginger, and the tropical fruits, it produced, in 1787, 231,397 cwt. of sugar; and in 1790, but about 113,000 cwt. The produce of this article varies from 8000 to 17,000 hogsheads of 13 cwt. 
By return to house of commons, 1806, the Exports of Sugar from St. Christopher s amounted, 
In 1789, to 11,000 hogsheads of 13 cwt. 1799, to 9,900 do. 1805, to 26,000 do. 
The official value of the Imports and Exports of St. Kitt s were, in 
1809, imports 
266,064, exports 
132,845. 
1810, 253,611, 89,362. 
And the quantities of the principal articles imported into Great Britain were, in 
Coffee, 
Sugar. 
Rum. 
Cotton Wool. 
Brit. Plant. 
For. Plant. 
Brit. Plant. 
For. Plant. 
Cwt. 1809, 435 1810, 136 
Cwt. 71 75 
Cwt. 
166,053 167,943 
Cwt. 
2 158 
Galls. 343,075 
220,88(5 
Lbs. 
112,327 26,853 
As in the other British islands in the neighbour hood, all the white men from the age of 16 to 60 are obliged to enlist in the milita, and in this island they serve without pay. They form two regi ments of foot, although the whole number of ef fective men in each regiment seldom exceeds 300 ; but there is likewise a company of free blacks, and this, before the late war, constituted the whole of the military force within the island. Indeed, its natural strength, from the conformation and in equalities of its furface, is such, that a garrison of 2000 effective troops, properly supplied with am 
munition and provisions, would in all human pro bability render it impregnable to the most formi dable invasion. 
The Gazette of November 1st, 1811, contains what has hitherto been considered as unprece dented : A statement of every person s income, according as he is rated to the income tax. Pos sessors of sugar-estates pay 6s. on every ton of sugar ; and others, when their incomes, inde pendent of such estates, amount to 200/. currency, are to pay II. per cent. 
By return to house of commons, March 18th, 1790, the following was the Slave Trade from Africa 
to this island, in the under-mentioned years, 
Arrivals from Africa. 
Negroes Exported. 
Negroes re tained for Cultivation. 
Years. 
\umber of Vessels. 
Tonnage. 
Total number of Negroes imported. 
To foreign W. In dies in Brit. Bot. 
Total exported. 
1787 1788 
5 
645 
1095 
185 
300 
185 
00 
9;0 
And the Import of Slaves, by report of privy council, 1788, at a medium of four years, and by a return to house of commons in 1805, at a medium of two years from 1803, was as follows: 
Average of 
Four years to 1787 Two years to 1803 
Import?. 
Re-exports. 
Retained. 
C58 971 
102 124 
556 847 
By report of privy council, 1788, and by subse quent estimate, the population amounted to 
Years. 
Whites. 
People of Colour. 
Slaves. 
1787 1805 
1912 1800 
1908 198 
20,435 26,000 
See CARIBE (Leeward) Islands; and for the later political inquiries, see WEST INDIES. 
|CHRISTOVAL, SAN, a settlement of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Toluca in Nueva Espana. It contains 64 families of Indians, and lies a small distance to the n. of its capital. 
|CHRISTOVAL, SAN, another, of the head settle ment and alcaldia mayor of Zacatlan in the same kingdom, lying two leagues from its capital. 
|CHRISTOVAL, SAN, another, of the hrad settle ment and alcaldia mayor of Tetelaxonotla in the same kingdom, lying two leagues to the a?, of that place. 
|CHRISTOVAL, SAN, another, of the province and corregimiento of Angaraes in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of San Antonio, and situate on the contrary side of the river. 
|CHRISTOVAL, SAN, another, of the province and corregimiento of Conchucos in the same kingdom; annexed to the curacy of San Marcos. 
|CHRISTOVAL, SAN, another, of the province and corregimiento of Lucanas in the same kingdom ; annexed to the curacy of its capital. CHRISTOVAL, SAN, another, of the head settle ment of Pinotepa, and alcaldia mayor of Xicayan, in Nueva Espana. It contains 24 families of Indians, and is seven leagues to the n. of its head settlement. 
|CHRISTOVAL, SAN, another, of the head settle ment and alcaldia mayor of Cuquio in the same kingdom ; situate near to the conflux of the rivers Mesquital and Grande. Its population is large, and it lies 15 leagues to the w. of its capital, an 0 to the n. w. of the capital of the province of Guadalaxara. 
|CHRISTOVAL, SAN, another, of the head settle ment of Axixique, and alcaldia mayor of Zayula, in the same kingdom ; situate on the shore of the great lake or sea of Chapala. It contains 70 fa milies of Indians, who employ themselves in fish ing and agriculture ; is 13 leagues to the s. of its head settlement. 
|CHRISTOVAL, SAN, another, of the province and country of the Amazonas, in the Portuguese possessions ; situate on the shore of the river Maranon, at the mouth where it enters the Ovaripana. 
|CHRISTOVAL, SAN, another, of the province and government of Cartagena in the district of Sinn ; situate on the bank of the river Pichelin, in the division of this jurisdiction and that of Tolu. It is one of those which were founded, in 1776, by the Governor Don Juan Pimienta. 
|CHRISTOVAL, SAN, another, of the kingdom of Brazil ; situate on the shore of a river which enters the Yguan to the s. of the settlement of Jesus Maria. 
|CHRISTOVAL, SAN, another, of the province and captainship of Sergipe in the same kingdom ; situate on the sea-coast, between the river Sirugipa and that of Vazabaris. 
|CHTUSTOVAL, SAN, another, of the province and kingdom of Nueva Galicia ; situate near its capital. 
|CHRISTOVAL, SAN, another, of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of the Jesuits in the province of Tepeguana, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya. 
|CHRISTOVAL, SAN, another, of Nuevo Mexico; situate on the shore of the Rio Grande del N. (Large River of the N.) where this enters the Conchos. 
|CHRISTOVAL, SAN, a bay on the coast of the province of California, in the part opposite the coast of Nueva Esparto. 
|CHRISTOVAL, SAN, an isle of the N. sea, in the interior of the bay and port of the Cul de Sac Grand, of the island of Guadalupe. 
|CHRISTOPHER, ST. See CHRISTOVAL. 
|CHUAO, a port of the coast of the kingdom of Tierra Firme, in the province and government of Venezuela, to the ta. of the port of LaGuaira. 
|CHUAPA, a settlement and head settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Villalta in Nueva Espana. It contains 1 12 familes of Indians, and is 12 leagues n. e. of its capital. 
|CHUAPA, a river of the kingdom of Chile, 2 
464: 
which rises in the mountains of the cordillera. On its shores is caught a ranch esteemed sort of shell-fish, called tascas. It runs into the sea in lat. 31 40 . 
|CHUAPA, a volcano of the same kingdom, ce lebrated for the irruptions it lias made. It is 23 leagues from the coast, and to the . of the city of San Juan de la Frontera, iiilat. 31 30 s. 
|CHUAZINGO, a settlement of the head settle ment and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa in Nueva Espaiia. It contains 124 families of Indians, and is two leagues to the n. n. w. of that of Tlapa. 
|CHUBISCA, a settlement of the missions which belong to the religious order of St. Francis, in the province of Taraumara, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya, lying four leagues to the s. e. one-fourth to the s. of the settlement and real of the mines of San Felipe de Chiguaga. Five leagues to the s. . of this settlement are two large estates, called Fresnos and Charcas. 
|CHUCAPA, a settlement of the province and corregimtento of Angaraes in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Acoria. 
|CHUCAPA, another, in the province and corrcgimiento of Xauja in the same kingdom. 
|CHUCANTI, a river of the province and go vernment of Darien, in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. It rises in the mountains towards the n. and enters the sea between the islands Las Palmas and Pinos. 
|CHUCAY, a settlement of the province of Ve nezuela, and government of Maracaibo ; situate on the extremity of the peninsula formed by the cape of San Roman. 
|CHUCHA, a bay in the port of Portobelo, and lying quite in the interior of the same. It is an harbour, or second port, of a circular figure, closed in on all sides, its access being through a narrow channel. Several rivers flow into it. 
|CHUCHE, a small island of the S. sea, in the bay and gulph of Panama. It lies the farthest of any from the coast, and to the w. of the large island of Rey. 
|CHUCHULAIA, a settlement of the province and corregimienfo of Larecaja in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Cofnbaya, in which there is a pious sanctuary of Our Lady, much frequented. 
|CHUCUNAQUI, a large river of the province of Darien, and kingdom of Tierra Finne. It rises in the mountainous parts, and runs s.za. 13 leagues as far as the fort Royal of Santa Maria, collecting in its course the waters of 20 rivers less than itself ; it then enters the grand river Tuira. 
|CHUCHUNGA. a settlement of the province and government of Jaen dc Bracamoros in the 
kingdom of Quito ; situate on the shore of the river of its name, having a port, which is a lad ing-place for the river Maranon. The above river rises in the sierra of the province of Luya and Chillaos, enters the Ymasa, being united to the Cumbassa ; these together run into the Marauon, and at their conflux is the aforesaid port. Its mouth is in lat. 5 12 30" s. 
|CHUCMI. See JULUMITO. 
|CHUCO, SANTIAGO DE, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Huamachuco in Peru. 
|CliUCUITO, a province and government of Peru ; bounded e. by the great lake of its name, and part of the province cf Omasuyos ; n. by that of Paucarcolla or Puno ; s. e. by that of Pacages ; and s. w. and w. by the cordillera of the coast which looks towards Moquehua. It is 25 leagues long from n. to s. and 36 wide. It was extremely populous at the time of the conquest, and was on that account considered wealthy. Its governors had the controul of political affairs, and enjoyed the title of vice-patron and captain-general of the immediate provinces, including some which lay upon the coast. It is of a cold but healthy tempe rature, particularly in the rainy months, which are December, February, and March. It produces sweet and bitter papas, of which are made chuTio, bark, canagua, hagua, and barley. In some of the glens, where the soil is moister, they grow pulse, flowers, and fruit-trees. This province abounds in cattle, such as cows, sheep and pigs, and native sheep, which the natives use for trad ing instead of asses ; the regular load for each being four or five arrobas. Here are also bred alpacas, Jutanacos, vicunas, deer, cuyes, and vizcachas, which are similar in shape and figure to a hare ; also pigeons, partridges, ducks, and os triches. From the fleeces of the cattle many kinds of woven articles are made for useful arid orna mental apparel, beautifully dyed ; and from the wool of the alpaca handsome carpets, quilts, and mantles of various designs and colours. This pro vince has many silver mines, which are worked with emolument ; also streams of hot medicinal waters. It is situate on the shores of the great lake of Chucuito, from which large quantities of" fish are taken, and sold for a good price to the neighbouring provinces. It is watered by several rivers, all of which enter the lake : the largest or most considerable of them is the Hilava. Its na tives amount to 30,000, separated in 10 different settlements. Its repartimiento used to amount to 101,730 dollars, and its alca-cala to 813 dollars an nually. The capital is of the same name. This 
belongs to the bishopric of La Paz, and is so situate as to have a fine view of the lake. It is a settle ment at once the most pleasant and convenient, fertile, and abounding in fruits and cattle, but its temperature is excessively cold. It has two parishes, with the dedicatory title of Santo Do mingo and La Asuncion, and two hermitages de dicated to St. Barbara and St. Sebastian. The other settlements are, Asiento de Minas de Mi- Asiento del Desagua
chacani, dero, 
Asiento de San Anto- Acora, 
nio de Esquilache, Hilave, Pomata, 7 u ly&gt; 
Asiento de Huacullani, Santiago, 
Zepita. 
|CHUCUITO, The lake of; which, although it be thus called, is also known by the name of Titicaca, is 51 leagues in length from n. w. to s. e. and 26 in width, although in some parts less. On its shores arc six provinces or corregimientos, which are, The province of this Paucarcolla, 
name, Lampa, 
Pacages, Asangaro. 
Omasuyos, 
This lake is of sufficient depth for vessels of any size, since in many bays not far in from its shores there are from four to six fathoms ot water, and within it, some places from 40 to 50. It is, as far as is ascertained, without any shoals or banks. Near it grow some herbs, called clacchos, eaten by the cows and pigs ; also a great quantity of the herb called totora
 or cat s tail, which in some parts grows to the length of a yard and an half. Of this the Indians make rafts, not only for fishing but for carrying to and fro the cattle and productions of the harvest and crops growing in the various islands lying in this lake. Some of these islands are so covered and hemmed in with the herb totora that it requires much force and labour to cut a pas sage through it. In one of the largest of these islands the Incas had a magnificent temple, dedi cated to the sun, the first that, was ever built. This lake is not without its tempests and squalls ; they are, on the contrary, frequent, and have at times caused no inconsiderable mischief. Its waters are thick, but are nevertheless drank by the cattle, and even the Indians ; particularly by those of the nation of the Uros, who are a poor ignorant people, who formerly lived upon the islands in great wretchedness, and who by dint of great solici tations have been prevailed upon to leave them for the mainland, where they now reside in some mi serable caves, excavated places, or holes in the earth covered over with flags of fofora, maintaining themselves by fishing. This lake contains likewise various kinds of fish, such as trout, ormantosj caches, anchovies, and boquillas in abundance; these are, for the most part, about the length of a man s hand, and three fingers thick. The Indians of Yunguyo take upwards of 700 yearly, and sell them at four and six dollars the thousand. They also catch some small pejereyesy and an infinite variety of birds, which are suited, and afford excellent food. It is confidently and repeatedly asserted by the Indians, that the greater part of the riches of the country was thrown into this lake when the Spaniards entered it at the time of the conquest ; and amongst other valuables the great gold chain made by the order of the Inca Huayanacap, which was 233 yards in length, and within which 6000 men could dance. 
|CHUCURPU, an ancient settlement of warlike Indians of the province and corregimiento of Cuzco in Peru. It lies to the e. of this city, and was subjected and united to the empire after a long resistance by Pacbacutec, emperor of the Incas. 
|CHUCUTI, a river of the province and go vernment of Darien in the government of Tierra Firme. It rises in the mountains towards the e. and following this course, enters the Taranena at a small distance from its source. 
|CHUDAUINAS, a barbarous nation of Indians of the kingdom of Quito, to the s. e. of this city. They inhabit the part lying s. w. of the river Pastaza, and are bounded on the s. e. by the Ipapuisas, and w. by the Xibaros. They are not numerous, owing to the continual wars which they have maintained with their neighbours ; and though of a martial spirt, they are of a docile and humane disposition. Some of them have united themselves with the Andoas, in the settlement of this name, which lies upon the w. shore of the river Pastaza. 
|CHUECA, SAN AGUSTIN DE, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Lipes,and archbi shopric of Charcas, in Peru ; annexed to the cu racy of San Christoval. 
|CHUETI, a river of the province and govern ment of Choco. It rises in the sierras of Abide, runs w. and enters the Paganagandi. 
|CHUFIAS, a barbarous nation of Indians who inhabit the e. of the river Aguarieu, bounded on the n. w. by the nation of the Encabellados, with whom they are in continual warfare. 
|CHUGOD, SANTA CATALINA DE, .a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Caxamarca in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Chetu. 
|CHUI, a river of the province and captainship of Rey in Brazil. It runs s. and turning e. en ters the lake Mini. 
|GJJUI, a settlement of this province ; situate on the sea-coast, and lying between this and the lake Mini. 
|CHUIGOTES. See CuiUGoxog. 
|CHUILLE, a river of the province and go vernment of Darien in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. It has its source in the mountains towards the e. runs n. e. and enters the river Tarena. 
|CHUIRIEUI, a river of the province and go vernment of Paraguay. It runs n. and enters the Igny near the mission of San Miguel. 
|CHUJLE, a small port or creek of the coast of the S. sea, in the province and corregimiento of Arequipa. It is shallow, insecure, and exposed to the s. w. winds. 
|CHULIHUCANI, or CHULCHUCANI, a settle ment of the province and government of Potosi in Peru. 
|CHULINA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Larecaja in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Charazani. 
|CHULISANA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Andahuailas in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Cachi. 
|CHULUMANI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento ofCicasica in Peru. 
|CHULUMANI, a river of the above province, which rises at the end of the Cordillera of Ancuma, begins its course to the e. and forming a large bend towards the n. enters the Beni just at its source, and where it keeps the name of the Chuquiavo. 
|CHUMA, a river of the Nuevo Reyno de Gra nada, which flows down from the mountains of Bogota . It waters the territory of Merida, pass ing opposite the city, and enters through the s. side into the lake of Maracaybo. 
|CHUMA, a settlement of the province and corrrgimiento of 1 /arccaja in Peru. 
|Cil UMATLAX, a settlement of the head settle ment of Zozocolrs, and alciildia mayor of Papantla, in Nueva Espana. It is situate at the top of an high mountain, and from it may be seen all the settlements belonging to this jurisdiction. Its popu lation amounts to 183 families of Indians, and it lies to the n. of its head settlement, three leagues distant from this, and 14 from the capital. 
|CHUMBE, a village of the province and corregimiejito of Cuonca in the kingdom of Quito. It is to the w. of Tarqui, and on the w. shore of one of the torrents rising in the river Paute. Not far from it are some excellent hot baths, of which no use is made. [Here the stately mebntoma and the cNiliotfirium are growing at an elevation of 12,000 
feet, according to Humboldt, who visited this Til lage in 1802. Lat. 3 10 s. 
|CHUMBES, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Vilcas Huaman in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Vizchongo. 
|CHUMBI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Parinacochas in Peru, where there is a pious sanctuary, with an excellent painting of the blessed virgin, said to have been given by a pontiff to the curate of this settlement when he was at Rome. 
|CHUMBICHA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Tucuman in Peru ; situate to the v). of the valley of San Fernando de Catamarca. 
|CHUMBICOS, a settlement of the province and corregimienlo of Piura in Peru ; situate on the shore of a small river of the same name. 
|CHUMBILLA, a mountain of the province and corregimiento of Huamanga in Peru; celebrated for a rich silver mine. It lies three leagues from a small settlement called Canaria, which is at pre. sent abandoned and deserted. 
|CHUMBIVILCAS, a province and corregimiento of Peru. It is bounded n. by the province of Quispicanchialgo, and by that of Chilqucs and Masques on the n. w. ; by those of Cotabamba and Aymaraez on the w. ; by that of Condcsuyos de Arequipa on the s. ; and on the e. by that of Canes and Cauches. Its temperature is for the most part cold, although in some places temperate, so that it produces the fruits peculiar to either climate ; such as wheat, barley, maize, pa pas, and other seeds, though none in abundance, but plenty of neat cattle. In this province are found the lofty and vast snowy mountains called Condesuyos del Cuzco. It lies on the boundaries of the province of Parinacocha, being separated from it by the river which flows down from the province of Camana. Here much cloth peculiar to the country is manufactured ; and in its district are many mouths of gold and silver mines, the mounds and pits of which, together with the re mains of several mills for working metal, indicate that in former times they were probably worked to no small advantage. They gather here a great quantity of Cochineal, which is called mauio, with Avhich cloths are dyed of very fine colours. It has likewise fountains and mineral streams of hot water, and is subject to earthquakes. Its repartimento used to amount to 85,800 dollars, and its alcavala to 685 dollars per annum. Its inhabitants, including the district of Condesuyos, amount to J6,000 souls, who live in the 22 following settlements : 
C II U 
467 
Belille, 
Ayacasi, 
Libitaco, 
Totora, 
Pataquena, 
Alahamaca, 
Toro, 
Asicnto de Quivio, 
Colquemarcaj 
Yanqui, 
Capacmarca, 
Cancahuana, 
Llauzco, 
Caspi, 
Quinota, 
Santo Tomas, 
Alca, 
Puica, 
Tomipampa, 
Cotahuassi, 
Quillunza, 
Cupi. 
|CHUMEHE, a settlement of the province and corre%imiento of Cuenca in the kingdom of Quito. 
|CHUM PULL, a settlement of the district and province of Toltenbaxo in the kingdom of Chile ; situate near the sea-coast in the point of Tiraba. 
|CHUMPULL, a river of this province, which runs n, n. ze. and enters the Callacallu. 
|CHUNANAS, an ancient nation of Indians of the province of Cnzco in Peru. It \vas subjected and made tributary tothe empire by thelnca Huaynacapac, thirteenth Monarch of P rn. 
|CHUNCARA, a settlement of the correghm ento of Cuzco in Peru ; one of those which have re mained in this kingdom from the time of the Incas. It was the boundary or extent of the conquests of Sinchiroca, eleventh Emperor, and he left at it a strong garrison to guard against in vasion from the neighbouring people. Twenty leagues from its capital. 
|CHUNCHANGA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Yea in Peru. 
|CHUJNCHI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Chirnbo in the kingdom of Quito ; lying between the rivers Alausi to the n. and Pomallacta to the w. 
|CHUNCHI, another settlement of the province and government of Jaen de Bracamoros in the same kingdom. It is entirely of Indians, of an hot climate, and in its territory towards the n. and towards the e. are some gold mines, which were in former times worked, but to-day abandoned. Its situation is between the rivers Patacones to the e. and Chinchipe to the n\ upon the high road which leads from Loyola to Tomcpenda. 
|CHUNCHILEA, a river of the district of Guadalabquen in the kingdom of Chile. It runs ft. n. zo. and enters the Callacalla. 
|CHUNCIIIPE, a river of the province and government of Jaen de Bracamoros in the king dom of Quito. It runs ,. and forming a bend towards the e. enters theMaranon. 
|CHUNCHOS, a barbarous nation of Indians, f the province and government ot Tarma in Peru, 
and much dreaded by the Spaniards, on account of the repeated incursions made by those savages on their possessions. In Lima they are in a continal state of fear and apprehension of some sud den attack from these enemies ; for in 1742 they took and destroyed several settlements iind estates, killing many Franciscan monks who were mis sionaries amongst them. They were, however, once attacked by the brigadier, the Marquis de Mena Hermosa, general of Callao, who construct ed some forts, which are still served with artillery and troops sufficient to protect them. These Indians have a chief or prince, called the chuncho, descended, according to their accounts, from the royal race of the Incas, who would fain lay claim 1o the monarchy of Peru as his right ; and accordingly, in 1744, represented to the Marquis of Villa Garcia, not without great threats, his in tention of doing himself justice by force of arms : he is a Catholic, and has added to h is own honours the title of King of Peru ; he was brought up at Lima amongst the Spaniards as the son of a cazique t where he was instructed in the rules of government, policy, and military tactics, which he introduced into his own country, and made known the use of swords and fire-arms. He went to Rome dis guised as a menial, was introduced to the court of Madrid, where he kissed the hand of King Philip V. and the foot of the Pontiff Clement XII. He has two sons well instructed and equal in mental energies. These Chunchos Indians are numerous, and live, some of them, in villages, and others scattered over the mountains and in the woods ; they maintain a secret correspondence with the Indians of all the other settlements of Peru and Quito, as well as with the Christians and infidels inhabiting the forests where missions are establish ed ; by this means they know what is passing in all the provinces, cities, and settlements, &c. Many Indians who are malcontents, or fugitives from justice on account of crime or debt, invariably betake themselves tothe Chunchos, and this is the reason why this nation is so very populous. The viceroy of Peru uses the greatest precautions, and is continually on the alert against any movements of the Chunchos or other Indians, and keeps a garri son of good troops upon his frontiers. 
|CIIUNCIIURI, an ancient pi ovince of Peru in Las Charcas. It is small, and its natives were the most valorous and hardy of any in the king dom. The IncaRoca, fourth Emperor, subjected them, having attacked them with 30,000 of his best troops. 
|CHUNGUI, a settlement of the province anil 3 o 2 corregimiento of Huamanga in Peru; annexed to the curacy of Anco. 
|CHUNIANIS, a barbarous nation of Indians of the lands of Magellan, in the vicinity of the straits of Magellan. It is a tribe descended from the Iluyellanes. They are numerous and fero cious; the men and women go entirely naked; their arms are bows and arrows, the latter being pointed with well-filed flints ; they are robust, of great strength, and fine appearance. Some travellers pretend that these are the fabulous giants of whom so many have written. 
|CHUPA, a settlement of the province and cor regimiento of Asangaro in Peru. 
|CHUPA, a very lofty mountain of the province and government of Veragua in the kingdom of Tierra Firmc, to the $. of the capital, midway be tween the coasts of the two seas. 
|CHUPACHOS, a river of Peru, which flows clown from the mountains of the Andes. It rises from the lake Patancocho, in lat. 10 41 s. ; washes the country of the Chupachos Indians, from whence it takes its name, and finishes its course by emptying itself into the Mollobamba, on thezv. side, in lat. 7 21 s. 
|CHUPAN, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Huamalies in Peru; annexed to the curacy of Banos. 
|CHUPA
fA, a river of the province and go vernment of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito. It rises in the cordillera of the Andes, to the n. of the city of Guanuco in Peru, and after collecting the waters of several other rivers in its protracted course, enters the river Maranon in a very broad stream. 
|CHUPAS, an extensive valley or plain of the province and corregimiento of Huamanga in Peru, near to the city. It is celebrated for the battle which was fought here by the Licentiate Baca de Castro, of the royal council of Castille, governor of Peru, on the 16th September 1542, against the army of the rebels commanded by Diego de Almagro the younger, and son of the conqueror of the same name, when the latter was routed and taken prisoner with the loss of more than 700 men. 
|CHUPAS, a settlement of the province and cor regimiento of Canta in the same kingdom ; annex ed to the curacy of Pari. 
|CHUPE, a settlement of the province and cor regimiento of Cicasica in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Yanacache. 
|CHUQUI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Calca and Lares in Peru ; anmexed to the curacy of of Lares. 
|CHUQUI, another, in the province and correffimiento of Yamparaes, not far from the town of Potosi. 
|CHUQUIABO. SeePAZ. 
|CHUQUIBAMBA, a settlement and capital of the province and corregimiento of Condesuyos de Arequipa in Peru. It is of a cold and unpleasant temperature, and lies four leagues from Camana. 
|CHUQUIBAMBA, another, in the province and corregimiento of Cochabamba in Peru. 
|CHUQUIBAMBA, another, in the province and corregimiento of Chachapoyas, of the same king dom. 
|CHUQUICARA, a river of the province and corregimiento of Guamachuco. It rises in the same province, and enters the river Santa, chang ing its own name to this, immediately that it touches the boundary of this jurisdiction, which it divides from those of Truxillo and Guamachuco. 
|CHUQUICHAMBI, a settlement of the pro vince and corregimiento of Charangas, arch bishopric of Charcas in Peru. 
|CHUQUICOTA, a settlement of the province arid corregimiento of Carangas, and the arch bishopric of Charcas, in Peru. 
|CHUQUILLA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Lipas, and archbishopric of Charcas, in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Saa Christovul. 
|CHUQUI-MAGU, a river of Peru. It rises in the mountains of Jaeu de Bracamoros, of the kingdom of Quito, and after laving the territorj of the corregimiento ofPiura, enters the S. sea. 
|CHUQUINGA, a settlement close to that of Nasca, and nearly upon the shore of the river Amancay, where there is a narrow pass, through which two men cannot without great difficulty go abreast ; for on one side rises the mountain nearly perpendicular, and on the other is a precipice which runs into the river ; this is the spot where a signal victory was obtained by the rebel Francisco Hernandez Giron, in 1554, against the Brigadier Alonzo de Alvarado, both of them leaders of fac tions, maintaining the separate interests enkindled in the civil wars of Peru. 
|CHUQUINGA, another settlement, in the pro vince and corregimiento of Aymaraez, also in Peru. 
|CHUQUIRIBAMBA, a large settlement of Indians, of the province and corregimiento of Loxa in the kingdom of Quito; on the shore of a small river which enters the Catamayu, on which ac count some maintain that it is the origin of the latter. It is surrounded by a beautiful and fertile 
territory, where the noble families of Loxa hare their best possessions. 
|CHUQUIS, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Huamalies in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Banos. 
|CHUQUISACA, LA PLATA, or CHARCAS, a city and capital of the province of Peru, founded by Pedro Anzures in 1539, who gave it this name. It had a settlement of Indians on the same spot. The first founders called it La Plata, from the celebrated mine of this metal (silver) in the moun tain of Porco, close to the aforesaid settlement, and from whence immense wealth was extracted by the emperors the Incas of Peru. This city is lituate on a plain surrounded by pleasant hills, which defend it from the inclemency of the winds ; the climate is mild and agreeable, but during the winter, dreadful tempests, accompanied with thun der and lightning, are not unusual ; the edifices are good, handsome, and well adorned, having delightful orchards and gardens. The waters are delicate, cold, and salutary, and divided into different aqueducts, by which they are carried to the public fountains, forming an object at once useful and ornamental. Its nobility is of the first and most distinguished families of Peru, who have many privileges and distinctions. The cathedral consists of three naves ; it is very rich, and adorn ed with fine furniture and beautiful paintings. It contains convents of the religious orders of St. Domingo, St. Augustin, St. Francis, La Merced, and San Juan de Dios, with a good hospital, a handsome college and a magnificent church which belonged to the regulars of the company ; also three monasteries of nuns, the one of Santa Clara, the other of Santa Monica, and the third of the Carmelites ; a royal university with the title of San Francisco Xavier, the rector of which was universally of the college of the regulars of the company of the Jesuits. It has also two houses of study for youth, the one the seminary of San Christoval, and the other the college of San Juan, which were likewise under the controul of the Jesuits until the year 1767 ; also an hermitage de dicated to San Roque. It was erected into a bishopric by the pontiff Julius III. in 1551, and afterwards into a metropolitan in 1G08, with an archbishop, five dignitaries, six canons, four pre bends, and as many more demi-prebends. The tribunal of audience was erected here in 1559, and afterwards those of the inquisition of the cruzada. Its arms are a shield divided horizontally, having in the upper part two mountains with a cross upon each, in the middle a tree with two columns on the sides, in the lower part to the left two lions rampant, on the right two towers with two lions, a standard being in the middle, and the whole embossed upon a silver field. At the distance of six leagues from this city passes the river Pilcomnyu, by which it is supplied with good fish, and upon the shores of the Cachimayu, which is only two leagues distant, the nobility have many rural seats. In 1662 a great insurrection took place here amongst the Mustees and the people of colour. It is the native place of several illustrious persons, and amongst others of the following : 
Don Rodrigo de Orozco, Marquis of Mortara, captain-general of the principality of Cataluna, and of the council of state and war. 
Fray Antonio de Calancha, a monk of St. Au gustin, a celebrated author. 
Don Rodrigo de Santillana, oidor of Valladolid, and afterwards in his country. 
The venerable Friar Martin de Aguirre, of the order of St. Augustin. 
Don Alonso Corveda de Zarate, canon of Lima, and professor of languages. 
The Father Maestro Fray Diego Trexo, a Do minican monk. 
The Father Juan de Cordoba, of the extin guished company of Jesuits, a celebrated theologist. 
Its archbishopric has for suffragans, the bishop rics of Santa Cruz de la Sierra, La Paz, Tucuman, and La Ascencion of Paraguay ; and to it diocese belong 188 curacies. Its inhabitants in and about it amount to 13,000, of which 4000 are Spaniards, 3000 Mustees, 4500 Indians, and 15,000 Negroes and Mulattoes. It is 290 leagues from Cuzco, inlat. 19 31 *. 
Archbishops of the church of La Plata. 
1. Don Fray Tomas de San Martin, a monk of the order of St. Dominic, a master in his order, and one of the first monks who passed over into Peru with the Friar Vicente de Valverde ; he was provincial there, returned to Spain with the Licen tiate Pedro de la Gasca, and as a reward for his labours, presented by the king to the first arch bishopric of Charcas, in 1553: he died in 1559. 
2. Don Fray Pedro de la Torre, who wa* elected, but not consecrated ; and in his place, 
3. Don Fray Alonso de la Cerda. 
4. Don Fernan Gonzalez de la Cuesta, who laid the foundation of the cathedral church. 
5. Don Fray Domingo de Santo Tomas, of the order of St. Dominic, a noted preacher, and one of those who went over to Peru with the Fray Vicente Valverde ; he was prior in different convents, and general visitor of his order in those kingdoms. 
6. Don Fernando de Santillana, native of So
470 
villa, president of the courts of chancery of Gra nada and Valladolid, elected bishop ; lie died in Lima before he took possession. 
7. Don Alonso Ramirez Granero, and not Pedro, as Gil Gonzalez will have it; a native of Villaescusa in the bishopric of Cuenca, a collegiate of this city, dean of the church of Guadix, and fiscal of the inquisition of Mexico; elected archbishop in 1574 ; he governed until 1578. 
8. Don Fray Juan de Vivero, native of Yalladolid, of the order of St. Augustin ; he passed over to Peru, was prior of his convent of Lima, presented to the archbishopric of Cartagena of the Indies, and to this archbishopric ; but these digni ties he would not accept ; he returned to Spain, and died in his convent of Toledo. 
9. Don Alonso Kamirez de Vergara, native of Segura de Leon, collegiate in Malaga, Alcala, and Salamanca, professor of arts, and canon of Malaga ; he was presented to the archbishopric of Charcas in 1594, and died in 1603. 
10. Don Fray Luis Lopez de Solis, native of Salamanca, of the order of St. Augustin ; he passed over into Peru, where he was master of his reli gious order, professor of theology, prior provin cial, and qualificator of the inquisition ; he was promoted to the church of Quito, and to this me tropolitan see. 
11. Don Fray Ignacio de Loyola, a monk of the barefooted order of St. Francis ; he was commis sary in the province of Filipirias, and on his return to Spain elected archbishop of Charcas. 
12. Don Alonso de Peralta, native of Arequipa, archdeacon and inquisitor of Mexico, and arch bishop of Charcas, where he died. 
13. Don Fray Geronimo de Tiedra, native of Salamanca, of the order of St. Domingo; he was prior of his convent, and preacher to the king, and archbishop of Charcas in 161b . 
14. Don Fernando Arias de Ugarte, native of Santa Fe of Bogota, of whom \ve have treated in the catalogue of the bishops of Quito; he passed over from the archbishopric of Santa Fe to this in 
1630. 
15. Don Francisco dc Sotomayor. 
16. Don Fray Francisco dc Borja, of the order of San Benito, master in the university of Sala manca, and professor of theology ; elected bishop of Charcas in 1634. 
17. Don Fray Pedro de Oviedo, of the order of San Benito, native of Madrid ; he studied arts and theologv in Alcala, was abbot of the monastery of S. Clodio, and difmidor of his order ; he was pro moted from fhe bishopric of Quito to this arch bishopric in 1645 : he died in 1649. 
18. Don Juan Alonso de Ocon, native of La Roja, collegiate-major of San Ildefonso in Alcala, doctor arid professor of theology, curate of Elechosa in the archbishopric of Toledo, and of the parish of Santa Cruz of Madrid ; he was promoted from the church of Cuzco to this of La Plata. 
19. Don Fray Gaspar de Villaroel, of the order of St. Augustin, native of Itiobamba ; he studied in the royal university of Lima, and with the re putation of being very learned, of which, indeed, his works bear testimony ; he was promoted from the church of Arequipa to this in 1658. 
20. Don Bernardo de Izaguirre, native of To ledo ; he was fiscal of the inquisition of Carta gena and of Lima, and was promoted from the church of Cuzco to this metropolitan see. 
21. Don Fray Alonso de la Cerda, of the order of preachers, native of Lima, provincial of his order, bishop of Honduras ; from whence he was promoted to this church. 
22. Don Melchor de Linan and Cisneros, native of Tordelaguna, of whom we speak in the cata logue of the bi.*hops of Santa Marta ; he was re moved from the bishopric of Popayan in 1672, governed until 1678, when he was promoted to the metropolitan see of Lima. 
23. Don Bartolome Gonzalez de Poveda, who became archbishop, and governed until 1692. 
24. Don Fray Diego Morcillo Rubio de Aunon, of the bishopric of La Paz in 1711, where he re mained until 1724, when he was promoted to the archbishopric of Lima. 
25. Don Francisco Luis Romero, promoted from the archbishopric of Quito; he governed until 1725. 
26. Don Alonso del Pozo and Silva, of the bishopric of Santiago of Chile. 
27. Don Agustin Delgado, in 1743 ; governed until 1746. 
28. Don Salvador Berrnudez, from the aforesaid year ; governed until 1747. 
29. Don Gregorio dc Molleda y Clerque, of the bishopric of Truxillo, in 1748 ; he governed until 1758, when he died. 
30. Don Cayetano Marcel lano y Agramont, of the bishopric of Buenos Ayres, in 1758 ; he go verned until 176J, when he died. 
31. Don Pedro de Argandona, promoted in the above year; he governed until 1X76, when he died. 
32. Don Francisco Ramon de Herboso, who governed from 1776 to 1784. 
33. Don Fray Joseph Antonio de San Alberto, who governed in 1785. 
|CHUQUISONGO, SAN PEDIIO DE, a settlement of the province and corregwnento of Huamachnco in Peru ; one of the four divisions of the curacy of Estancias. 
|CIIUQUIYAPU, an ancient province of Peru, which was conquered and united to the empire by Mayta Capac, fourth Emperor of the Incas, after the famous battle and victory of Hnallu against the Collas Indians. It is tolerably well peopled, and of a cold climate. Its territory abounds in excellent pastures, in which there are great quan tities of cattle. In some parts, where the tempera ture is hot, there is founct maize, cco, and sugar cane. This country abounds in woods, and in these are found tigers, leopards, stags, and mon keys of many different species. 
|CHURCAMPA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Huanta in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Mayor. 
|CHURCH CREEK Town, in Dorchester county, Maryland, lies at the head of Church creek, a branch of Hudson river, seven miles s.w. from Cambridge. 
|CHURCH Hill, a village in Queen Ann s county, Maryland, at the head of S. E. Creek, a branch of Chester river, n. w. of Bridgetown, and n. e. of Centreville eight miles, and 85 s.w. from Phila delphia. Lat. 39 6 n. Long. 76 10 . 
|CHURCHILL, a great river of New S. Wales, one of the provinces of N. America, at the mouth of which the English Hudson bay company have a fort and establishment ; situate in lat. 5P n. and long. 94 12 w. The commerce of this place is great and lucrative, and on account of its great distance entirely secure from any disturbance from the French. In 1747 the number of castor-skins, which were brought by 100 Indians to this spot in their canoes, amounted to 20,000. Several other kinds of skins were also brought from the n. by 200 other Indians ; some of whom came hither by the river Seals, or Marine Wolves, 15 leagues to the s. of the fort. To the n. of this fort there are no castors, since there are no woods where these animals are found, though there are many other woods which abound in wolves, bears, foxes, buf faloes, and other animals whose skins are valuable. Here are great quantities of shrubs or small trees, planted by the factory, supplying timber ; but the opposite side of the river is most favourable to their growth : and at a still greater distance are found large trees of various kinds. The company re siding in the fort is exposed to many risks, and obliged to inhabit a rock surrounded by frosts and snows for eight months in the year, being exposed to all the winds and tempests. On account of the deficiency of pasture, they maintain near the factory no more than four or five horses, and a bull with two cows ; for the maintenance of which du ring the winter, fodder is brought from a fenny bottom some miles distant from the river. Those who have been here affirm, that between this river and the river Nelson there is, at a great distance up the country, a communication or narrow pass of land, by which these rivers are divided; and the Indians who carry on this traffic, have dealings with the English navigating the river Nelson or Albany. [See NRW BRITAIN. 
|CHURCHTOWN, a village so called, in the n. e. part of Lancaster county, Pennsylvania, about 20 miles e. n.e. of Lancaster, and 50 w. n. w. of Philadelphia. It has 12 houses, and an episcopal church ; and in the environs are two forges, which manufacture about 450 tons of bar iron annually. CHUKIN, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Caxatarnbo in Peru. Its jurisdiction comprehends the settlements of 
Huacho, Pal pas, 
Curay, Naba, 
Taucir, O yon, 
Rapas, Tinta, 
Pachangara, Mallay. 
It has some celebrated fountains of mineral waters. 
|CHURUBAMBA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Huanuco in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Santa Maria del Valle. 
|CHURUMACO, a settlement of the head settle ment and akaldia mayor of Cinagua in Nueva Espana ; situate in a dry and warm country ; on which account the seeds scarcely ever come to ma turity, save those of maize : melons indeed grow in abundance, owing to the cultivation they find, and from water being brought to them from a river which runs at least a league s distance from the the settlement. In its district are several herds of large cattle, which form the principal branch of the commerce of the inhabitants : these consist of 80 families of Indians. In its limits are also found some ranchos, in which reside 22 families of Spa niards, and 34 of Mustees and Miilattoes. At a short distance is the mountain called Yngimran, in which copper mines are found, though this metal has not been observed much to abound. Four leagues to the e. of its capital. 
|CHURUMATAS, a settlement of the province and corregintiento of Yamparaes in Peru, and of the archbishopric of Charca*. 
|CHUSCOS, a barbarous nation of Indians of the ancient province of Panataguas, to the n. of the city of Huanuco ; of which little more than id name is known. 
|CHYAIZAQUES, a barbarous nation, and but very little known, of Indians, of the Nuevo Reyno tie Granada, bordering upon the river Fusagasuga. They are few, and live dispersed in the woods, having a communication with the Faeces and Fusungaes. 
|CHYENNES, Indians of N. America, the remnant of a nation once respectable in point of number. They formerly resided on a branch of the Red river of Lake Winnipie, which still bears their name. Being oppressed by the Sioux, they removed to the w. side of the Missouri, about 15 miles below the mouth of Warricunne creek, where they built and fortified a village ; but being pursued by their ancient enemies the Sioux, they fled to the Black hills, about the head of the Chyenne river, where they wander in quest of the buffalo, having no fixed residence. They do not cultivate. They are well disposed towards the whites, and might easily be induced to settle on the Missouri, if they could be assured of being pro tected from the Sioux. Their number annually diminishes. Their trade may be made valuable. 
|CIACICA. See CICASICA. 
|CIBAMBE, a settlement of the district and corregimiento of Alausi in the kingdom of Quito. 
|CIBAYA, a settlement of the province and corregimienlo of Arica in Peru. 
|CIBOLA, or CIVOLA, the name of a town in, and also the ancient name of, New Granada in Tierra Firme, S. America. The country here, though not mountainous, is very cool ; and the Indians are said to be the whitest, wittiest, most sincere and orderly of all the aboriginal Americans. When the country was discovered, they had each but one wife, and were excessively jealous. They worshipped water, and an old woman that was a magician ; and believed she lay hid under one of their lakes. 
|CIBOO, MINAS DE, some rough and craggy mountains, nearly in the centre of the island of St. Domingo, where some gold mines are worked, and from whence great wealth was procured at the be ginning of the conquest. 
|CIBOUX, a small island near the e. coast of the Isla Real, or Cape Breton, between the port Delfih and the entrance of the lake of Labrador. 
|CICASICA, a province and correginiiento of Peru ; bounded . and n. e. by the mountains of the Andes, ami the province of Larecaxa ; e. by the province of Cochabamba ; 5. e. l)y that of Paria and correginiiento of Oruro ; on the 5. it is touched by the river of Desaguadero ; 5. w. by the province of Pacages ; and n. w. and w. by the city of La Paz. It is one of the greatest in the whole kingdom, since the corregidor is obliged to place here 12 lieutenants for -the administration of justice, on ac count of its extent. It is five leagues from n. to s. and 80 from e. to w. Its temperature is various ; in some parts there are some very cold serranias, in which breed every species of cattle, in proportion to the number of estates found there. That part which borders upon the Andes is very hot and moist, but at the same time fertile, and abounding in all kinds of fruits and plantations of sugar-cane, and in cacao estates, the crops of which are very great, and produce a lucrative commerce ; the use of this leaf, which was before only common to the Indians, being now general amongst the Spaniards of both sexes and all classes ; so that one basket ful, which formerly cost no more than five dollars, will now fetch from JO to 11 : vines are also culti vated, and from these is made excellent wine. This province is watered by the river La Paz, which is the source of the Beni ; also by a river descending from the branches of the cordillera, and which, in the wet season, is tolerably large. At the river Corico begins the navigation by means of rafts to the settlement of Los Reyes. Amongst the pro ductions of this province may be counted Jesuits bark, equal to that of Loxa, according to the ex periments made at Lima. This province begins at the river Majaviri, which divides the suburbs of Santa Barbara from the city of La Paz, and here is a little valley watered by the above river, and in it are a few houses or country-seats belonging to the inhabitants of the above city. This valley, which is of a delightful temperature, extends as for as the gold mine called Chuquiahuilla, on the skirt of the cordilltra
 where was found that rich lump of gold which weighed 90 marks, the largest ever seen in that kingdom, with the pe culiarity, that upon assaying it, it was found to have six different alloys ; its degrees of perfec tion differing from 18 to 23 j ; and that being valued in Spanish money, it proved to be worth 1 1,269 dollars 3| reals. This prize was carried to the royal treasury, and upon this occasion the Marquis of Castelfuerte, then viceroy, received the thanks of his majesty. In the territory of Cinco Curatos (or Five Curacies) of the Andes are found in the forests excellent woods, such as cedars, corcobolos, &c. and many fine fruits, also tobacco. It had formerly very rich mines of gold and silver, which are still known to exist in other mountains besides that of Santiago, but the natives have no in clination to work them. The aforementioned mountain has the peculiarity of abounding in either sort of the said metals. In the asiento of the mine* of Arica, there is a gold mine which produces but little. From the wools of the flocks are made some 
manufactures peculiar to the country, such as coarse trowsers, baizes, and blankets. Although it is some years since this province has received any mischief from the infidels who inhabit the moun tains of the Andes, yet it has regular advanced de tachments or guards stationed for the defence of the frontiers, prepared against a recurrence of the evils experienced in former times. As we have before said, it is the largest province, so also it is the best peopled, since it contains upwards of 50,000 souls and 33 settlements, the capital of which has the same name. Its repartimiento
 or tribute, used to amount to 226,750 dollars, and it used to pay an alcavala of 1814 dollars per annum. The settle ments are, 
Cicasica, Mecapaca, 
Coroico, Pasca, 
Yanacache, Ynquisive, 
Chulumani, Quimi, 
Caza, Collana, 
Suri, Iluayrapaya, 
Cabari, Coripaya, 
Mohosa, Chupe, 
Capinata, Millnhuay, 
Ychoca, Taxma, 
Coani, Choxlla, 
Yaco, Chirca, 
Luribay, Yrupana, 
Haichayo, Colqui, 
Calamarca, Plaraca, 
Zapanqui, Ocavaya. 
Caracato, 
|CICAYARI, a river of the province and country of Las Amazonas, in the Portuguese possessions. It rises in the territory of the Chappoanas Indians, runs n. n. w. and enters the Rio Negro. 
|CICERO, a military township in New York, on the s, w. side of Oneida lake, and between it, the Salt lake, and the Salt springs. 
|CICLADAS GR ANDES, islands of the S. sea, discovered by Mr. De Bouganville in 1763. 
|CICOBASA, a river of the province and govern ment of Quixos y Macas in the kingdom of Quito, and of the district of the latter. It rises in the cordillera of the province of Cuenca, runs s. and enters the river Santiago. 
|CIENEGA, a settlement and real of the silver mines of the province of Tepeguana, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya ; situate near the settlement of Parral. 
|CIENEGA, another settlement, of the province and government of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is situate on the sea-coast, and on the bank of the cienega or marsh which lies close to it, and which gives it its name. It was a reduction of the monks of St. Domingo. 
|CIENEGA, another, with the surname of Oro, in the province and government of Cartagena, of the same kingdom. It is of the district of Tolu, and formed by the re-union of other settlements in the year 1776, effected by the Governor Don Juan Pimienta. 
|CIENEGA, another, of the island of Cuba; situate on the n. coast. 
|CIMA, a valley of the province and government of Antioquia ; bounded by that of Paucura, front which it is divided by the river Cauca just at its source. 
|CINACANTLAN, a settlement of the province and alcaldia mayor of Chiapa in the kingdom of Guatemala. 
|CINAGUA Y GUACANA, the alcaldia mayor and jurisdiction of the province and bishopric of Mechoacan in Nueva Espana. It is 80 leagues long from e. to w. and 60 wide from n. to s. Its territory is for the most part mountainous and un even, and its temperature bad. Its productions are large cattle, wax, maize, and fruits. The ca pital is the settlement of the same name, of a hot temperature, and inhabited by 25 families of Indians, who cultivate maize arid melons, upon which this scanty population consists, though it was formerly of some consideration. It has suf fered, no doubt, from the uiikindnees of the tempera ture, and from the want of water. The jurisdiction is 80 leagues to the w. with a slight inclination to the s. of Mexico. The other settlements are, Guacana, Paraquaro, 
Ario, Nocupetajo, 
Etuquarillo, Acuiyo, 
Santa Ana Turicato. Punguco. 
|CINALOA, a province and government of Nueva Espana. It is between the w. and n. of Mexico, from whence it is distant 300 leagues. It extends in length as far as proselytes have been made to the gospel, viz. to 140 ; and it ex tends to 40 in width. On the e. of it are the loftiest sierras of Topia, running towards the n. and on the zo. it is embraced by the arm of the sea of California. On the s. it has the town of Culiacan, and to the n. the innumerable nations of Indians, the boundaries of which are unknown. This province lies between lat. 27 and 32 n.- } this being the extent to which the missonaries have penetrated. The temperature is extremely hot, although the cold is intense during the months of December and January. It rains here very little, especially upon the coast ; and seldom more than 3 P 
474 
four or five times in the year ; which causes the ground to be so parched, that it would be entirely uninhabitable, were it not for the multitude of streams with which it is intersected, and which render the temperature mild and healthy. The country for the most part consists of levels, covered with green shrubs and trees, forming shady woods of three or four leagues in extent. In these are found the Brazil-wood, ebony, &c. which serve as an asylum for wild beasts, leopards and wild boars, deer and rabbifs, a variety of mountain cats, coyotes
 serpents and vipers. In the valleys are found a multitude of quails, turtle-doves, pheasants, cranes, parrots, macaws, much esteemed for the beauty of their plumage, and with which the Indians adorn themselves, and an infinite variety of other birds. The rivers, all of which descend from the sierras of Topia, in the rainy season increase to such a degree as to inundate the country for the space of three or four leagues ; and generally re maining out for eight days at least, the Indians are under the necessity of forming for themselves a kind of terrace upon the branches of trees, by means of planks and sods, where they make fires and dress their food. There are many salt ponds, also mines of silver, which are not worked for want of la bourers. This province was peopled by several nations of Indians, who had their villages and huts on the sides of rivers. They used to maintain them selves on maize, which they cultivated, also on ca labashes, which are very sweet and savoury, French beans, and a species of wild carob plant, called by them mesqmteS) and which being ground, they used to drink in water, after the manner of choco late. They had also another delicacy in the plant called mezcalj which resembles the savila ; of this there are several sorts, of which they make wine, sweets, and vinegar ; of its tendrils thread, and of its prickles needles. This country also abounds in nopaks, pitahayas, and other plants, including many ivhich are native to Europe. Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca was the first who discovered this extensive province in his perigrination, after he had suffered shipwreck in going from Florida to Mexico ; and from his report of it, the viceroy Don Antonio de Mendoza was induced to send into it some persons to discover more concerning it. In 1590 it was visited by the regulars of the com pany of Jesuits, who came hither to preach the gospel. They succeeded in making proselytes amongst the natives, and established a regular mission, which was patronized by the Queen Dona Margarita of Austria, wife of Philip III.; she liaving sent, for the promotion of the interests of 
this great object, and for the decorations of tht altars, &c. several valuable presents of jewels, ornaments, and other precious articles. The capital is the town of San Felipe and Santiago, and the other settlements are, 
Montes Claros, Toro, 
Real de Alamos, Concepcion, 
Bocaverito, Loreto, 
Noguera, Navajoa, 
Camoa, Tecia, 
Guarabe, Tepehue, 
Ocosconi, Real de los Fra
Mocorito, yelcs, 
San Ignacio, Vaca, 
Santa Ana, Toriz, 
Achogoa, Cuytes, 
Caurimpo, Temoris, 
Mocoyaguy, Chinipas, 
Chiguaguilla, Valle Umbroso, 
Tegueco, Guazapares, 
Sivirijoa, Jatebo, 
Charay, Guadalupe, 
Mochicarui, Mayo, 
San Miguel, Canamoas, 
Haome, Batacosa. 
Santa Maria, 
|CINALOA, a river of this province, which runs to enter the sea in the gulf of Californa, or Mar Roxo de {Cortes, between the rivers Culiacan and Del Fuerte. 
|CINAMIN, a river of the province and cap tainship of Rio Grande in Brazil. It rises near the coast, and runs into the sea close to the cape of San Roque. 
|CINCINNATI, a flourishing town in the ter ritory of the United States, n. w. of the Ohio, and the present seat of government. It stands on the n. bank of the Ohio, opposite the mouth of Lick ing river, two miles arid a half s, w. of fort Wash ington, and about eight miles w. of Columbia. Both these towns lie between Great and Little Miami rivers. Cincinnati contains about 200 houses ; and is 82 miles n. bye. of Frankfort; 90 n. w. of Lexington, and 779 w. by s. of Philadelphia. Lat. 38 42 n. Long. 84 11 o&gt;. 
|CINCINNATUS is the s. easternmost of the military townships of New York state. It has Vir gil on the a?, and Salem, in Herkemer county, on the e. and lies on two branches of Tioughnioga river, a n. w. branch of the Chenango. The centre of the town lies 53 miles s. w. by w. of Cooperstown, and 39 s. e. by s. of the s. e. end of Salt lake, Lat. 42 27 . 
|CINCOS, a settlement of the province and corrcgimiento of Xauxa in Peru. 
|CINCO-SENORES, a settlement of the province of Tepeguana, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya ; one of the missions of the Babosariganes Indians, held there by the regulars of the com pany of Jesuits. Within eight leagues to the s. of its district is a great unpeopled tract, called De las Manos, (Of the Hands), from the infidel Indians having nailed up against some temples in those parts many hands of some unfortunate Spaniards whom they had killed, when the latter had en tered the country under the idea of making pro selytes. 
|CINGACUCHUSCAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, who inhabit the woods to the s. of the river Maranon. In 1652 they were united to the Pandabeques, and established themselves in the settlement of Xibaros of the missions of Maynas, with the exception of some few, who still remain in their idolatry, and lead a wandering life through the woods. 
|CINIO, a settlement of the province and co lony of Maryland, in the county of Kent ; situate on the shore, and at the extremity of the bay of Chesapeak. 
|CllNOQUIPA, a settlement of the province and government of La Sonora in Nueva Espaiia. 
|CINTENELA, ISLA DE, one of the islands which lie between the s. point of the Caico Grande and the Panuelo Quadrado. 
|CINTO, a settlement of the province and correginriento of Castro Vireyna in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of its capital. 
|CINTORI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Caxamarquilla in Peru. 
|CINTU, a spacious llanura
 or plain, of the ancient province of Chimu, now Truxillo, on the coast of the S. sea. It was taken possession of by Huaina Capac, thirteenth Emperor of the Incas. It is very fertile, and of a good and healthy cli mate ; but it is but little inhabited. 
|CINTY, a settlement of the province and corrcgimiento of Pilaya or Paspaya in Peru. 
|CINTY, a river of the province and government of Tucuman. It runs s. and enters the river San Juan. 
|CIPOYAY, a country and territory of the pro vince and government of Paraguay, called also the province of Vera, towards the e. and where the nation of the Guaranis Indians dwell. It is of a hot climate, but very fertile, abounding in woods, and well watered by many rivers; some of which run from e. to ?: . and enter the Uruguay, and others from 
. to n. and enter the Plata. 
475 
|CIPRE, a river of the province and govern ment of Esrneraldas in the kingdom of Quito. It takes its course from e. to zc. and opposite the river Sola, empties itself into that of Esmeraldas, on the &lt;. side, in lat. 28 n. 
CIRANDIRO, a settlement and the capital of the akaldla mayor of Guimeo in the province and bishopric of Mechoacan. It is of a hot tempera ture, and inhabited by 90 families of Tarascos Indians. In its vicinity is the estate of Quicluuidio, in which eight families of Spaniards, and 15 of Mustecs and Mulattoes, arc employed in making sugar. Also in the estate of Santa Maria arc five families of the former. It is 75 leagues to the w. and one-fourth to the s. w. of Mexico. 
|CIRENCESTEK. See MARCUS Hook. 
|CIRICIIE, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Antioquia in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; situate on the shore of a small river which enters that of Cauca. 
|CIRIGH. SeeSEKGipK. 
|CIRII, a small river of the province and cap tainship of Sergipc in Brazil. It rises near th coast, runs s.s.e. and enters the river Sirugipa, a little before this river enters the sea. 
|CIRIONES, a barbarous nation of Indians, of the province and government of Moxos in Peru. It is a wandering nation, savage, and but little known. 
|CISNE, a settlement of the province and corregimienlo of Loxa in the kingdom ot Quito. 
|CITRONIERS, or LIMONEROS, MONT AN AS DE LOS, mountains in the island of Guadalupe. They are in the large tract of land, and on the s. coast, lying between the settlements of Santa Ana and San Francisco. 
|CITY Point, in Virginia. See BERMUDA Hundred. 
|CIUAPA, a river of the province and corrcgimiento of Coquinibo in the kingdom of Chile, towards the n. It is notorious from a species of fish caught in it, called tache, of an extremely deli cate flavour. It runs into the S. or Pacific sea, firming a small port of little depth. 
|CIUDADRcAi, a city of the province and government of Paraguay ; founded in 1557 by Rui Diaz Melgarejo, on the shore of the river Piquiri, three leagues from Parana. It was des troyed by the Mamalukos Indians of San Pablo of Brazil, in 1630, and in its place was substituted the rich town of Espiritu Santo, the territory of which abounds in fruits, vines, and mines of copper. In the vicinity of the present town is a great wa terfall, formed by the above river, upwards of" S P 2 
476 
200 fathom in height. Eighty leagues n. e. of La Asuncion. Lat. 23 35 s. 
|CIUDAD REAL,, another city of this name, the capital of the province and alcaldia mayor of Chiapa, in the kingdom of Guatemala. It is very fertile in cacao, cotton, sugar, and pepper, of which it makes a great commerce ; is the head of a bishopric erected in 1538, and is renowned for having had as its first bishop Don Fray Bartolome de las Casas or Casaus, of the order of St. Domingo ; a man celebrated in the world not only for his intrinsic virtue, but for the zeal with which he undertook the cause of the Indians against the oppressions they suffered through their conquer ors. This city has three convents of monks of the orders of St. Domingo, St. Francis, and La Merced, and a monastry of nuns, with the dedi catory title of Nuestra Senora de la Encarnacion. It lies 60 leagues from the sea towards the n. and 70 from the city of Guatemala, in lat. 17, long. 19 20 . [Chilton, an Englishman, says the Indians, called this city Sacatlan ; and that in 1570 it contained about 100 Spanish inhabitants. See CHIAPA. 
|CIUDAD REAL, another, of the province of Guayana, and government of Cumana, founded, in 1759, by the Rear-admiral Don Joseph de Iturriaga, on the shore of the Orinoco. It was formed by several wanderers and idle people of the pro vinces of Barcelona and Venezuela, and of the island of Margarita ; but was of short duration, as it fell completely to decay when the king s pro tection was withdrawn; the inhabitants being no longer able to maintain a footing against the re peated attacks of the Caribes Indians. 
|CIZAN, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Tucuman, and district of its capital, in Peru ; situate e. of the town of San Fer nando. 
|CLAIPOLE, a settlement of the island of Barboes, in the district and parish of St. George. 
|CLAIR, ST. a county in the territory n. w. of the Ohio, was laid off 27th April 1790. Its boundaries are thus officially described : " Be
f inning at the mouth of the Little Michillimacinack river ; running thence s. in a direct line to the mouth of the Little river above fort Massac, upon the Ohio river; thence with the Ohio to its junction with the Mississippi ; thence up the Mis sissippi to the mouth of the Illinois river; and up the Illinois to the place of beginning, with all the adjacent islands of the said rivers Illinois and Mis sissippi." 
|CLAIR, ST. a fort in the territory n. zc. of the Ohio, is situate 25 miles n. of fort Hamilton, on a 
small creek which falls into the Great Miami ; and 21 miles s. of fort Jefferson. 
Cr,AiR, ST. Lake, lies about balf- way between lake Huron and lake Erie, in N. America, and is about 90 miles in circumference. It receives the waters of the three great lakes, Superior, Michi gan, and Huron, and discharges them through the river or strait called D Etroit (which is in French, the Strait) into lake Erie. Its channel, as also that of the lake, is sufficiently deep for vessels of very considerable burden. See D ETROIT. 
|CLALISTAC, a settlement of the head settle ment of Xonacatepec, and alcaldia mayor of Cucrnavaca,in Nueva Espaila. 
|CLALSIUILUNGO, a settlement of the head settlement of Acantepec, and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa, in Nueva Espana. It is of a hot tempera ture, contains 84 families of Mistecos Indians, who employ themselves in so wing maize, and cultivating every kind of cane, from which they extract a portion of loaf-sugar, and with which they sup ply the neighbouring jurisdictions. One league and an half s. w. of its capital. 
fCLAM Town. See EGG Harbour. 
|CLANAPA, a head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Tlapa in Nueva Espana. It contains 274 families of Indians, including those of the wards of its district. Six leagues w. of its capital. 
|CLAPULCO, SAN PEDRO DE, a head settle ment of the alcaldia mayor of Thehuacan in Nueva Espana. It is annexed to the curacy of Coxcotlan, and situate in its vicinity. It con tains 130 families of Indians. 
|CLAQUEPOURE, a river of the province and government of Guayana, in the French pos sessions. 
|CLARA, SANTA, a head settlement of the dis trict of the alcaldia mayor of Ecatepec in Nueva Espana. It contains 94 families of Indians, and lies one league and an half s. of its capital. 
|CLARA, SANTA, another settlement in the head settlement of the district of Toxtepec, and alcaldia mayor of Tecali, in the same kingdom. It con tains 130 families of Indians. 
|CLARA, SANTA, another, of the missions held by the Franciscans, in the district of the alcaldia mayor of Guadalcazar of the same kingdom. It contains 30 families of Indians, and its territory is full of them. It lies four leagues e. of the settlement of Monte Alverna. 
|CLARA, SANTA, another, of the province and 
fovernment of Cumana in the kingdom of Tierra irme, one of those of the Franciscan missions of Piritu : situate OH the shore of the river Arivi. 
|CLARA , S A NT A , another, of the province and go vernment of Venezuela ; situate on the shore of a river to the w. n. w. of the city of Nirua. 
|CLARA, SANTA, another, of the province and government of Yucatan ; situate on the coast be tween the settlements of Silan and Sisal. 
|CLARA, SANTA, another, of the missions belong ing to the religious of St. Francis, in the kingdom of Nuevo Mexico. 
|CLARA, SANTA, another, of the island of Cuba ; situate on the w. coast. 
|CLARE, a township on St. Mary s bay, in Annapolis county, Nova Scotia. It has about 50 families, and is composed of woodland and salt marsh. 
|CLARE, a small island of the S. sea, close to the port of Guayaquil. It is desert, and two leagues in length. It is commonly called Amortajado, since, being looked upon from any part, it bears the resemblance to a dead man. Twentyfive leagues from Cape Blanco. 
|CLARE, a very lofty mountain of the province and government of Sonora in Nueva Espaiia, near the coast of the gulf of California, and in the most interior part. It was discovered in 1698. 
|CLARE, a small lake of New France, which is formed by the strait of Misisagues, between lake Huron and that of Erie. 
|CLARE, a bay on the coast of the country and land of Labrador, in the strait of Belle-isle. 
|CLAREMONT, a township in Cheshire coun ty, New Hampshire, on the e. side of Connecti cut river, opposite Ascutney mountain, in Ver mont, and on the n. side of Sugar river ; 24 miles s. of Dartmouth college, and 121 s.zo. by w. of Portsmouth. It was incorporated in 1764, and contains 1435 inhabitants. 
|CLAREMONT County, in Camden district, S. Carolina, contains 2479 white inhabitants, and 21 10 slaves. Statesburg is the county town. 
|CLARENDON, a county of S. Carolina, [the southernmost in Camden district, about 30 miles long and 30 broad, and in 1792 contained 1790 whites and 602 slaves. 
|CLARENDON, a settlement of the island of Ja maica ; situate on the s. coast. 
|CLARENDON, a township near the centre of Rutland county, Vermont, watered by Otter creek and its tributary streams ; 14 or 15 miles e. of Fairhaven, and 44 n. e. of Bennington. It con tains 1478 inhabitants. On the s. e. side of a mountain in the w. part of Clarendon, or in the edge of Tinmouth, is a curious cave, the mouth of which is not more than two feet and a half in diameter; in its descent the passage makes an 
477 
angle with the horizon of 35 or 40; but con tinues of nearly the same diameter through its whole length, which is 31 feet. At that distance from the mouth, it opens into a spacious room, 20 feet long, 12 j wide, and 18 or 20 feet high ; every part of the floor, sides, and roof of this room ap pear to be a solid rock, but rery rough and un even. The water is continually percolating through the top, and has formed stalactites of various forms ; many of which are conical, and some have the appearance of massive columns ; from this room there is a communication by a narrow pas sage to others equally curious. 
|CLARINES, a settlement of the province of Barcelona, and government of Cumana, in the kingdom of Tierra Firme; lying to the e. of the city of Barcelona, and on the shore of the river Unare. 
|CLARKE, a settlement of the island ofBarbadoes, in the district of the parish of St. Joseph, and on the e. coast. 
|CLARKE, another, of the same island, on the s. coast. 
|CLARKE, a new county of Kentucky, between the head waters of Kentucky and Licking rivers. Its chief town is Winchester. 
|CLARKSBURG, the chief town of Harrison county, Virginia. It contains about 40 houses, a court-house, and gaol ; and stands on the e. side of Moiiongahela river, 40 miles s. ic. of Morgantown. 
|CLARKSTOWN, in Orange county, New York, lies on the ?0. side of the Tappan sea, two miles distant, n. from Tappan township six miles, and from New York city 29 miles. By the state census of 1796, 224 of its inhabitants are elec tors. 
|CLARKSVILLE, the chief town of what was till lately called Tennessee county, in the state of Tennessee, is pleasantly situated on the e. bank of Cumberland river, and at the mouth of lied river j opposite the mouth of Muddy creek. It contains about 30 houses, a court-house, and gaol, 45 miles n. w. of Nashville, 220 . a , by za. of Knoxville, and 940 w. by s, of Philadelphia. Lat. 36 25 n. Long. 87 23 w." 
|CLARKSVII.LE, a small settlement in the n. w. territory, which contained in 1791 about 60 souls. It is situate on the n. bank of the Ohio, opposite Louisville, a mile below the rapids, and JOO miles s. e. of post Vincent. It is trcquently flood ed when the river is high, and inhabited by people who cannot at present find a better situa tion. 
|CLARO, a river of the district of Rexe in the 
kingdom of Chile. It rises from one of the lakes of Avendano, runs v&gt;. and then turning 5. enters the river Laxa. On its shore the Spaniards have a fort, called Yumbel, or Don Carlos de Austria, to restrain the Araucanos Indians. 
|CLARO, another river in the province and corrcgimiento of Maulc of the same kingdom. It runs w. and enters the Maulc. 
|CLARO, another river of the province and go vernment of Mariquita in the Nuevo Key no de Granada. It rises in the valley of Corpus Christ! , and running through it, enters the great river Magdalena. 
|CLARO, another, a small river of the province mid government of Paraguay. It ruiu x. and en ters the Mbotetei. 
|CLAIIO, another small river of the kingdom of Brazil, which also runs u\ and enters the Preto or Palma, opposite the Bcnito. 
|CLARO, another of the same kingdom of Brazil, distinct from the former. It rises in the country of the Araes Indians, runs n. n. e. and enters the Parcuipasa, to thea). of the town Boa. 
|CLARO, a port of the coast of the S. sea, in the province and government of Choco in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. It lies between the port Quemado and the bay of San Francisco Solano. 
|CLAUCAC, a settlement of the head settlement of Xonacatepec, and alcaldia mayor of Cuernavaca, in Nueva Espaiia. 
|CLAUDIO, SAN, a small island of the N. sea, near the e. coast of Nova Scotia in N. America, in the strait which this coast forms with the island of San Juan. 
|CLAVERACK, a post-town in Columbia county, New York, pleasantly situated on a large plain, about two miles and a half e. of Hudson city, near a creek of its own name. It contains about 60 houses, a Dutch church, a court-house, and a goal. The township, by the census of 1791, contained 3262 inhabitants, including 340 slaves. By the state census of 1796 there appears to be 412 electors. It is 231 miles from Philadelphia.  
|CLAYCAYAC, a head settlement ofthe alcal dia mayor of Zul tepee in Nueva Espana ; annexed to the curacy of Temascaltepec. It contains 84 families of Indians, and is four leagues s. of its capital. 
|CLEAUER, a settlement ofthe island of Barbadoes, in the district ofthe parish of San Juan. 
|CLERC, ENSENADA DE, a bay ofthe ?j. coast and w. head ofthe island of St. Domingo, in the French possessions, between the bay of Los Caimitos and the Agujero or Trou of Jeremias. 
|CLERK S Isles lie s. w. from, and at the 
entrance of Behring s straits, which separate Asia from America. They rather belong to Asia, being very near, and s. s. w. from the head-land which lies between the straits and the gulf of Anadir in Asia. They have their name in honour of thai able navigator, Captain Clerk, the companion of Captain Cook. In other maps they are called St. Andrea isles. 
|CLERMONTj a post-town in Columbia coun ty, New York, six miles from Red hook, 15 from Hudson, 117 miles n. of New York, and 212 from Philadelphia. The township contains 867 inhabitants, inclusive of 113 slaves. 
|CLERMONT, a village 13 miles from Camden, S. Carolina. In the late war, here was a block-house encompassed by an abbatis; it was taken from Colonel Itugt ly of the British militia, in December 1781, by an ingenious stratagem of Lieutenant-colonel Washington. 
|CLEYALI, a settlement of Indians of S. Caro lina ; situate on the shore ofthe river Alabama. 
|CLIE, Lake LK, in Upper Canada, about 38 miles long and 30 broad ; its waters communicate with those of lake Huron. 
|CLINCH Mountain divides the waters of Holston and Clinch rivers, in the state of Tennessee. In this mountain Burk s Garden and Morris s Nob might be described as curiosities. 
|CLINCH, or PELESON, a navigable branch of Tennessee river, which is equal in length to Hol ston river, its chief branch, but less in width. It rises in Virginia, and after it enters into the state of Tennessee, it receives Powcl s and Poplar s creek, and Emery s river, besides other streams. The course of the Clinch is 5. w. and s. w. by w. ; its mouth, 150 yards wide, lies 35 miles below Knoxville, and 60 above the mouth ofthe Hiwasse. It is beatable for upwards of 200 miles, and Powel s river, nearly as large as the main river, is navigable for boats lOO miles. 
|CLINTON, the most n. county of the state of New York, is bounded n. by Canada, e. by the deepest waters of lake Champlain, which line se parates it from Vermont, and s. by the county of Washington. JBy the census of 1791, it contained 1614 inhabitants, intruding 17 slaves. It is di vided into five townships, viz. Plattsburgh, the capital, Crown Point, Willsborough, Champlain, and Peru. The length from n. to s. is about 96 miles, and the breadth from c. to w. including the line upon the lake, is 36 miles. The number of souls was, in 1796, estimated to be 6000. By the state census, in Jan. 1796, there were 624 persons entitled to be electors. A great proportion of the lauds are of an excellent quality, and produce 
abundance of the various kinds of grain cultivated in other parts of the state; the people manufacture earthen ware, pot and pearl ashes, in large quanti ties, which they export to New York or Quebec. Their wool is excellent ; their beef and pork se cond to none ; and the price of stall-fed beef in Montreal, 60 miles from Plattsburg, is such as to encourage the farmers to drive their cattle to that market. Their forests supply them with sugar and molasses, and the soil is well adapted to the culture of hemp. The land-carriage from any part of the country, in transporting their produce to New York, does not exceed 18 miles ; the car rying place at Ticonderoga is one mile and a half, and from fort George, at the s. end of the lake of that name, to fort Edward, is but 14 miles. The small obstructions after that are to be removed by the proprietors of the n. canal. From this country to Quebec, are annually sent large rafts ; the rapids at St. John s and Chamblee being the only interruptions in the navigation, and those not so great, but that at some seasons batteaux with 60 bushels of salt can ascend them : salt is sold here at half a dollar a bushel. Seranac, Sable, and Boquet rivers water Clinton county ; the first is remarkable for the quantity of salmon it pro duces. 
|CLINTON, a township in Dutchess county, New York, above Poughkeepsie. It is large and thriving, and contains 4607 inhabitants, including 176 slaves. Six hundred and sixty-six of its in habitants are electors. 
|CLINTON, a settlement in Tioga county, New York, bounded by Fayette on the n. Warren on the s. Green on the w. and Franklin in Otsego county on the e. Unadilla river joins the Susquehannah at the n. e. corner, and the confluent stream runs s. vs. to Warren. 
|CLINTON, a plantation in Lincoln county, district of Maine, lies 27 miles from Hallowell. 
|CLINTON Parish, in the township of Paris, seven miles from Whitestown, is a wealthy, plea sant, flourishing settlement, containing several handsome houses, a newly erected Prebytcrian meeting-house, a convenient school-house, and an edifice for an academy, delightfully situated, but not yet finished. Between this settlement and the Indian settlements at Oneida, a distance of 12 miles, (in June 1796), was wilderness without any inha bitants, excepting a few Indians at the Old Oneida village. 
|CLINTON S Harbour, on the n. w. coast of N. America, has its entrance in lat. 52 J2 n. Cap tain Gray named it after Governor Clinton of New York. 
479 
|CLIOQUOT. See CLYOQUOT. 
|CLI PSA, a fertile and pleasant plain, or llanura, of the kingdom of Peru, in the jurisdiction of Chuquisaca, and bounded by that of Cochabamba. It is 30 miles in circumference, is well peopled, and very fertile and pleasant, and its climate is healthy. 
CLISTINOS, a fierce nation of Indians, who inhabit round Hudson bay. See NEW BRITAIN. 
|CLOS, a settlement of N. Carolina, in the county of Anson. 
|CLOSTER, a village in Bergen county, New Jersey, nearly seven miles s. e. ot Peramus, and 16 n. of New York city. 
|CLIOQUOT, a sound or bay on the n. w. coast of America, w. from Berkley s sound. See HANCOCK S Harbour. 
COxiCALCO, SAN FRANCISCO DE, a settle ment of the alcaldia mayor of Ecatepec in Nueva Espana. It contains 129 families of Indians. 
|COACHIC, a settlement of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of Je suits, in the province of Taraumura, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya. It is 34 leagues to the s. w. of the town and real of Mines of Chiguagua ; and about the distance of a league and a half in the same direction, lies an estate of the same name. 
|COACLAN, SAN GASPAR DE, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Tezcoco in Nueva Espaiia. It contains 218 families of Indians, in which are included those of its six neighbouring wards. It is one league s. of its capital. 
|COACULA, ASUNCION DE, a settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Iguala in Nueva Espana. It contains 37 families of Indians. 
|COAGUILA, or NUEVA ESTREMADURA, a province of Nueva Espana, bounded by the Nuevo Reyno de Leon. It extends as far as the river Medina ; runs 200 leagues in length towards the n. and is 160 wide from s. w. to n. e. All this extensive country is cs it were unpeopled, being inhabited no otherwise than by some few settle ments established by the missions, who consist of the monks of St. Francis of the city of Queretano, who have succeeded in converting some of the na tives. There are, however, three garrisons upon the frontiers of the sierras, and country of the in fidel Indians, for the purpose of checking any irruption. This province is watered by many large rivers, the principal of which are those of Nadadores and St. Domingo. There are here some estates, in which large and small cattle breed plentifully, on account of the fineness of (he pas tures. The capital is the town and garrison of 
4 SO 
Santiago de la Monclava, and the other settlements 
are as follows : 
Sari Francisco Aguayo, San Buenaventura, 
San Miguel, Catano, 
El Presidio del Sacra- Villa del Saltillo, 
mento, Las Juntas, 
San Juan Bautista de La Hacienda del Alamo, 
Rio Grande, Los Ranchos, 
Petoyes, San Pedro de Boca Leo
San Francisco de Bizar. nes, 
ron, Monte Rey. 
Nra. Sra. de la Victoria, 
|COAHUITLAN, SANTIAGO DE, a settlement of the head settlement of Amuzgos, and alcaldia mayor of Xicayan, of Nueva Espaiia. It is com posed of 10 families of Indians, who are busied in cultivating cochineal, cotton, and bamilla. Twenty-two leagues to the w.of its head settlement. COAI, a small river of the province and go vernment of Paraguay. It runs e. and enters the Parana close to the settlement of the mission of St. Thomas. 
|COAILLO, a settlement of the province and corregimicnto of Caiiete in Peru. 
|COAJUSCO, SAX FRANCISCO DE, a settle ment of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Zultepee in Nueva Espaiia. It contains 36 fami lies of Indians, and is three leagues to the 5. of its capital. 
|COALAQUE, a settlement of the province and corrcgimiento of Moquehua in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Puguina. 
|COANDA, a province uncultivated and little known, s. w. of that of Jaen de Bracamoros in the kingdom of Quito. It is full of forests, rivers, lakes, and pools ; the climate is hot, moist, and unhealthy. 
|COAPA, a settlement of the head settlement of San Luis, of the coast and alcaldia, mayor of Tlapa in Nueva Pspafia. It is of a hot tempera ture, and contains 86 families of Indians. 
|COAPA, another settlement in the alcaldia mayor of Comitlan, of the kingdom of Guatemala. 
|COAPAN, SAN PABLO DE, a settlement of the head settlement of Tlacolula, and alcaldia mayor of Xalapa, in Nueva Espana. It is very close on the s. w. side of its head settlement. 
|COAPETENGO, SAN MARTIN DE, a settle ment of the head settlement of Zitepcc, and alcaldia mayor of Tenango del Valle, in Nueva Espana. It belonged formerly to the jurisdiction of Tancuba, and was united to this of Tenango, on acconnt of being closer to it than to its former jurisdiction. It contains 35 families of Indians. COAPILLAj a settlement of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Zoques in the kingdom of Gua temala. 
|COARI, a large river of the kingdom of Peru, the head and course of which are unknown, save that it runs through countries belonging to the in fidel Indians till it enters the Maranon : according to the map of Don Juan de la Cruz, it has its source from the large rivers of Cuchivaraor Purus, and of Tcfe. It runs s. e. then n. and then turn ing to a s. e. course, enters with a large body of water into the Maranon, through the territory of the Zurinas Indians. 
|COARI, a settlement of the province and coun try of Las Amazonas, in the Portuguese posses sions. It is upon the shore of the Maranon, and at the mouth of the former river. 
|COATA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Paucarcolla in Peru. In its vicinity are three eminences of 20 yards in height, and wrought by the hand; there being a tradition amongst the Indians, that in one of them is inclosed a certain great treasure taken at the time that the Incas conquered this country : in its church is venerated an image of Nuestra Senora de la Prescntacion, which is a subject of devotion to all the faithful of the neighbouring provinces. It is si tuate on the bank of the great lake Titicaca. 
|COATE, a settlement of the province and cor regimiento of Larecaja in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Combaya. 
|COATEPEC, SAN GERONIMO DE, a head settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Xalapa in Nueva Espana. Its district is eight leagues in length, and its own situation is very pleasant, and its productions are many, such as maize, French beans, and tobacco, the latter being its chief ar ticle of commerce. Its inhabitants are composed of 12 families of Spaniards, 214: of Muslees and Mulattoes, and 138 of Indians: of the latter, some employ themselves as drovers, and others in fatten ing pigs for the supply of Vera Cruz ; land being very deficient, and the whole of the territory allot ted to them not exceeding 600 yards. Two leagues s. e. of Xalcomulco. 
|COATEPEC, another settlement, in the head settlement of Teutalpan, and alcaldia mayor of Zacatlan, in the same kingdom. It contains 120 families of Indians, and is three leagues from its head settlement. 
|COATEPEC, another, which is the head settle ment of the alcaldia mayor of Zaqualpa in the same kingdom. It contains 150 families of Indians. 
|COATEPEC, another, with the dedicatory title of San Francisco, of the head settlement of Eeca
Jcopan, and alcaldia mayor of Zaqualpa. It con tains 204 families of Indians. 
|COATFPEC, another, with the dedicatory title of Santa Maria, of the alcaldia mayor of Tacuba. It is very poor and much reduced. 
|COATKPIC, another, the capital of the alcaldia mayor of the same kingdom ; the jurisdiction of which comprehends three head settlements of the district. It is of a moderate temperature, abound ing in seeds and grain, which are cultivated in many estates of its territory ; and in these some cattle also are bred. It contains 340 families of Indians, 15 of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattoes, with a good convent of monks of St. Domingo. Nine leagues to the w. of Mexico. 
|COATEPEC, another, of the head settlement of Amatepec, and alcaldia mayor of Zultepec, in the same kingdom. It contains 20 families of Indians, who maintain themselves by breeding large cattle, and in sowing some fruits and maize. Four leagues to the n. of its head settlement. 
|COATEPEQUE, S. PABLO DE, a settlement of the head settlement of Zitaquaro, of the alcaldia mayor of Mara vat io, in the bishopric of Mechoacan. It contains 179 families of Indians, and is one eighth of a league s distance from its head settlement towards the s. 
|COATETELCO, S.JUAN DE, a settlement of the head settlement of Mazatepec, and alcaldia mayor of Cuernavaca, in Nueva Espana ; situate in a valley of a hot temperature. It contains 94 families of Mexican Indians, who pride them selves on their nobility, and suffer no other people to come and dwell among them. Here is a lake formed by the winter rains, in which are caught mojarraS) a fish much esteemed in Mexico. 
|COATINCHAN, a head settlement of the al caldia mayor of the Puebla de los Angeles in Nueva Espana. It has, besides the parish church, a convent of monks of St. Francis, 324 families of Indians, and 50 of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattoes, with those of the wards of its vicinity. Two leagues s. e. of its capital. 
|COATININGA, a river of the country of Las Amazonas, in the Portuguese possessions. It runs n. n. ti?. and enters the Madera. 
|COATLAN, a settlement of the head settlement of Metlatlan, and alcaldia may : or of Papantla, in Nueva Espana. It contains 25 families of Indians, and is little more than three leagues to the s. a?, of its head settlement. 
|COATLAX, another, with the dedicatory title of San Pablo, the head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Miahuatlan in the same kingdom, being of a mild temperature. It con
|VOL. I. 
481 
tains 532 families of Indians, with those of its immediate wards, all of them employing them selves in the cultivation of maize and other fruits of this region. It lies J2 leagues between the e. and s. of its capital. 
|COATLAN, another, the head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Nexapa in the same kingdom. It has a convent of monks of St. Domingo, and contains 114 families of Indians, employed in the cultivation and sale of grain and cotton garments. It lies J2 leagues to the n. of the capital. 
|COATLAX, another, of the head settlement of Cozcatlan, and alcaldia mayor of Tasco, in the same kingdom. It contains 130 families of Indians, and lies three leagues to the e. of its capital. 
|COATLAN, a river of the province and alcaldia mayor of Soconusco in the kingdom of Guatemala which runs into the S. sea, to the e. of the capital 
|COATLINCHAN, SAN MIGUEL DE, a settlementof the alcaldia mayor ofTczcucoin Nueva Espana. It contains 218 families of Indians, in cluding those of its immediate wards, and is one league to the .9. of its capital. 
|COAUCAZINTLA, a settlement of the district and head settlement of Tlacolula, and al~ caldia mayor of Xalapa, in Nueva Espana ; situate between three lofty mountains, and in the midst of others with which its territory is covered. It is of a mild temperature, the soil is fertile, but produces only maize and French beans, in which consists the commerce of the inhabitants. These are composed of 44 families of Indians. One league to the n. e. of its head settlement. 
|COAUTITLAN, the district and alcaldia. mayor of Nueva Espana; being one of the most fertile and ricli territories, however inconsiderable in size, covered with cultivated grounds and estates, which produce quantities of maize, wheat barley, and other grain. It is a grand plainj watered by the river of its name, which traverses it, and runs from s. to n. It has a lake called ,Zumpango, close to the settlement of Coyotepec, which filling itself from the waters of the river empties itself into the lake Ecatepec. This juris diction contains the following settlements : The capital of the same San Miguel de los Xa
name, queyes, 
Coyotepec, Teoloyuca, 
Santa Barbara, Tepozotlan, 
Tultcpec, Xaltocan. 
Huehuetoca, 
The capital, which is the residence of the alcaldia mayor, lies in the direct road from Mexico to the interior of the provinces, and upon this account 3d 
482 
it has a large proportion of families of Spaniards, MusteeS) and Mulattoes ; besides which, it con tains 387 of Indians, and a convent of monks of St. Francis. Seven leagues to the n. n. w. of Mexico, although the distance is commonly count ed at only six. Long. 274 12 . Lat. 19 50 . 
|COAUTLA, a province and aJcaldia mayor of Nueva Espana ; bounded s. by the corregimiento of Mexico. It is also called, Of Amilpas. Its jurisdiction extends 25 leagues ; rt is of a warm and moist temperature, but is fertile, and abounds in wheat, maize, French beans, lentils, barley, and tares, as also in other productions, which serve as a commerce to its natives. Great quantities of sugar are also manufactured in various mills and machines for the purpose. This province is water ed by two rivers, the one very large, called the Amazinaque, which runs e. and the other, some what less, to the c. ; in both of them are caught many bagres and trout, which, being mucli es teemed in the neighbouring provinces, afford also another considerable branch of commerce. It has silver mines which produce tolerably well, and from one, which is vulgarly called La Peregrina, much riches were formerly extracted. The juris diction consists of the following settlements : The capital of the same Xamiltepec, 
name, Tlacotepec, 
Tetelzingo, Zacoalpan, 
Tlamimilulpa, Temoaque, 
Cacoyoc, Ancuilco. 
Ocuituco, 
The capital forms three streets, of regular pro portion and symmetry in the buildings, with t\vo elegant edifices, one of the monks of St. Domingo, and the other of the barefooted monks, or Descalzos, of St. Francis. It contains 36 families of Spa niards, 70 of Mustees, 40 of Mulattoes, and 200 of Indians; the part of the city inhabited by the latter is never visited by the Spaniards but as a walk, or place of recreation, and the Indians never attempt to encroach upon the part not appropriated to them. Twenty-five leagues s. of Mexico. Long. 274 10 . . Lat. 19 5 . 
|COAUTLA, another settlement and real of the silver mines of this province, in which are two sugar mills, and some engines for grinding metal. It contains 56 families of Spaniards, Mustces, and Mulattoes, and lies 12 leagues to the s. w. of its capital. 
|COAUTLACO, a settlement of the head settle ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa in Nueva Espana. It contains 35 families of Indians, and is two leagues to then. e. of that place. 
|COAZA, a settlement of the province and cor
regimiento of Larecaja in Peru ; annexed to the cu racy of Combaya. 
|COBAN, a settlement and capital of the pro vince and alcaldia mat/or of Vcra Paz in the king dom of Guatemala. It contains a good convent of the order of St. Domingo, and is 30 leagues from Guatemala. 
|COBBESECONTE, or COPSECOOK, which in the Indian language signifies the land where stur geons are taken, is a small river which rises from ponds in the town of Winthorp, in the district of Maine, and falls into the Kcnnebeck within three miles of Nahunkeag island, and 15 from Moose island. 
|COBEQUIT, a large settlement of the province and colony of Nova Scotia ; situate on the side of the basin of Minas, on the innermost shore of the bay of Fundy. 
|COBEQUIT or COLCHESTER River, in Nova Scotia, rises within 20 miles of Tatamogouche, on the n. e. coast of Nova Scotia ; from thence it runs s. ; then s. w. and w. into the e. end of the basin of Minas. At its mouth there is a short bank, but there is a good channel on each side, which vessels of 60 tons burden may pass, and go 40 miles up the river. There are some scattered settlements on its banks. 
|COBESEY, in the district of Maine. See 
PlTTSTON. 
|COBHAM, a small town in Virginia, on the s. bank of James river, opposite James town ; 20 miles n. w. of Suffolk, and eight or nine s. w. of Williamsburg. 
|COBJIAM Isle, mentioned by Captain Micldleton, in the journal of his voyage for finding a n. e. passage. Its two extremities bear n. by e. and e. by n. in lat. 63 n. long. 3 50 from Churchill, which he takes to be the Brook Cobham of Fox. 
|COBIJA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Atacama in Peru, and archbishopric of Charcas; annexed to the curacy of Chinchin. It is founded on the sea-shore, has a good port, where the inhabitants are busied in the fishing for congers ; and these being called charquecillos, or salted, are carried in abundance for sale to the neighbouring provinces, to the sierra, and other parts. In lat. 23 20 s. according to Don Cosme Bueno ; and according to the ex-jesuit Coleti, in lat. 22 25 s. 
|COBEZA. See COBIJA. This obscure port and village is inhabited by about 50 Indian families, and is the most barren spot on the coast. This is, however, the nearest port to Lipes, where there are silver mines, and also to Potosi, 2 
which is above 100 leagues distant, and that through a desert country. 
|COBITU, a river of the province and mis sions of the Gran Paititi. It rises in the mountains of the infidel Indians, which serve as a boundary to the province of Larecaja ; runs nearly due n. collecting the waters of many otliers,and enters theMarmore with the name of Mato. COBLER S Rock, a rock or isle of the N. sea, very close upon the e. coast of the island of Barbadoes. 
|COBLESKILL, anew town in the county of Scnoharie, New York, incorporated March 1797. COBO, a river of the province and government of Neiva in the JNuevo Reyno cle Granada. It rises in a llanura, or plain, runs w. and enters the river Magdalena, opposite the city of La Plata. 
|COBORCA, a large and capacious bay of the province of Pimeria in Nueva Espana. 
|COBOS, a fortress of the province and govern ment of Tucuman in Peru ; of the district and ju risdiction of the city of Salta, from whence it is nine leagues distant ; having been founded in 1693 at the foot of a declivity, to serve as an outwork or defence against the Indians of Chaco. It is at present destroyed and abandoned, and serves as a country-house on the estate of an individual. 
|COBRE, SANTA CLARA DE, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Valladolid, in the province and bishopric of Mechoacan. It contains 100 fa milies of Spaniards, 50 of J\fustees y 38 of Mulattoes, and 135 of Indians ; some of whom speculate in working the mines of copper which are close by, others in the cultivation of maize, and others gain their livelihood as muleteers. Three leagues s. of the city of Pasquaro. 
|COBRE, another settlement in the island of Cuba, on the s. coast. 
|COBRE, a river of the province and government of Veragua in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. It has its origin in the sierras of Guanico to the s. and enters the Pacific sea. 
|COBRE, a mountain on the coast of the province and corregimiento of Coquimbo in the kingdom of Chile. It derives its name from some very abun dant copper mines. Great quantities of this metal are carried from hence to Spain for founding artil lery, and for different purposes. 
|COBULCO, a settlement of the province and alcaldia mayor of Los Zacatepeques in the king dom of Guatemala. 
|COCA, a large river of the kingdom of Quito. It rises from different streams which flow down from the cordillera of the paramo, or mountain de sert, of Goto pax i. It continually follows the course 
c o c 
483 
of the large river Napo, and at last becomes in corporated with the same. 
|COCAGNE, or Cue A. VA, a small river of Nova Scotia. It runs e. and enters the sea in the gulf of St. Lawrence, and in the strait formed by the island of St. John, opposite the island of its own name. 
|COCALICO, a township in Lancaster county, Pennsylvania. 
|COCAMA, a great lake in the midst of the thick woods which lie in the country of Las Amazonas, to the s. and w. of the river Ucayale. It is 10 leagues long from n. lo s. and six wide from e. to w. On the e. it flows out, through a little canal, into the river Ucayale, and on the w. it forms the river Cassavatay, which running n. and then e. enters also the Ucayale. Its shores are constantly covered with alligators and tortoises. 
|COCAMAS, a barbarous nation of Indians of the country of Las Amazonas, who inhabit the woods to the s. of the river Maranon, and in the vicinities of Ucayale. It takes its name from the former lake, called La Gran Cocatna. They are a barbarous and cruel race, wandering over the forests in quest of birds and wild beasts for mere sustenance. Their arms are the macana y and the Indian cimeter, or club of chonta, a very strong ebony. 
|COCANIGUAS, a settlement of the province and government of Esmeraldas in the kingdom of Quito. 
|COCAS, a settlement of the province and cor regimiento of Castro Vireyna in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of lluachos. 
|COCAS, another settlement, in the province and corregimiento of Vilcas Huaiman, of the same kingdom : annexed to the curacy of Totos. 
|COCATLAN, SAX Luis DE, a settlement of the head settlement of Coatlan, and alcaldia mayor of Nexapa, in Nueva Espana. It contains 160 fa milies of Indians, employed in the trade in cochi neal and cotton stuffs. It is four leagues to the n. of its head settlement. 
|COCAYA, a river of the province and govern ment of Maynas in the kingdom of Quito. It unites itself with the Ibinelo, and then takes the name of Unquizia, and enters the Putumayo. 
|COCHA, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Jaen de Bracamoros in the kingdom of Quito. 
|COCHA, another settlement of the province and corregimiento of Cotabambas in Peru : annexed to the curacy of Lla aquas. 
|COCHA, another, of the province and corregimi ento of Vilcas Huaiman in the same kingdom ; an nexed to the curacy of V r ilcas. 
484 
c o c 
|COCHA, another, of the province and government of Tucuman, of the jurisdiction of the city of Cordoba ; situate on the shore of the river Segundo. 
|COCHABAMBA, a province and corregimiento of Peru ; bounded n. by the cor dill era of the Andes, e. by the heights ot Intimuyo, 5. e. by the province of Misque, s. by that of Chayanta or Charcas, s.w. by the corregimiento ofOruro, w. and n. w. by that of Cicasica. It is 40 leagues in length from n. to s. and 32 in width. This pro vince may with justice be called the granary of Peru, since it produces an abundance of every kind of seed, through the mildness of its climate. In the higher parts are bred a tolerable quantity of large and small kinds of cattle. It is watered by several small rivers of sweet water, which fertilize the valleys ; and in these are some magnificent estates. Almost all these small rivers become united in the curacy of Capinota ; and their wa ters, passing through the provinces of Misque and Charcas, become incorporated in the large river which passes on the e. side of Santa Cruz de la Sierra. In former times some mines were worked here, and from 1747, forward, great quantities of gold have been extracted from the lavaderos, or washing-places, upon the heights of Choquecamata, although this metal is not now found there in the same abundance. Some veins of it are, how ever, to be seen in the cordillera, although these render but little emolument. The greatest com merce carried on in this province depends upon its own productions ; and the market-place of the valley of Arque is so stocked with articles as to Lave the appearance of a continual fair. It has also some glass kilns, as it abounds greatly in glasswort ; likewise many sugar estates, and streams of hot waters. Its repartimiento used to amount to 186,675 dollars, and its alcavcda to 1493 dollars per annum. Its inhabitants may amount to 70,000; and these arc divided into 17 curacies, two others being iftxnexed. The capital is the town of Oropesa, arid the rest are, 
Sacaba, Carasa, 
Choquecamata. Calliri, 
Yani, Zipezipe, 
Machacamarca. Quillacollo, 
Tapacari. Passo, 
lierenguela, Tiquipaya, 
Coloha, Colcapirhua, 
Arque, Punata, 
Capinota, Tarata. 
Si pay a, 
Inhabited by a hardy, sober, and active race, Cjchaba nhi fas Azara obrsrves) has risen of late 
years to a considerable state of prosperity in the manufactory of glass, cotton, &c. with which, du ring the late war, it has supplied the whole inte rior. Blessed with fertility and a moderate cli mate, it bids fair to be the Manchester of Peru
 for 1,000,000 pounds of cotton are already annually consumed in its manufactures. Its surface abound s in a variety of salts and mineral productions, and its forests teem with woods and roots for dyeing. To these Ilaenke has particularly turned his atten tion, and has pointed out, besides several new ma terials for manufacture, other processes for dyeing, worthy of our adoption in Europe. This pro vince joined the new government of Buenos Ayres in September 1810. See LA PLATA. 
|COCHABAMBA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Cuaylas in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Llautan in the province of Santa. 
|COCHABAMBA, an extensive valley, watered by the pleasant streams of the river Condorillo, of the province of this name ; in which was founded the principal settlement of the Indians, now called Oropcsa. 
|COCHAIJAMBA, a river of the same province, which rises close to the settlement of Tapacari. It runs s. s. e. and enters the Plata, after traversing many leagues. 
|COCHACAJAS, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Andahuailas in Peru. It is 35 leagues from Cuzco, and 44 from Huamanga. 
|COCHACALLA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Tarma in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Parianchacra. 
|COCHACASA, an ancient settlement of Indians, in the province of Chinchasuyu in Peru. It was one of the celebrated conquests of the here ditary prince of the Incas, Yahuar Huacae, son of the Emperor Inca Roca, sixth in the series of these monarchs. 
|COCHACASCO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Huarochiri in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Chorillo. 
|COCHAIMA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Luya and Chillaos in Peru ; an nexed to the curacy of Cheto. 
|COCHAMARCA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Caxatambo in Peru. 
|COCHANGARA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Xauxa in Peru. 
|COCHAPETI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Huailas in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Cotoparazo. 
|COCHARCAS, a settlement of the province and corregimienlo of Andahuailas in Peru ; an nexed to the curacy of Chinchcros ; in which is 
c o c 
485 
venerated an image of Our Lady, the most cele brated for miracles of any in the whole kingdom. The wonderful things, indeed, that have been wrought here, have caused it to be the object of great devotion ; accordingly an handsome temple has been erected, and the riches and ornaments which adorn the same are exceedingly valuable. People come here from all the distant provinces to offer up their prayers, to implore the protection of the Holy Virgin, and to thank her for benefits re ceived. The festival here celebrated is on the 8th of September, when the quantity of people as sembled is so large as to give the place, for the space of 12 days, the appearance of a fair. 
|COCHAS, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Caxatambo in Peru. 
|COCHE, an island of the N. sea, near the coast of Nueva Andalucia, and belonging to the island of Margarita. It is nine miles in circumference, arid its territory is low arid barren. It was cele brated for the pearl-fishery formerly carried on here. It is four leagues to the e. of Cubagua. 
|COCHEARI, a river of the province and coun try of Las Amazonas. It runs w. and enters the Madera opposite the Yaraari. 
|COCHECHO, a n. w. branch of Piscataqua river in. New Hampshire. It rises in the Blue hills in Strafford county, and its mouth is five miles above Hilton s point. See PJ SCAT A QUA. 
|COCHEIRA, CUMPLIDA, a river of the coun try of Brazil. It rises to the n. of the gold mines of La Navidad, runs w. and enters the Tocantines on the e. side, between the Salto de Tres Leguas and the settlement of the Portal de San Luis. 
|COCHIMATLAN, a settlement of the head settlement of Almololoyan, arid alcaldia mayor of Colirna, in Nueva Espana. It contains 100 fami lies of Indians, whose trade consists in the manu facturing of salt, and the cultivation of their gar dens, which produce various kinds of fruits. Two leagues to the w. of its head settlement. 
|GOCIIINOCA, a settlement of the province and government of Tucuman, in the jurisdiction of the city of Xujui. It has an hermitage, with the dedicatory title of Santa Barbara, which is a chapel of ease, and three other chapels in the settlement of Casivindo. The Indians of this place manufacture gunpowder equal to that of Europe, and in its district are some gold mines. 
|COCFJINOS, ESSKNADA J)E, a bay on the s. coast of the ihland of Cuba, between the point Gorda and the bay of Xagua, opposite the falls of Diejjo Perez. 
|COCHITI, 
a settlement of the kingdom of 
Nucvo Mexico ; situate at the source of a river which enters the large river Del Norte, or of th North. 
|COCHOAPA, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor ofTlapa in Nueva Espana; situate upon a dry and barren plain. It contains 150 families of In* dians, who are busied in the cultivation of cotton, the only production of the place. 
|COCHON, or COCHINO, a small isle of the N. sea, near the island of Guadalupe, in the bay of the Cul de Sac Petit, or Gala Angosta. 
|COCHUTA, a settlement of the province and government of Sonora in Nueva Espana. 
|COCHUY, a province of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, to the n. e. ; bounded by the province of Chita. It has now the name of Laches, from having been inhabited by this nation of Indians. It is very thinly peopled, of a hot climate, and abounding in woods. 
|COCKAHISPEN, a small river of Canada, which runs n. e. and enters Hudson s bay. 
|COCKBURNE, a township in the n. part of New Hampshire, Grafton county, on the e. bank of Connecticut river, s. of Colebrooke. 
|COCKERMOUTH, a town in Grafton county, New Hampshire, about 15 miles n. e. of Dartmonth college. It A\as incorporated in J766, and in 1775 contained 118 inhabitants ; and in 1790. 373.1 
|COCKSAKIE. SeeCoxAKiE. 
|COCLE, a large river of the province and go vernment of Panama in the kingdom of Ticrra Firmc. It is formed by the union of the Penome and the Nata, which run to the right and left of the mountain of Toabre, becoming navigable from that part to their entrance into the sea. A contra band trade was in former times constantly carried on through this river into the S. sea ; for which reason Don Dionisio de Alcedo (the father of the author of this Dictionary) built a fort which de fended its entrance, as likewise a watch-tower or signal-house, to give notice of any strange vessels which might enter the river for the above pur poses. The English took this tower/and built an other fort, by it in 1746, having been assisted by a company of at least 
00 smugglers. These were dislodged in their turn by the aforesaid president, who inflicted condign punishment upon the heads of all the offenders. 
|COCMONOMAS, a barbarous nation of Indians of Peru, who inhabit the mountains of the province of Guanuco. They are docile, of a noble spirit, and in continual warfare with the Callisecas and Mazupes. 
480 
c o c 
|COCO, a river of the province and government of Darien in the kingdom of Tiernv Firme. It rises in the mountains of the n. and enters the sea opposite the island of Las Palinas, and gives its name to the territory of a Cacique, thus called. 
Coco, a point of the coast of the S. sea, and kingdom of Tierra Firme, in the bay of Panama. 
|COCOLI, a river of the province and govern ment of Honduras. It runs e. and enters the sea in the gulf of this name. 
|COCOLI, a point of the coast, in the same pro vince and kingdom. 
|COCOLOT, a city, which some have supposed to be in the province of Chaco in Peru, but of the existence of which no proofs arc at present to be found. 
|COCOMERACIir, a settlement of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of Jesuits, in the province of Taraumara, and kingdom of Nueva Vizciiya. It is 40 leagues to the w. s. zv. of the town and real of the mines of Chiguaga. 
|COCOMICO, a settlement of the province and government of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno de Granadu. 
|COCONUT). See CUCUNUCO. COCORALE, a settlement of the province and government of Venezuela in the kingdom of Tierra Firme ; situate at the w. of the town of San Felipe. 
|COCORIN, a settlement of the province of Ostimuri in Nueva Espaiia; situate on the shore of the river Hiagui, between the settlements of Bacun and Comoriopa. 
|COCOROTE, some copper mines in the pro vince and government of Venezuela, much cele brated . 
CO COS, some small islands of the Pacific or S. sea, lying close together, and divided by some narrow channels. They abound in cocoa-trees, and from thence take their name. They are also called Santa Cruz, from having been discovered on the day of the invention of the cross. The climate here is pleasant, but the isles are unculti vated and desert. Lat. 5 n. 
Cocos, a point of the island of Trinidad, on the e. coast. 
|COCOSPERA, a settlement of the province and government of Sonora in Nueva Espana ; situate at the source of a river. 
|COCOTA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Tunja, in the jurisdiction of the city of Pamplona, ot the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, 
|COD 
|COCOTZINGO, S. GEHONIMO DE, a settle ment of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Cuernavaca in Nueva Espana. 
|COCUI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra nada ; situate at the foot of the sierra Nevada. It is of a cold temperature, but abounds in all kinds of productions, and particularly in wheat, maize, barley, &c. It contains 700 white inhabitants, and 150 Indians. Thirty-two leagues from Tunja, and eight from the settlement of Chita. 
|COCUI S AS, a settlement of the province and government of Cumana in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. It lies to the s. of the city of Cariaco. 
|COCUISAS, a river of the province and govern ment of Venezuela, being one of those which enter the Gamalotal, before this runs into that of La Portuguese. 
|COCULA, a settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Tlajomulco in Nueva Es pana. It contains a convent of the religious order of St. Francis, and is six leagues to the w. of its capital. 
|COCUPAC, orZxNziNTLA, a city and head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Valladolid in Nueva Espana, and of the bishopric of Mechoacan. Its situation is in a nook to the n. of the great lake. On the e. and w. are two lofty mountains, which form so many other entrances, the one to the s. and the other to the n. Its tem perature is rather cold than warm ; and although it does not want for fruits, it is but ill supplied with water, the only stream it has not running more than the distance of a stone s throw before it enters a lake. The inhabitants are thus under the ne cessity of supplying themselves by wells. The population of this city consists in 45 families of Spaniards, 52 of Muslees and Mulattoes, and 150 of Indians. They occupy themselves in the mak ing of tiles or flags ; and the inferior order arc muleteers. It has a convent of the religious order of St. Francis. 
|COCUS, PUNT A DE, a point on the e. coast of the island of Newfoundland, between cape Spear and the bay of Tor. 
|COD, a cape of the coast of New England and province of Massachusetts. It runs for many leagues towards the sea, forming a large semicircle, and afterwards returning, forms the bay of Barnstable. See Cape COD, BAHNSTABLE, &c.J 
|CODDINGTON, a settlement of the island of Barbadoes, in the district of the parish of San Juan. 
|CODEBORE, a small river of New Britain, 
|COG 
or country of Labrador. It runs s. e. and enters the St. Lawrence. 
|CODEC.O. SeeTiRRRA BOMBA. 
|CODEHUE, a settlement of the province ami corregiinienlo of Raricagna, in the kingdom of Chile, to the e. of the town of Triana. 
|CODERA, CABO DE, a cape on the coast of the province and government of Venezuela. Lat. 10 35 . Long. 66 10 . 
|CODORUS, a township in York county, Pennsylvania. 
|CODOSA, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Tucuman in Peru ; situate on the shore of the river Quarto, and at the head of the sierra of Carnpanchin. 
|COELCIIO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Chachapoyas in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Chiliquia. 
|COELLO, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Neiva in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra nada ; situate on the shore of the large river Magdalena. 
|COEMAL, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Luya and Chillaos in Peru ; an nexed to the curacy of Luya, the capital. 
|COEURS, Bay of, in the island of Marti nique, one of the Antilles. It is near the settle ment of Carbet. 
|COEYMANS, a township in Albany county, New York, 12 miles below Albany. By the state census of 1796, 389 of its inhabitants are electors. 
|COFANES, a barbarous nation of Indians of the kingdom of Quito, which began to be con verted to the Catholic religion in 1602, through the labour and zeal of the Father Rafael Ferrer, of the extinguished company of the Jesuits, and who \vas killed by the same Indians. The princi pal settlement, founded by this martyr, with the dedicatory title of San Pedro, is now almost de stroyed, though some few inhabitants still remain. The same is situate between the river of its name to the n. and that of Azuela to the s. The above river is targe and rapid, and takes Hs name from these Indians. It rises in the sierra Nevada, or Snowy, runs from w. to e. and enters the Azuela, in lat. 13 n. 
|COFFIN-LAND, a small island of the coast of Georgia, and one of those which are called Georgican, at the entrance of the river Ashley. 
|COFRE, a small river of the province and go vernment of Buenos Ayres. It runs s. and enters the sea between the rivers Pavor anil Del Rosario, opposite the capital. 
|COGUA, a settlement of the corregimiento of Zipaguira in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It 
|COII 
487 
is of a very cold temperature, and abounds in the productions peculiar to its climate, particularly in fire- wood, with which it supplies, for the ma nufacturing of salt, the settlements of Nemocon and Zipaquira. To this last settlement it is very contiguous ; and it lies nine leagues . of Santa Fe. Its population is reduced to 70 housekeepers, and as many other Indians. 
|COIIANZY, a river of the province and colony of New Jersey, in the county of Cumberland. It runs s. and enters the sea in the bay of Delaware. 
CoHANZY, or CAESAR i A, a small river, which rises in Salem county, New Jersey, and running through Cumberland county, empties into Delaware river, opposite the upper end of Bombay hook. It is about 30 miles in length, and is na vigable for vessels of 100 tons to Bridgetown, 20 miles from its mouth. 
|COHASSER, a settlement of the province and colony of New Hampshire, to the e. of the lake Champlairi. 
|COHASSET, a township in Norfolk county, Massachusetts, which was incorporated in 1770, and contains 817 inhabitants. It has a Congrega tional church, and 126 houses, scattered on dif ferent farms. Cohasset rocks, which have been so fatal to many vessels, lie off this town, about a league from the shore. It lies 25 miles *. e. of Boston, but in a straight line not above half the distance. 
|COHGNAWAGA, a parish in the township of Johnstown, Montgomery county, New York, on the w. side of Mohawk river, 26 miles w. of Schenectady. This place, which had been settled near 80 years, and which was the seat of Sir Wil liam Johnson, was mostly destroyed by the Bri tish and Indians, under the command of Sir Wil liam in the year 1780; in this action Johnson evinced a want of feeling which would have dis graced a savage. The people destroyed in this expedition were his old neighbours, with whom he had formerly lived in the habits of friendship ; his estate was among them, and the inhabitants had always considered him as their friend and neighbour. These unfortunate people, after see ing their houses and property consumed to ashes, were hurried, such as could walk, into cruel cap tivity ; those who could not walk fell victims to the tomahawk and scalping knife. Sec CAGHNA
|WAGA.l 
|COFIOEZ, or the FALLS, in Mohawk river, be tween two and three miles from its mouth, and 10 miles/?, of Albany, are a very great natural curio sity. The river above the falls is about 300 yards wide, and approaches them from the n, w. in a 
488 
rapid current, between high banks on each side, and pours the whole body of its water over a per pendicular rock of about 40 (some say more) feet in height, which extends quite across the river like a mill-dam. The banks of the river, imme diately below the falls, are about 100 feet high. Abridge 1 100 feet long, and 21 feet wide, resting on 13 piers, was erected, at the expenceof 12,000 dollars, in 1791, a mile below the falls, from which a spectator may have a grand view of them ; but they appear most romantically from Lansinburgh hill, five miles e. of them. 
|COHONGORONTO is the name of Potowmack river before it breaks through the Blue ridge, in lat. 39 45 n. Its whole length to the Blue ridge may be about 160 miles; from thence it assumes the name of POTON MACK., which see. 
|COHUIXCAS, a country in New Spain, in which there is a considerable mountain of load stone, between Tcoiltylan and Chilapan. J 
C OIABAMBA, a settlement of the province and corregftnitnto of Chilques and Masques in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Calpi. An earthquake was experienced in this province in 1707, which desolated many settlements ; when also happened that, extraordinary phenomenon which is accredited and related by Don Cosme Bueno, geographer of Lima, as having taken place ; which was, trnt a small estate was by this earthquake removed from one side of the river to the other, together with the house, garden, and inhabitants, without their perceiving any thing had happened ; and as the event took place at midnight, when they were all asleep, that they were not a little surprised to find themselves esta blished in the curacy of Colcha. This extraordi nary occurrence, however, has i&lt;s precedent in a similar circumstance which happened in the kingdom of Quito. 
COIACIII, a settlement of the missions which were held at the expencc of the regulars of the company of Jesuits, in the province of Taraumara, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya, 18 leagues and an half between the s. w. and s. t. of the town and real of the mines of San Felipe de Chiguagua. 
|COLA I MA, a settlement and head settlement of the correghnicfito of this name in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of an hot temperature, produces cacao, sugar-cane, maize, yucns
 plan tains, and an infinite quantity of cattle and swine ; but it is much infested with reptiles and insects, vipers, snakes, spiders, and mosquitoes. It also abounds in gold, and the Indians to the number of 450, who go to Santa Fe to pay their tribute, pro ceed in companies, and are accustomed to collect 
in four or five days, on the shores of the river Salda na, as much gold as is necessary for the tribute they are obliged to pay in the city. 
COIAME, a river of the province and country of Las Amazonas, in the Portuguese possessions. It runs w. in a serpentine course, and enters the Maranou between the rivers Tcfe and Catoa. 
CO 1 13 A, a small island of the S. sea, close to the coast of the province and government of Veragua, in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, and five leagues distant from the point Blancn. 
|COIN, a river of the island of Guadalupc. It runs to the w. w. in the isthmus which almost di vides the island into two parts, and enters the sea at the bottom of the bay of Cul de Sac Petit. 
|COIOACAN, a district and alcaldia mayor of Nueva Kspana. It is one of the most pleasant, and fertile in wheat, maize, barley, and other seeds. Nearly the whole of its population live in coun try houses, in gardens and orchards which pro duce quantities of fruit, such as peurs of several kinds, peaches, apples, prunes, plums, damsons, pomegranates, quinces, oranges, and lemons, with which a great commerce is carried on with the city of Mexico. In some parts of this province cloths and baizes are fabricated. It belongs to the jurisdiction of the marquisate Del Valle de Oaxaca ; to which the tributes are paid, the king re taining the sum of four tomines, (a Spanish coin weighing the third part of a drachm.) The settlements of this district arc, San Angel, Chapultepec, 
San Augustin de las Nuestra Senora de los 
Culvas, Remedios. 
Tacubaya, 
The capital, which bears the same name, is a large, pleasant, fertile, and well peopled town. It has shady arbours, country houses, and orchards and gardens, which serve as a recreation to the people of Mexico, from whence it is distant two leagues to the .?. s. e. Its population amounts to 1S85 Indian families. It has a good convent of the religious order of St. Dominic, and many work-shops, in which are fabricated cloths, baizes, and serges. Long. 99 4 . Lat. 19 20 . 
|COIOMEAPA, SANTA MARIA BE, a settle ment and head settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Theacan in Nueva Esparto. It contains 300 families of Indians, and 20 of Mustees and Mulattoes. Twelve leagues s. c . of its capital. 
|COIOTEPEC, SANMATEODE, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Yanguitlan in Nueva Espaiia. It contains 22 families of Indians, who subsist by the trade in cochineal. Six leagues s. e. of its capital. 
|COIOTZINGO, S. MIGUEL BE, a settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Guejozingo in Nueva Espafia. It contains 18 families of Indians. 
|COIQUAR, a settlement of the province and government of Cumana, situate on the shore of a river, between the city of Cariaco, and the inte rior bay of the gulf Triste. 
|COIUCA, SAN MIGUEL de, a settlement and head settlement of the district of the government of Acapulco in Nueva Espana. It contains 137 fa. miliesof Indians, and is nine leagues to the n, e. of its capital. Close by this, and annexed to it, is another settlement, called Chinos, with 120 families. 
|COIUCA, with the dedicatory title of San Agustin, another settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Zacatula in the same kingdom ; containing 32 families of Indians and some AIusteesj and being annexed to the curacy of its capital. 
|COIULA, a settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Cuicatlan in Nueva Es pana. It contains 30 families of Indians, who trade in cochineal. Three leagues e. of its ca pital. 
COIUTLA, a settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Zochicoatlan in Nueva Es pana ; situate on a plain surrounded by heights. It is annexed to the curacy of its capital, and contains 37 families of Indians, being 15 leagues distant from its capital. 
CO J ATA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Paucarcolla in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Vilques. 
. COJEDO, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Venezuela in the kingdom of Tierra Firme ; situate on the skirt of a mountain near the river Guarico. 
|COKESBURY .College, in the town of Abington, in Harford county, Maryland, is an in stitution which bids fair to promote the improve ment of science, and the cultivation of virtue. It was founded by the methodists in 1785, and has its name in honour of Thomas Coke and Francis Asbury, the American bishops of the method ist episcopal church. The edifice is of brick, hand somely built on a healthy spot, enjoying a fine air and a very extensive prospect. The college was erected, and is wholly supported by subscription and voluntary donations. The students, who are to consist of the sons of travelling preachers, annual subscribers, members of the society, and orphans, are instructed in English, Latin, Greek, logic, rhetoric, history, geography, natural philosophy, 
|VOL. I. 
|COL 
48!) 
and astronomy ; and when the finances of the col lege will admit, they are to be taught the Hebrew, French, and German languages. The rules for the private conduct of the students extend to their amusements ; and all tend to promote regularity, encourage industry, and to nip the buds of idleness and vice. Their recreations without doors are walking, gardening, riding, and bathing; within doors they have tools and accommodations for the carpenter s, joiner s, cabinet-maker s, or turner s business. These they arc taught to consider as pleasing and healthful recreations, both for the body and mind. 
|COLA ISA CAPE, a settlement of the province and corregimiertto of Loxa in the kingdom of 
y
\ 
Quito. 
|COLUMBO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Loxa in the kingdom of Quito. 
|COLAMI, a settlement of Indians of S. Carolina; situate on the shore of the river Albania. 
|COLAN, a settlement of the province and rorregimiento ofPiura in Peru, on the coast of the Pacific ; annexed to the curacy of Paita. Its terri tory produces in abundance fruits and vegetables, which are carried for the supply of its capital. All its inhabitants are either agriculturists or fisher men. It is watered by the river Achira, also called Colan, as well as the settlement ; and though distinct from Cachimayu, it is not so from Catamayu, as is erroneously stated by Mr. La Martiniere. [Here they make large rafts of logs, which will carry 60 or 70 tons of goods ; with these they make long voyages, even to Panama, 5 or 600 leagues distant. They have a mast with a sail fastened to it. They always go before the wind, being unable to ply against it ; and therefore onlj fit for these seas, where the wind is always in a manner the same, not varying above a point or two all the way from Lima, till they come into the bay of Panama ; and there they must sometimes wait for a change. Their cargo is usually wine, oil, sugar, Quito cloth, soap, and dressed goat-skins. The float is usually navigated by three or four men, who sell their float where they dispose of their cargo ; and return as passengers to the port they came from. The Indians go out at night by the help of the land-wind with fishing floats, more manageable than the others, though these hava masts and sails too, and return again in the day time with the sea-wind. Lat. 4 56 s. 
|COLAN, the aforesaid river. See CATAMAYIT. 
|COLAPISAS, a settlement of Indians of the province and government of Louisiana ; situate on the shore of the Mississippi, upon a long strip of land formed by the lake Maurepas. 
490 
|COL 
|COLARIA, a settlement of the province and government of Turuman, in the district of the capital, to the w. of this province. 
|COLASTINA, a small river of the province and government of Buenos Ayres. It runs e. and enters the Parana. 
|COLATE, a small river of the province and alcaldia mayor of Tecoantepec in the kingdom of Guatemala. It runs into the S. sea, between the rivers Azatian and Capanerealte. 
|COLATPA, a settlement of the head settlement of Olinala, and alccildia mayor of Tlapa, in Nueva Espana 1 . It contains 29 families of Indians, who employ themselves in the commerce of chia, a white medicinal earth, and cochineal, which abound in their territory : n. w. of its head settlement. 
|COLAZA, a small and ancient province, ex tremely fertile and delightful, belonging at the pre sent day to the province of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It was discovered by Sebas tian de Benalcuzar in 1536. Its inhabitants, who were a warlike and cruel race, are entirely extir pated. 
|COLCA , a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Vilcas Huaman in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Huanacapi. 
|COLCA, another settlement in the province and corregimiento of Xauja in the same kingdom ; an nexed to the curacy of Chongos. 
|COLCA, another, in the province and corregimiento of Aimaraez in the same kingdom ; an nexed to the curacy of Pampamarca. 
|COLCABAMBA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Aimaraez in Peru. 
|COLCABAMBA, another settlement, in the pro vince and corregimiento of Theanta in the same kingdom. 
|COLCAHUANCA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Huailas in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Pampas. 
|COLCAMAR, a settlement of the province and corregitniento of Luya and Chillaos in Peru ; an nexed to the curacy of Luya, its capital. 
|COLCHA, a settlement of the province and cor regimiento of Lipes, and archbishopric of Charcas, in Peru. It was formerly the capital, and pre serves in its church an image of the blessed virgin, sent thither by the Emperor Charles V. It is now annexed to the curacy of San Christoval. 
|COLCHA, another settlement, of the province and corregimienlo of Chilques and Masques in the same kingdom. 
|COLCHA, another, of the province and corregi mienlo of Cochabamba in the same kingdom ; an nexed to the curacy of Berenguela. 
|COL 
|COLCHA GUA, a province and corregimiento of the kingdom of Chile ; bounded on the e. by the cordillera Nevada ; s. by the province of Maiile, the river Teno serving as the boundary ; and w. by the sea. It is 40 leagues in length from e. to a\ and 32 in width from n. to s. Here are some gold mines, and there were several others, the working of which has been discontinued : here are also some copper mines. It abounds in wheat, large and small cattle, horses and mules. In a part called Cauquencs are some hot baths, which are much frequented, from the salutary affects they produce, especially upon those affected with the French disease, leprosy, spots on the skin, or wounds. The inhabitants of this province amount to 15,000 souls, and its capital is the town of San Fernando. 
|COLCHAGUA, a settlement of this province and corregimiento, which is the head of a curacy of another, and contains four chapels of ease. 
|COLCHESTER, a township in Ulster county, New York, on the Popachton branch of Delaware river, s. w. of Middletown, and about 50 miles s. w. by s. of Cooperstown. By the state census of J796, 193 of its inhabitants are electors. 
|COLCHESTER, a large township in New London county, Connecticut, settled in 1701 ; about 15 miles zo. of Norwich, 25 s. e. of Hartford, and 20 n. w. of New London city. It is in contemplation to have a post-office established in this town. 
|COLCHESTER, the chief town in Chittenden county, Vermont, is on the e. bank of lake Champlain, at the mouth of Onion river, and n. of Bur lington, on Colchester bay, which spreads n. of the town. 
|COLCHESTER, a post-town in Fairfax county, Virginia ; situate on the n. e. bank of Ocquoquam creek, three or four miles from its confluence with the Potowmack ; and is here about 100 yards wide, and navigable for bouts. It contains about 40 houses, and lies 16 miles s. w. of Alexandria, 106 n. by e. of Richmond, and 172 from Phila delphia. 
|COLCHESTER River, Nova Scotia, Sec COHE
|QUIT.l 
|COLCURA, a fortress of the kingdom of Chile, built on the opposite shore of the river Biobio, to restrain the incursions of the warlike Araucanian Indians, who burnt and destroyed it in 160 J. 
|COLD Bay, in the extremity of the n. coast of the island of Jamaica, between the port Antonio and the n. e. point. 
|COLD SPRING, in the island of Jamaica, is a villa six miles from the high lands of Liguania. The grounds are in a high state of improvement. 
|COL 
Cold spring is 4200 feet above the level of the sea ; and few or none of the tropical fruits will flourish in so cold a climate. The general state of the thermometer is from 55 to 65 ; and even some times so low as 44 : so that a fire there, even at noon-day, is not only comfortable, but necessary, a great part of the year. Many of the English fruits, as the apple, the peach, and the strawberry, flourish there in great perfection, with several other valuable exotics, as the tea-tree and other oriental productions. 
|COLD SPRING Cove, near Burlington, New Jer sey, is remarkable for its sand and clay, used in the manufacture of glass ; from whence the glass works at Hamilton, 10 miles w. of Albany, are sup plied with these articles. 
|COLE, a settlement of the island of Barbadoes, in the district of the parish of St. George, distinct from the other of its name in the same parish. 
|COLEA, a river of the province and govern ment of Maynas in the kingdom of Quito. It runs s. and enters the Tigre. 
|COLEBROOKE, in the n. part of New Hamp shire, in Grafton county, lies on the e. bank of Connecticut river, opposite the Great Monadnock, in Canaan, state of Vermont ; joining Cockburne on the s. and Stuartstown on the n. ; 126 miles n. t. by n. from Portsmouth. 
CoLr.BuooKE, a rough, hilly township on the n. line of Connecticut, in Litchfield county, 30 miles n. w. of Hartford city. It was settled in 1756. Here are two iron works, and several mills, on Still river, a n. w. water of Farmington river. In digging a cellar in this town, at the close of the year 1796, belonging to Mr. John Hulburt, the workmen, at the depth of about 9 or 10 feet, found three large tusks and two thigh-bones of an animal, the latter of which measured each about four feet four inches in length, and 12| inches in circum ference. When firsjt discovered they were entire, but as soon as they were exposed to the air they mouldered to dust. This adds another to the many facts which prove that a race of enormous animals, now extinct, once inhabited the United States. 
|COLERAINj a township in Lancaster county, Pennsylvania. 
CoLERAiN, a town on the w. bank of St. Mary s river,* Camden county, Georgia, 40 or 50 miles from its mouth . On the 29th of June 1796, a treaty of peace and friendship was made and con cluded at this place, between the president of the United States, on the one part, in behalf of the United States, and the king s chiefs and warriors of the Creek nation of Indians, on the other. By 
|COL 
41) i 
this treaty, the line between the white people and the Indians was established to run " from the Currahee mountain to the head or source of the main s. branch of the Oconee river, called by the white people Appalatohee, and by the Indians Tulapoeka, and down the middle of the same." Liberty was also given by the Indians to the pre sident of the United States to " establish a trading or military post on the s. side of Alatamaha, about one mile from Beard s bluff , or any where from thence down the river, on the lands of the Indians ;" and the Indians agreed to " annex to said post a tract of land of five miles square ; and in return for this and other tokens of friendship on the part of the Indians, the United States stipu lated to give them goods to the value of 6000 dollars, and to furnish them with two blacksmiths with tools. 
|COLGUE, a settlement of the island of Laxa in the kingdom of Chile ; situate on the shore of the river Tolpan. 
|COLIMA, the alcaldia mayor and jurisdiction of the province and bishopric of Mechoacan in Nueva Espana. It is bounded c. by the jurisdic tion of Zapotlan, s. by that of Mortines, n. by that of Tuzcacuesco, and w. by that of Autlan, and the port of LaNavidad in the kingdom of Nueva Galicia. It carries on a great trade in salt, collected on the coasts of the S. sea, where there are wells and salt grounds, from Mhich great emolument is derived, supplying, as they do, the inland provinces with this article. Formerly the best cocoa wine of any in the kingdom was made here, from the abundance of this fruit found in all the palm estates ; but the art of bringing it to perfec tion was lost, and this branch of commerce died away, from the additional cause, that the making of this liquor was prohibited by the viceroy, the Duke of Albuquerque, as being a drink calculated to produce great inebriety. The capital is of the same name ; and the settlements of this district are, Almololoyan, Zinacantepec, 
Comala, Totolmoloyan, 
Zaqualpa, Caxitlan, 
Xulua. Tecoman, 
Xilotlan, Ixtlahuaca, 
Guezalapa, Tomala, 
Nagualapa, Cuatlan. 
Cochimatlan, 
The capital is a town situate upon the coast of the S.sea, near the frontiers ot Xalisco, in the most fertile and pleasant valley of Nueva Espana. It abounds in cacao and other vegetable produc tions ; is of a hot temperature, and the air is very pure. Its buildings are regular and handsome, 3 R 2 
492 
|COL 
particularly those of the parisli church, the conTent of the monks of Nuestra Sefiora de la Merced, another of St. Francis, and the hospital of S. Juan tie Dios. Its population consists of 200 families of Spaniards, 122 of Mustees, 15 Mulattoes, and 22 of Indians. In its district is found and gathered the celebrated plant called in the country oleacazan, which is considered as a wonderful restorer of lost strength, and a certain specific against all kinds of poison. The leaves of it are applied to the part affected, and the natives are accustomed to judge of its virtues by its degree of adhesion. One hun dred and fifty leagues to the a?, of Mexico, in long. 103 20 , and hit. 18 54 . 
|COLIMAS, a barbarous nation of Indians in former times, but now reduced to the faith, in the province of its name; this being now incorporated with that of Muzoofthc Nucvo Reyno de Granada. These Indians are also known by the name of Canapayes, being united to them. Its capital is the city of La Palma de los Colimas. See article Muzos. 
|COLIMBA, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Popay an in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra nada. 
|COLINA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Santiago in the kingdom of Chile ; in the district of which there are five chapels of case, in a spacious and beautiful valley. 
|COLIN A, a river of this province and kingdom, which rises in the mountains of its cordillera, and enters the Maypo. 
|COLIUINA, a settlement of the province and government of Nicaragua in the kingdom of Guate mala ; situate upon a long strip of land on the coast of the S. sea. 
|COLLA, a parish of the province and govern ment of Buenos Ayres ; situate on a small river near the sea-coast, about eight leagues e. of Colonia del Sacramento, in lat. 34 19 39" s. Long. 57 21 43" w.l 
|COLLADOS, ENSENADA DE LOS, a bay on the 5. coast of the w. head, and in the territory of the French, in the island of St. Domingo. It is be tween the rock of Bareo and the river Damasein. 
|COLLAHUAS, and ASIENTO OF MINES OF CAYLLOMA, a province and corregimiento of Peru ; bounded n. by that of Chumbivilcas, e. by that of Canes and Canches or Tinta, s. e. by that of Lampa, s. by that of Arequipa, and w. by that of Camana. It is 52 leagues in length s. e. n. w. and 16 in width. Its temperature is cold, from being situate in the cordillera ; with the exception of that part which borders upon Camana, where it is mild, especially in the five leagues where its 2 
|COL 
jurisdiction extends itself in the valley of Sihuas ; the other five leagues reaching to the sea bordering on Camana. Its productions are various : those of the valley are comprised in wine, brandies, wheat, maize, pulse, and fruits, especially figs, which being preserved, serve as nourishment to numbers of poor people. The other territories of this province are of the same temperature, though comparatively barren. It abounds in large and small cattle, native sheep, vicunas, and some wild animals. The roads are dangerous, from the country s being extremely unequal, and the greater part of it being a craggy ravine, over which labours, rather than to say runs, a pretty large river, which has its rise within the province. Here are many silver mines, from which great riches were formerly extracted, since they yielded 80 or 100 marks each cajcon. Atthe present day they yield but sparingly, on account of their great depth, some of them being 200 fathoms in descent ; they are, nevertheless, worked with tolerable profit. The principal mountain of these mines is that of Caylloma, and it was through this mine that the capital was founded. There are also not wanting mines of gold, tin, lead, copper, and sulphur ; but these, on account of the deficiency of resources, remain unworked. The capital, as we have before stated, is Caylloma. Its repartimiento used to amount to 57,100 dollars, and its alcavala to 456 dollars per annum. The other settlements of the jurisdiction 
are. 
Tisco, 
Callalli, 
Sibayo, 
Llauta, 
Taya, 
Chibay, 
Canocota, 
Coperaque, 
Lary, 
Huanca, 
Yura, 
Madrigal, 
Tapay, 
i angui, 
Achoma, 
Murco, 
Sihuas, 
Maca, 
Ychupampa, 
Chabanaconde, 
Pinchollo, 
Huambo, 
Ilucan. 
|COLLANA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Cicasica in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Mecapa. Its Indian inhabitants have kept themselves unmixed from any other cast ever since the time of the conquest ; and in order to still preserve themselves so, they Avill not allow of any strangers sleeping in the settlement, though he should be sent by the corregidor. If any other person should come among them, he is put into prison, and after a very short time dispatched. Owing to these precautions, the vicious propenpensities observable in other settlements are en
|COL 
tirely unknown to this. Its inhabitants lead a regular life ; they give without expectation of in demnification, and are governed throughout the whole tribe by the sounding of a bell. In short, they might serve as a model for all the other settle ments of Indians in the kingdom. 
|COLLANA, another settlement of the same pro vince and corregimiento ; annexed to the curacy of Mecacapaca. 
|COLLANES, a chain of very lofty mountains, almost continually covered with snow, in the pro vince and corregimiento of Riobamba in the king dom of Quito, to the s. of the river Pastaza, and of the mountain Tunguragua. They take their name from the nation of barbarous Indians who live scattered in the woods of these mountains, which run from w. to e. forming a semicircle of 20 leagues. The mountain which out-tops the rest, they call the Altar. 
|COLL AN I, a settlement of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of the Jesuits in Nuevo Mexico. 
|COLLATA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Huarochiri in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Santa Olaya. 
|COLLAY. See PATAZ. 
|COLL ETON, a county of the province of Ca rolina in N. America ; situate . of the county of Grenville, and watered by the river Stone, which unites itself with an arm of the Wadmoolan. That part which looks to the n. e. is peopled with es tablishments of Indians, and forms, with the other part, an island called Buono, which is a little below Charlestown, and is well cultivated and in habited. The principal rivers of this country are, the Idistows, the S. and N. Two or three miles up the former river, the shores are covered with plan tations, which continue for more than three miles further n. where the river meets with the N. Edistow, and in the island formed by both of them, it is reckoned that 20 freeholders reside. These are thus called, from the nature of the assignment and distribution of lands which took place in the new colonies. But the English governor did not grant an absolute and perpetual property, save to particular individuals : the concession was some times for life, sometimes considered as lineal, sometimes to descend to the wife, children, or re lations, and sometimes with greater restrictions. The above-mentioned people have, however, their vote in the assembly, and send to it two members. In the precinct of this county is an Episcopal church. 
|COLL ETON, another county, of the province and colony of Georgia. 
|COL 
493 
|COLLF.TON, a settlement of the island of Barbadotps, in the district of the parish of Todos Santos. 
|COLLICO, a small river of the district of Tolten Baxo in the kingdom of Chile. It runs n. 11. w. and enters the river Tolten. 
|COLLIQUEN, a Ilanura, or plain, of the corregimiento of Truxillo in Peru. It is fertile, and of a dry and healthy climate, although thinly in habited and uncultivated. 
|COLLIUE, a settlement of Indians of the king dom of Chile, situate on the shore of the river Tolpan. 
|COLLQUE, an ancient, large, and well peo pled settlement of Peru, to the n. of Cuzco ; con quered and carried by force of arms by the Inca Huayna Capac, thirteenth Emperor of Peru. 
|COLNACA, a settlement of the province and corrrgimiento of Chichos and Tarija in Peru, of the district of the second, and annexed to the cu racy of its capital. 
|COLOATPA, a settlement of the head settle ment of Olinala, and alcaldia mayor of TIapa, in Nueva Espaiia. It contains 29 families of Indians, who occupy themselves in the commerce of chia, a white medicinal earth, and cochineal, which abounds in this territory. It lies to the n. w. of its head settlement. 
|COLOCA, a settlement of the province and government of Santa Cruz de la Sierra in Peru, situate on the shore of the river of La Plata, and to the n. of its capital. 
|COLOCINA, SAN CARLOS DE, a settlement of the province and government of Cartagena, in the district of the town of Tolu ; founded in 1776 by the governor Don Juan Pimienta. 
|COLOCINA, some mountains of this province and government, also called Betanzi, which run n. for many leagues from the valley of Penco. 
|COLOCOLO, a settlement of Indians of the kingdom of Chile ; situate on the shore of the river Cararnpangue, and thus called from the celebrated cazique of this name, one of the chiefs in the war in which these Indians were engaged with the Spaniards. 
|COLOLO, a small river of the province and government of Buenos Ayres. It runs n. and en ters the river Negro, near where this enters the Uruguay. 
|COLOMBAINA, a small settlement of the juriscidiction of Tocaima, and government of Mariquita, and in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; an nexed to the curacy of the settlement of Ambalema. It is situate on the shore of the river Magdalena ; is of a very hot temperature, and; 
494 
|COL 
much incommoded by mosquitos ; so that its po pulation is much reduced, and those that remain apply themselves to the cultivation of sugar-canes, maize, j/ucas, and plantains. 
|COLONCHE, a small settlement of Indians, of the district and jurisdiction of Santa Elena, in the government of Guayaquil, and kingdom of Quito; situate on the s. shore of a river, from whence it takes its name, in lat. 1 56 s. The said river rises in the mountains of the district, and enters the S. sea, opposite the island of La Plata. 
|COLONCHE, a small island of the S. sea, near the coast of the province and government of Gua yaquil. 
|COLONIES OF THE ENGLISH. See the articles VIRGINIA, CAROLINA, NEW ENGLAND, NEW YORK, JERSEY, MASSACHUSETTS, RHODE Island, PENNSVLVANIA, NOVA SCOTIA ; of the Dutch, see SURINAM, BERBICE, CORENTIN, CURAZAO ; of the Portuguese, SAN GABRIEL; of the French, CAYENNE, ST, DOMFNGO, MAR TINIQUE ; of the Danes, ST. THOMAS. [See gene ral Tables of Dominions, &c. in the introductory matter. 
|COLOPO, a large river of the province and government of Esmeraldas in the kingdom of Quito. It runs from s. e. to n. w. at an almost equal distance between the rivers Esmeraldas and Verde, and runs into the S. sea, in the bay of San Mnteo, in lat. 58 n. 
|COLOR, CABO DE, a cape on the coast of the province and captainship of Sergipe in Brazil. It lies between the rivers Real and Ponica. 
|COLORAUA, PUNTA, a point on the coast of the N. sea, and in the province and government of Venezuela, to the e. of the cape San Roman. 
|COLORADA, a river of the jurisdiction and ahaldia mayor of Penonome, in the government of Panama, and kingdom of Tierra Firme. It rises in the mountains to the s. and enters the Pacific near the settlement of Anton. 
|COLORADO, a settlement of the province and government of Tucurnan, in the district and jurisdiction of the city of Salts, and s. s. e. of the same. 
|COLORADO, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Santa Marta in the kingdom of Tierra Firme ; situate on the shore of the river of its name. COLORADO, a river of the province and corregimiento of Cuyo in the kingdom of Chile. It rises in its cordillera, to the n. runs e. and spends itself in various lakes, on account of the level of the country. The geographer Cruz errs in making it enter the river Maipo. 
|COL 
|COLORADO, another, a large river of the pro vince and government of Sonora in Nueva Espana. 
|COLORADO, another, a small river of the pro vince and government of Santa Marta in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, which enters the great river Magdalena before you come to the town of Tamalameque. 
|COLORADO, another, in the province and go vernment of Louisiana, near the road which leads to Mexico. It runs s. e. in a very large stream, and enters the sea in the bay of San Bernardo. 
|COLORADO, a cape or point of land of the s. coast of St. Domingo, in the part possessed by the French, between the bays of Tondo and Puer. 
|COLO K A uo, a mountain of the province and government of Tucuman, on the shore of the river Salado, and to the s. of the settlement of Nuestra Senora de Buenas Costumbres. 
|COLORADOS, a barbarous nation of Indians,, of the province and corregimiento of Tacunga in the kingdom of Quito, who inhabit some moun tains of the same name, very craggy and rugged, abounding in animals and wild beasts, such as bears, lions, tigers, deer, squirrels, monkeys, and marmosets. These Indians, although the greater part of them are reduced to the Catholic faith by the extinguished company of the Jesuits, are given to superstition ; they are divided into two parts, the one called the Colorados of Angamarca, since their principal settlement bears this title, and the other the Colorados of St. Domingo : they now belong to the province and government of Esme raldas, and live retired in the woods, and upon the banks of the rivers Toachi and Quininay, where the missionaries of the religion of St. Domingo of Quito exercise their apostolical zeal. The princi pal settlement of this place, bein
 situate on theo&gt;. shore, is called St. Domingo. The commerce of these Indians, and by which they subsist, is in carrying to Guayaquil, the province by which they are bounded , wood for making canoes and rafts, sugar-canes, achiote
 and agi pepper, and bring ing back in exchange cattle, fish, soap, and other necessary effects. 
|COLOSO, a settlement of the province and government of Cartagena ; situate on the shore of the river Pechelin, to the s. s. w. of the town of Maria, to the jurisdiction of which it apper tains. 
|COLOTLAN, a settlement and head settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Mextitlan in Nueva Espafia. It contains 240 families of Indians, arid is three leagues to the w. of its capital. 
|COLOTLIPAN, a settlement of the head set
|COL 
tlement of Quecholtenango, and alcaldin mayor of Chilapa, in Nucva Espnfia. It contains 27 families of Indians, and is three leagues from its head settlement. 
|COLOYA, a settlement of the province and government of Popayan in the corregimiento o Pasto. 
|COLPA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento ofAymaraez in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Pituhuanca in the province of Cochabamba. 
|COLPAPIRHUA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Cochabamba in Peru ; an nexed to the curacy of Tiquipaya. 
|COLPES, a settlement of the province and government of Tucuman, in the district of its ca pital. 
|COLPI, a small river of the kingdom of Chile. It runs w. and enters the Quisu. 
|COLQUEMARCA, a settlement of the pro vince and corregimiento of Chumbivilcas in Peru. 
|COLQUEPATA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Paucartambo in Peru ; an nexed to the curacy of its capital. 
|COLQUI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Cicasica in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Mohosa in the province of Cocha bamba. 
|COLQUIOC, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Caxatambo in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Caxacay. 
|COLRAINE, a township in Hampshire coun ty, Massachusetts, which contains 229 houses, and 1417 inhabitants. 
|COLT A, a large lake of the province and corregimiento of Riobamba in the kingdom of Quito, near that city to the s. It is about two leagues in length from n. to s. and is of an oval figure. Its banks are covered with very fine rushes and encas, or flags; but fish will not breed in it, owing to the coldness of the climate ; it has two very small streams, the one to the n. and pass ing very near to Riobamba, and the other to the s. entering the w. side of the river Gamote. 
|COLUMBIA, a township in Washington county, district of Maine, on Pleasant river, ad joining Machias on the w.e. and was formerly called Plantations No. 12 and 13. It was incor porated in 1796. The town of Machias lies 15 miles to the e. ; it is nine miles from Sleuben. 
|COLUMBIA County, in New York, is bounded w. by Rcnsselaer, s. by Dutchess, e. by the state of Massachusetts, and w. by Hudson river, which ilivides it from Albany county. It is 32 miles in length and 21 in breadth, and is divided into 
|COM 
495 
eight towns, of which Hudson, Claverack, and Kinderhook, are the chief. It contained in 1790 27,732 inhabitants, and in 1796, 3560 electors. 
|COLUMBIA College. See NEW YOIIK City. 
|COLUMBIA, Territory of. See WASHINGTON, or the FEDERAL, CITY. 
|COLUMBIA, a post-town, the capital of Kershaw county, and the seat of government of S. Carolina. It is situated in Camden district, on the e. side of the Congaree, just below the con fluence of Saluda and Broad rivers : the streets are regular, and the town contains upwards of 70 houses. The public offices have, in some mea sure, been divided, for the accomodation of the inhabitants of the lower counties, and a branch of each retained in Charlestown. It lies 115 miles n. n. w. of Charlestown, 35 s. w. of Camden, 85 from Augusta in Georgia, and 678 s. w. of Phila delphia. Lat. 33 58 n. Long. 8 5 o&gt;. 
|COLUMBIA, a flourishing post-town in Goochland county, Virginia, on the n. side of James river, at the mouth of the Rivanna. It contains about 40 houses, and a warehouse for the inspec tion of tobacco. It lies 45 miles above Richmond, 35 from Charlottesville, and 328 s. w. of Phila delphia. 
|COLUMBIA, a town newly laid out in Lancas ter county, Pennsylvania, on the n. e. bank of Susquehannah river, at Wright s ferry, 10 miles w. of Lancaster, and 76 w. by n. of Philadel phia. 
|COLUMBIA County, in the upper district of Georgia, is bounded by Savannah e. on the n. e t and e. which separates it from the state of S. Caro lina, n. w. of Richmond county. Its shape is very irregular. 
|COLUMBIA, a town on the n. w. territory, on the w. bank of Ohio river, and on the w. side of the mouth of Little Miami river; about six miles s. e. by e. effort Washington, eight e. by s. of Cincin nati, and 87 n. by w. of Lexington in Kentucky. Lat. 38 44 w. 
|COMACARI, a large river of the kingdom of Nuevo Mexico. 
|COMACHUEN, SANTA MARIA DE, a settle ment of the head settlement of Siguinan, and alcaldia mayor of Valladolid, in the province and bishopric of Mechoacan, with 25 families of Indians, whose only occupation is in making saddle trees. Two leagues from its head settlement. 
|COMAGRE, a very small, barren, and desert island of the N. sea, on the coast of the province and government of Darien, and nearly to the s. of the island of Pinos. 
|COMA LA, a settlement of the head settlement 
496 
|COM 
of Atengo, and alcaldia mayor of Chilapa, in Nueva Espaiia. It contains 
7 families of Indians, and is t\vo leagues to the n. of its head settle ment. 
|COMALA, another settlement, in the head settle ment of A Imololoyan, and alcaldin mayor of Colinm. It contains (j7 families of Indians, who ex ercise themselves in the cultivation of the lands. T\vo league* to the n. c. of its head settlement. 
|COMA LA PA, a settlement of the province and alcaldia mayor of Chiapa in the kingdom of Guate mala. 
|COMALTEPEC, a settlement and head settle ments of the alcaldia mayor of Villalta, of a hot temperature, with 310 families of Indians. Nine leagues between the c. and ;/. of its capital. 
CoMALTEPiic, another, in the alcaldia mayor of Tecocuilco. It contains 78 families of Indians, who cultivate nothing but cochineal and mai/e, and these only in as much as is necessary for their sustenance. 
|COMAXJA, a settlement of the head settlement of Tirindaro, and alca dia mayor of Valladolid, in the province and bishopric of Mechoacan. It contains 13 families of Indians, and is one league to the s. of its head settlement. 
|COMANJA, another settlement and real of mines in the alcaldia mayor of Lagos, of the kingdom and bishopric of Galicia ; the population of which con sists of 50 families of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattoes, and 50 of Indians, who live by the commerce of and labour in the mines, which, although these inhabitants are little given to in dustry, produce good emolument. This settle ment is at the point of the boundary which divides the settlements of this kingdom from the king dom of Nueva Espana. Seven leagues c. of its capital. 
|COMAO, a province of the country of Las Amazonas, to the s. of this river, from the mouth of which it is 40 leagues distant, extending itself along the banks of the same; discovered in 1745 by Francisco de Orellana. The territory is level and fertile, and the climate moist and hot. It abounds in maize, and has some plantations of sugar-cane. It is watered by different rivers, all of which abound in fish, as do also its lakes; and in these an infinite quantity of tortoises are caught. This province belongs to the Portuguese, and is part of the province of Para. 
|COMARGO, a town of New Leon in N. America ; situate on the s. side of Rio Bravo, which empties into the gulf of Mexico on the w. side. 
|COMARU, or DE LOS ANGELES, a settle
ment of the missions held by the Portuguese in the country of the Amazonas, on the shore of the river Negro. 
CoMAiir, another settlement in the province and captainship of Para, and kingdom of Brazil ; situate on the s. shore of the river of Las Ama zonas, on a point or long strip of land formed by the mouth of the river Topayos. 
|COMAS, a settlement of the province and corrcgimicnlo of Xauxa in Peru. 
|COMA?, a lake of the province and government of Venezuela, of an oval figure, between the river Guarico and the jurisdiction which divides this government from that of Curnana. 
|COMATLAN, a settlement of the head settle ment of Chixila, and alcaldia mayor of Villalti. It contains 32 families of Indians, and is five leagues to the N. of its capital. 
|COMATLAN, another settlement, the head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Tequepexpa ; of a hot temperature. It contains 20 families of Indians, who live by cultivating the lands. Fifteen leagues to the s. of its capital. 
|COMAU, a settlement of the province and cap tainship of Para in Brazil ; situate at the mouth of the river Las Amazonas, to the n. n. e. of the town of Macapa. 
|COMAUUINI, a river of the province and government of Guayana, in the Dutch possessions, on the shores and at the mouth of which they have constructed the fort of Amsterdam. It runs n. and afterwards turning to the s. s. e. enters the Cotica. 
|COMAYAGUA, or VALLADOLID, a city and capital of the province of Honduras in the king dom of Guatemala ; founded by the Captain Alonzo de Caceres, by the order of Pedro de Alvarado. It was at first called Nuestra Senora de la Concepcion, and by this title there is still named an hospital which is well endowed and served. Here are ulso some convents of the religious order of La Merced, and a very good church, erected into a bishopric in 1539. One hundred and ten leagues from the capital Guatemala. Lat. 20 58 n. Long. 87 5 1 w. 
Bishops who have presided in Comayagua. 
1. Don Fray Juan de Talavera, of the order of St. Jerome, prior of his convent of Nuestra Senora del Prado, near Valladolid : being nomi nated first bishop, he refused the appointment. 
2. Don Christoval de Pedraza, elected bishop from the renunciation of the former; at the same time nominated protector of the Indies, and resi dentiary judge to the conquerors Pedro Alvaredo and Francisco de Montejo, in 1539. 
|COM 
3. Don -Fray Geronimo de Corella, of the order of St. Jerome, native of Valencia, descended from the Counts of Cocentayna ; prior of the convent of his country, and afterwards of that of Nuestra Senora del Prado, when he was elected bishop of, this diocese in 1562. 
4. Don Fray Alonso de la Cerda, of the order of preachers ; promoted to the archbishopric of Cbarcas in 1577. 
5. Don Fray Caspar de Andrnda, a Franciscan monk, and native of Toledo; collegian of the college of San Pedro and San Pablo of Alcala de Henares, guardian of the convents of S. Juan de los Reyes in Toledo and in Madrid, visitor of the provinces of Arragon, a celebrated preacher, and elected to this bishopric in 1588 ; he governed 24 years, and died in 1612. 
6. Don Fray Alonso Galdo, a monk of the order of St. Dominic, native of Valladolid, present ed in 1612; he visited its bishopric, was of ex emplary conduct, and being full of years and in firmities, he requested that a coadjutor might be nominated in 1628 ; and this was, 
7. Don Fray Luis de Canizares, a religious minim of St. Francis of Paula, native of Madrid ; he was lecturer in his convent, and in that of Alcala, calificador and consultor of the inquisition in Valladolid ; nominated through the nuncio of of his holiness; was visitor of the province of Andalucia, bishop of Nueva Carceres in Philippines, and promoted to this see, where he died, in 1645. 
8. Don Juan Merlo de la Fuente, doctoral canon of the church of the Puebla de los Angeles, elected bishop of Nuevo Segovia in the Philippines, which office he did not accept, and was bishop herein 1648. 
9. Don Pedro de los Reyes Rios of Madrid, native of Seville, monk of the order of San Benito, master, preacher in general, theological doctor, and poser to the cathedrals of the university of Oviedo, difinidor and abbot of the monasteries of San Isidro de Duenas, San Claudio de Leon, and San Benito de Sevilla, preacher to Charles II. elected bishop of this church, and before he went over to it, promoted to that of Yucatan in 1700. 
10. Don fray Juan Perez Carpintero; elected in the same year, 1700. 
11. Don Fray Angel Maldonado, native of Ocana, monk ot San Bernardo, doctor and pro fessor of theology in the university of Alcala; he wrote in defence of the right of Philip V. to the crown of Spain ; presented to the bishopric of Honduras, and after taking possession, promoted to the church of Antequara in 1702. 
12. Don Fray Antonio Guadalupe Lopez Por
|VOL. I. 
tillo, native of Gnadalaxara in Nneva Espana, of the order of St. Francis, a man of great learn ing and virtue, domestic prelate of his holiness Benedict XIII. ; presented to the bishopric of Comayagua in 1725 ; he died in 1742. 
13. Don fray Francisco Molina, of the order of St. Basil, master of theology, abbot of the mo nastery of Cuellar, thrice of that of Madrid, and twice difmidor general of Castille ; elected in 1743. 
14. Don Diego Rodriguez Rivas de Velasco, native of Riobamba in the kingdom of Quito, doc tor of both laws in the university of Alcala, col legian of the college of Los Verdcs, titular arch deacon of the holy church of Guatemala; elected bishop in 1750, and promoted to the bishopric of Guadalaxara in 1762. 
15. Don Miguel Anselmo Alvarez de Abreu, native of Tenerifle, secretary of the bishop of Se govia, and canon in the church of Canarias, jud
e of the apostolical chamber, and of the tribunal of the holy crusade, auxiliary bishop of the Puebla de los Angeles, presented to this in 1762, and pro moted to that of Antequera in 1767. 
16. Don Isidore Rodriguez; he died in 1767. 
17. Don Antonio de Macarulla, elected in 1767, and promoted (o that of Durango in 1773. 
18. Don Francisco Joseph de Palencia, elected in 1773. 
19. Don Fray Antonio de San Miguel, in 1776, until 1783. 
20. Don Joseph Antonio de Isabella, in 1783. COMBAGUEN, a settlement of Indians of the 
district of Tolten Alto in the kingdom of Chile. 
|COMBAHEE, a considerable river of S. Carolina, which enters St. -Helena sound, between Coosa and Ashepoo rivers. 
|COMBAHEE Ferry, on the above river, is 17 miles from Jacksonsborough, 15 from Pocotaglio, and 52 from Charlestown. 
|COMBACA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Larecajain Peru. 
|COMBAPATA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Tinta in Peru ; situate upon an eminence near the royal road which leads from La Plata to Lima. Its natives say that it has the best and most healthy temperature of any in the kingdom, and they mention some persons who have lived here to the age of 140 years. 
|COMBAPATA, a river of the above province and corregimiento. It rises in the Cordillera near the settlement of Pun oa, runs some distance e. and then turning n. enters the source of the Vilcomayo. 
|COMBEIMA, a large river of the province 3 s 
498 
|COM 
|COM 
and government of Neyba in the kingdom of Gra nada. It rises in the paramo or mountain desert of Qnindiu, traverses and waters the valleys of Las Lanzas, and unites itself with that of San Juan, taking the name of Coello, from a Spaniard of this name having been drowned in it. It then enters the Magdalen n. 
|COMBEJU, a settlement of the province and captainship of Rcy in Brazil ; situate at the source of the river Curilaba. 
|COMBERUI, Bay of, on the coast of the pro vince and captainship of Key in Brazil. It lies between the bay of Tasay and the island of Gallo. 
|COMBES, a settlement of the island of Barbadoes, in the district of the parish of St. George. 
|COMBINCUMA, a spacious, and but little known country of the kingdom of Quito*. It is full of woods, in which there are many wild beasts and snakes of various kinds, and it is watered by many rivers, all of which enter the s. side of the Maraiion. Amongst the various nations which inhabit it is that of the Tontones. 
|COMBITA, a settlement of the province and correghnienlo of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyrio de Granada. It is of a cold temperature, and pro duces the fruits corresponding with its climate. It contains 100 house-keepers, and as many other Indians, and is two leagues to the n. w. of its capital . 
|COMBLES, Los CINCO, a settlement and parish of the island of St. Christopher, one of the Antilles ; situate on the shore of the n. w. coast, and in the part formerly possessed by the Eng lish. 
|COMBO Y, a rocky shoal of the N. sea, to the s. of that of La Vivora. 
|COME A PA, a settlement of the province and alcaldia mayor of Los Zoques in the kingdom of Guatemala. 
|COMECUERO, a river of the province and government of Honduras in the kingdom of Guate mala. It runs into the gulf which has the name of the province. 
|COMETA, PUNTA DE, a point or cape of theCaico Grande, or Del N. (of the N.) on the n. e. coast. 
|COMETA, ashoal of rocks, near upon the n. e. coast of the island of Caico Grande, or Del N. and by the former point, from whence it takes its name. 
|COMFORT Point is the s. easternmost part of Elizabeth City county in Virginia, formed by James river at its mouth in Chesapeak bay. Point Comfort lies 19 miles zc. by w. of cape Henry. 
|COMFORT Point, another point, which is also 
of the same coast and province as the former, and within that buy, being one of the points which form the entrance of the river York. 
|COMFORT Point, another, on the s. coast of Hudson s bay, in the province of this name. 
|COMICHIGELES, SIERRA DE, in the pro vince and government of Tucunuin, and bounded by the sierra of Cuyo, in the kingdom of Chile. It runs from s. s. e. on the shore of the Concara, and in fact follows the course of that river. 
|COMISARIO, PUNTA DEL, a long strip of land which runs into the sea on the coast of the province and government of Cartagena, between this city and the point, of S. Bernardo. 
|COMISTAHUACAN, a settlement of the pro vince and alcaldia mayor of Los Zoques in the kingdom of Guatemala. 
|COMITLAN, a settlement of the province and alcahtia mayor of Chiapa in the kingdom of Guatemala. 
|COMITLAN, another settlement, in the pro vince and alcaldia mayor of Capanabastla in the same kingdom. 
|COMMANOES, one of the Small Virgin isles, in the W. Indies, situate to the n.n.e. of Tortula. 
|COMOCAUTLA, SAN PEDRO DE, a settle ment of the head settlement of Zapotitlan, and alcaldia mayor of Xacatlau, in Nueva Espana, three leagues distant from its head settlement. 
|COMO-LEWIJ, or Rio DE LOS SAUCES, call ed also Gran Desaguadero. See SAUCES. 
|COMONDU, SAN JOSEPH DE, a settlement of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of Jesuits in the province of Ca lifornia ; situate near the sea-coast, between the settlements of La Concepcion arid San Francisco Xavier. 
|COMONDU, SAN JOSEPH DE, a bay of this pro vince, between the bay of Concepcion and the island of Carmen. 
|COMOPORO, a settlement of the government of Maracaibo in the province of Venezuela; situate on the coast of the lake towards the e. part. 
CO MORI, CIIIQUEDE, a creek and establish ment of the French, in their possessions in G nay ana. 
|COMORIPA, or COMORIOPA, as some will have it, a settlement of the province of Ostimuri in Nueva Espana; situate on the shore of the river Hiaqui, between the settlements of Cocoria and Tecoriona. 
|COMPOSTELA, a province and alcaldia mayor of Nueva Galicia. Its jurisdiction extends from the mouth of the large river San Pedro ; as 
|CON 
for as the confines of the akaldia mayor of Tcpique. It is of an hot temperature, abounding in maize, cotton, cocoa-trees, and oilier fruits pecu liar to the climate ; and particularly in large and small cattle, which breed in numberless wards and country estates. It has silver mines, which are worked to tolerable profit. It is but thinly peopled, and the greater part of its inhabitants are Mustees and Negro slaves. It is watered by the river Canas, which rises in the jurisdiction of Acaponeta. The capital is of the same name. This was founded by Nuno de Guzman in 1531, and is the capital of the kingdom, and where the tribunal of royal audience and episcopal see were erected ; these being afterwards removed to the city of Guadalaxara. This latter city was at the same time made the capital, from its proximity to the shore of the S. sea, its distance from the same being only 12 leagues. It was at that time very wealthy, but it afterwards fell to decay : the pri macy w r as also taken from it, and it is nothing now but a miserable village. Its natives are the most polite and best affected to the Spaniards of any in the whole kingdom. [To the n. w. of Compostela, as well as in the districts of Autlan, Ahuxcatlan, and Acaponeta, a tobacco of a superior quality was formerly cultivated. Lat. 21 10 n. Long. 104 40 w. The settlements of this juris
499 
diction are, 
Matanchel, San Pedro, Calimaya, 
Sapotan, 
Mazatlan, 
Xaltocan. 
|COMPOSTELA, another city, in the island of St. Domingo. See AZUA. 
|COMPTON, a settlement of the English, in the province and colony of Massachusetts ; situate on the coast, at the entrance of the bay of Buzard. 
|COMUATO, a small island of the lake or sea of Chalapa, in the district of the alcaldia mayor of Zamora, and kingdom of Nueva Espaiia. It is of a hot and moist temperature, surrounded by thick reeds and Indian fig-trees. In the dry sea son it communicates with the mainland. Its po pulation is scanty, and consists of 20 families of Spaniards, and in its plains various herds of large cattle graze. Nine leagues from the capital. 
|COMUTA, a city of the province and captainship of Para in Brazil, founded in 1581 by Juan Pedro de Oliveiro, on the e. shore of the river Pacaxa. It is at present destroyed, and some small houses alone remain, where, for the conve nience of its situation, a small garrison of Portu guese resides. 
|CONAHASET, a rocky shoal of the coast of 
the province and colony of New England, at the entrance of port Boston. 
|CONAICA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Angaraez in Peru. 
|CONAJOIIARY, a post-town on the s. side of Mohawk river. New York, very large, 36 miles above Schenectady, and 318 from Philadelphia. See CANAJOHAUY. 
|CONANAMA, a bay of the province and govenment of Guayana. 
|CONANAMA, a river of the same name, in this province. 
|CONARDO-TUBA, a river of the province and captainship of Los Ilheos in Brazil. It rises near the coast, and runs e. between those of the Duna and Ilheos. 
|CONAWANGO, a n. branch of Alleghany river, in Pennsylvania, which rises from Chataughque lake. 
|CON GARY, a river of the province and corregimiento of Cuyo in the kingdom of Chile. It rises from a small lake to the e. of the mountain of the Pie de Palo, and running s. e. returns, form ing a curve to the w. when it divides itself into se veral branches. 
|CONCEPCION, or PKNCO, a city of the king dom of Chile, the capital of the province and corregimiento of its name, founded in 1550 by Pedro de Valdivia. Its situation is upon a barren and uneven territory, somewhat elevated, on the sea-shore, and on the side of a large, noble, and convenient bay. On the n. side it is crossed by a rivulet, and on the s. it is watered by the river Andalien, and lies not far from the Biobio. It is a small city, and its houses and buildings are poor and much reduced. It has, besides the ca thedral church, convents of the religious orders of St. Francis, St. Domingo, La Merced, St. Augustin, an hospital of San Juan de Dios, and a college which belonged to the regulars of the com pany of the Jesuits, and which is the best build ing in it. Its climate is moderately warm, al though in the winter the cold is great, it abounds greatly in all kinds of grain, cattle, and delicious fruits, and these are cultivated in gardens which are found attached to almost every house. It lies open on all sides, being commanded by six emi nences ; amongst the which the most prominent is that which is called Del Romitorio, and extends as far as the city. Its only defence is a battery on a level with the water, which defends the an choring ground of the bay. The natives resemble the rest of this kingdom : they are strong, robust, valorous, and well made, most dexterous in the 3 s 2 
500 
|CON 
management of the horse, and in this they are not unrivalled by the women. The common sort are also extremely skilful in the management of the lazo, which they throw over the animal in its flight, never missing their aim. This city has suffered extreme misfortunes ever since the time of its foundation ; for shortly after this took place, its inhabitants found themselves under the neces sity of retiring from it to Santiago, through the invasion of the Araucanos and Tucapeles Indians, who made themselves masters of it, and sacked and burnt it in 1554, under the command of the Cazique Lautaro : again, though the Spaniards endeavoured to repeople it, they were a second time driven back, as also a third time, in 1603, when the Governor Don Garcia Hurtardo de Mendoza, Marquis of Caiiete, had come to suppress the general insurrection of the Indians. It was after this rebuilt, and in 1730 again destroyed by a dreadful earthquake, being entirely inundated by the sea. It suffered also much from a similar shock in 1751. In the chief square, or market place, is a beautiful fountain, made by the com mand of Don Diego Gonzalo Montero. The tri bunal of royal audience was fixed in this city from the time that it was founded, in 1567, and re mained here until the year 1574, when it was translated to the capital of the kingdom, Santiago. It has been the head of a bishopric ever since 1620, when this honour was transferred to the city oif Imperial. It is the residence of a governor, de pendent on the captain-general and president ; it being his duty to reside six months of the year in Santiago, and the other six in this city. [Besides the commerce of hides, tallow, and dried beef, the inhabitants of Concepcion carry on a trade in wheat, which Frazier asserts yields 100 for one. Also near this city, as well as in various other parts of Chile, pit-coal is found in great abund ance; and, according to the above author, mines of it have been discovered at the depth of one or two feet from the surface. See CHILE. Sixty leagues to the s. of Santiago, in lat. 36 48 15* s. and long. 73 8 . 
Bishops who have presided in Concepcion of Chile. 
1. Don Fray Antonio de San Miguel, a monk of the order of St. Francis, native of Salamanca ; elected to be first bishop in 1564, and promoted to Quito in 1587. 
2. Don Agustin de Cisneros, dean of the church of Santiago of Chile ; elected bishop of this, and of Concepcion, in 1587 ; he died in 1594. 
3. Don fray Pedro de Azuaga, and not Diego de 
|CON 
Zuaga, as Gil Gonzalez Davila will have it, a monk of the order of St. Francis ; elected in 1595 ; he died before he was consecrated. 
4. Don Fray Heginaldode Lizarraga, native of Lima; elected in 1796; he died in 1613. 
5. Don Carlos Marcelo Corni, native of Truxillo in Peru, magistral canon of Lima ; promoted to the bishopric of his country in 1620. 
6. Don Fray Luis Geronimo de Ore, of the order of St. Francis, native of Guamanga, a ce lebrated writer in the different Indian languages, for which he had a peculiar talent; elected in 1622; he died in 1628. 
7. Don Fray Alonso de Castro, of the order of St. Augustin ; he did not accept the bishopric. 
8. Don Diego de Zambranaand Villalbos ; pro moted to Santiago of Chile. 
9. Don Fray Dionisio Cimbron, of the order of St. Bernard, native of Cintruenigo in Navarra ; he was prior in the monasteries of Espina, Junquera, and Ossera, secretary of the difinidor gene ral, and presented to the bishopric of Concepcion in 1651. 
10. Don Fray Diego Medellin, of the order of St. Francis, native of Lima. 
11. Don Fray Antonio de Morales, native of Lima, of the order of preachers, provincial in his religion. 
12. Don Fray Francisco de Vergara Loyola de Iza, of the order of St. Augustin, provincial of his religion, and native of Lima. 
13. Don Fray Andres de Betancur, of the order of St. Francis, provincial in the province of Santa Fe ; elected in 1664. 
14. Don Fray Luis de Lemos y Usategui, of the order of St. Augustin, preacher to King Charles II. native of Lima. 
15. Don Diego Montero del Aguila; promoted to the bishopric of Truxillo in 1716. 
16. Don Francisco Antonio de Escandon; pro moted to the bishopric of Quito in 1730. 
17. Don Salvador Bermudez, school-master in the church of Quito; he did not accept the ap pointment, and in his place was nominated by the king, 
18. Don Andres de Paredes Polanco y Armendariz, who was afterwards promoted to Quito in 1734. 
19. Don Pedro Azua Iturgoyen, native of Lima; promoted, in 1744, to be archbishop of Santa Fe. 
20. Don Joseph de Toro Zambrano, native of Santiago of Chile, doctoral canon of its church; elected, in 1744, bishop of Concepcion; he go verned until his death in 1760, 
|CON 
21. Don Fray Pedro de Espineira ; elected in 1762 ; he governed until his death, in 1778. 
22. Don Francisco Joseph de Maran ; elected in 1779. 
CoNCEPCioif DE LA VEGA, another city, in the island of St. Domingo, founded by the Admiral Christopher Columbus, on a beautiful and spacious plain, or Manure, celebrated for a conquest gained on it by a numerous army of Indians. It has a good parish church, erected into a bishopric, and which was afterwards done away with in 1605, it being then embodied with the archbishopric of S. Do mingo. It has also a convent of the religious order of St. Francis, in which is deposited and venerated the first cross that the discoverer and, con queror of this country planted here ; which, al though the Indians have endeavoured with all their might to break and destroy, has resisted all their efforts. Twenty-five leagues from the capital of S. Domingo. 
|CONCEPCION, a town of the province and go vernment of Paraguay ; situate on the e. side of the river Paraguay, about SO leagues n. of Asun cion. Lat. 23 23 S" s. Long. 57 16" a?. 
fCoNCEPcioN DEL PAO, a city of the province and government of Caracas ; composed of the in habitants of Trinity, of Margareta, and of Caracas, who owned the folds in the plains near the Ori noco, to the s. of Barcelona ; they here succes sively fixed their dwelling.*, for the purpose of being in the centre of their property, and of super intending it themselves. In 1744 the number of these houses were found considerable enough to ac quire the name of village. There are only 2300 people of all classes here, subsisting with facility by the fertility of the soil. The air and water are good, and the only inconveniences the inhabitants experience are an excessive heat, and inundations arising from the long and heavy rains. The produce of the land is merely the provisions common to the country. The wealth of the inhabitants consists entirely in cattle, which they export to Trinity, da Guarapiche or Orinoco. This village, now a city, is distinguished from St. John the Baptist del Pao, situate in the province of Venezuela, by the title of Concepcion del Pao. Lat. 8 42 n. Long. C &gt; 10 a). 
|CONCEPCIO.V, a settlement, the capital of the province and corregimiento of Xauja in Peru. 
|CONCEPCION, another, of the same province and corregimiento, in which there is a convent of the religious order of St. Francis. 
|CONCEPCIOX, another, of the province and corregimicnto of Lucanas in the same kingdom j anaexed to the curacy of Otoca. 
|CON 
50! 
|CONCEPCION, another, of the same province and kingdom ; annexed to the curacy of Paraisancos. 
|CONCEPCION, another, of the province and corregimicnto of Chichas and Tarija in the same king dom, and of the district of the former. 
|CONCLPCION, another, of the province and corregimicnlo of Vilcas Huaiman in the same king dom ; annexed to the curacy of Vizchongo. 
Co NCR PC ION, another, of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Leon in Nueva Espafia, and of the bishopric of Mechoacan ; annexed to the curacy of Rincon. It contains 208 families of Indians, 100 of Spaniards, and 40 of Mustees. It produces wheat, maize, and other seeds, and is a quarter of a league from its curacy, and four leagues from the capital. 
|CONCEPCION, another small settlement or ward, united to that of Tequiszitlan,of the alcaldia mayor of Theotihuacan in the same kingdom. 
|CONCEPCION, another, of the missions which are held by the religious order of St. Francis, in the province of Texas and kingdom of Nueva Espana. It is 1 12 leagues to the e. n. e. of the pre sidency of San Antonio de Bejar. 
|CONCFPCION, another, of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of Je suits, in the province and government of Mainas, of the kingdom of Quito ; situate on the shore of the great river Maranon, on a point of land formed by the same, and where this river is entered by the Apena ami the Guallaga. 
|CONCEPCIOV, another, of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of Je suits, in the province of Tepeguana, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya ; situate on the bank of the river Florido, near the settlement and real of the mines of Parral. 
|CONCEPCION, another, of the missions which, belong to the religion of St. Francis, in the pro vince of Taraumara, and kingdom of Nueva Viz caya, lying 17 leagues distant between the s. and s. w. of the real of the mines of San Felipe de Chiguagua. 
|CONCEPCIOX, another, with the surname of Achaguas, being composed of Indians of this na tion, in the kingdom of Granada ; of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of Jesuits in Orinoco; situate on the shore of the river Meta. 
|CONCEPCIONT, another settlement, the capital of the province and captainship of Itamaraca in Bra zil ; situate on the top of a mountain by the sea side. It has a magnificent parish church, and is garrisoned by two companies of troops. It con tains 300 housekeepers, and has three large sugar . 
502 
|CON 
mills. The whole of the district of its territory is covered with estates and country-seats, which abound ,in all kinds of fruits, at once rendering it a place pleasing and advantageous for residence. 
|COXCEPCION, another, of the province and correginricnto of Pacajes in Peru ; situate on the shore of the lake Titicaca, and at the mouth of the river Desaguadero. 
|CONCEPTION, another, of the province and go vernment of the Chiquitos Indians, in the same kingdom ; a reduction of the missions which were held in this province by the regulars of the com pany of the Jesuits ; situate between the source of the river Verde and the river Ubay. 
|CONCEPCION, another, of the province and go vernment of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito ; situate between the rivers Guandesand Yraibi, and nearly in the spot where they join. 
|CONCEPCION, another, of the former province and government ; situate on the shore of the river Itenes. 
|CONCEPCION, another, of the province and country of the Amazonas, in the Portuguese pos sessions ; a reduccion of the missions which are held by the Carmelite fathers of this nation ; situate on the shore of a pool or lake formed by the river Urubu. 
|CONCEPCION, another, of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of Je suits in California ; situate near the sea-coast and the Puerto Nuevo, or New Port. 
|CONCEPCION, another, of the province and go vernment of Tucuman in Peru, and district of Chaco; being a reduccion of the Abipones Indians, of the mission held by the regulars of the company of Jesuits, and to-day under the charge of the reli gious order of S. Francisco. 
|CONCEPCION, another, which is also called Fuenclara or Canada, of the missions held by the re ligion of St. Francis, in the kingdom of Nuevo Mexico. 
|CONCEPCION, another
which is the real of the silver mines of the province and government of Sonora in Nueva Espaiia. 
|CONCEPCION, another, of the province and cap tainship of Rio Janeiro in Brazil ; situate on the coast, opposite the Isla Grande. 
|CONCKPCION, another, of the province and cap tainship of S. Vincentc in the same kingdom. 
|CONCEPCION, another, of the province and go vernment of Buenos Ay res ; situate at the mouth of the river Salad illo, on the coast which lies between the river La Plata and the straits of Magellan. 
|CONCEPCION, another, of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of Je
|CON 
suits, in the province and government of Buenos Ayres ; situate on the w. shore of the river Uru guay. [Lat. 27 58 43". Long. 55 27 13" a?. 
|CONCKPCION, another, of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of Je suits, in the country of the Chiquitos Indians, in the kingdom of Peru ; situate to the e. of that of San Francisco Xavier. 
|CONCEPCION, another, of the province and go vernment of Cinaloa in Nneva Espaiia. 
|CONCEPCION, another, of the province and go vernment of Quixos and Macas in the kingdom of Quito, which produces nothing but maize, yucas t plantains, and quantities of aloes, with the which the natives pay their tribute, and which are much esteemed in Peru. 
|CONCFPCION, a town of the province and go vernment of Tucuman in Peru, in the jurisdiction of the city of Santiago del Estero, between the rivers Bermejo and Salado. It was destroyed bj the infidel Indians. 
|CONCEPCION, a bay of the kingdom of Chile, at the innermost part of which, and four leagues from its entrance, is found a bed of shells, from which is made excellent lime. 
|CONCEPTION, another bay, in the gulf of Cali fornia, or Mar Roxo dc Cortes. It is very large and capacious, having within it various islands. Its entrance is, however, very narrow. 
|CONCEPCION, a river in the province and go vernment of Costarica, which runs into the sea be tween that of San Antonio and that of Portete. 
|CONCEPCION, another, of the kingdom of Bra zil, which rises to the w. of the town of Gorjas, runs s. s. w. and unites itself with that of the Remedios, to enter the river Prieto or La Palma. 
|CONCEPCION, another, which is an arm of the river Picazuru, in the province and government of Paraguay. 
|CONCEPCION, another, of the kingdom of Chile, which runs through the middle of the city of Concepcion, and enters the sea in the bay of this name. 
|CONCEPCION, a large bay on the e. side of Newfoundland island, whose entrance is between cape St. Francis on the s. and Flamborou-h head on the n. It runs a great way into the land in a s. direction, having numerous bays on the w. side, on which are two settlements, Carbon iere and Havre de Grace. Settlements were made here in 1610, by about 40 planters, under Governor John Guy, to whom King James had granted a patent of incorporation. 
CoNCEPcioN OF SALAYE, a small town of N. America, in the province of Mechoacan in Mexico 
|CON 
or New Spain, was built by the Spaniards, as well as the stations of St. Michael and St. Philip, to se cure the road from Mechoacan to the silver mines of Zacatea. They have also given this name to several boroughs of America; as to that in II ispaniola island, and to a sea-port of California, &c.J 
|CONCHA, SAN MARTIN DE I.A, a town and capital of the province and corregimiento ofQuillota in the kingdom of Chile ; founded in 1726 by the Licentiate Don Joseph de Santiago Concha, who gave it his name, being at the time temporal president of this kingdom. Its situation is in a valley, the most beautiful and fertile of any in the kingdom, and it particularly abounds in wheat. It has been celebrated for the abundance of gold that has been taken out of a mine within its dis trict, and for the protection of which a fort had been built by Pedro de Valdivia. It has a very good parish church, three convents of the religious orders of St. Francis, St. Augustin, and La Merced, and a college which belonged to the regulars of the company of Jesuits, and which is at present oc cupied by the monks of St. Domingo, and a house of retirement for spiritual exercies, founded and endowed by a certain individual. In the district of this city European chesnuts grow, and not far from it is a lime-kiln belonging to the king, and which renders a supply for the works going on at the garrison of Valdivia. Nine leagues from Valparayso. Lat. 32 48 s. Long. 71 .10 w. 
|CONCHA, a settlement of Indians of S. Carolina; situate near the source of the river Sonlahowe. 
|CONCHA, a bay on the coast of the province and government of Santa Marta, to the e. of the cape of La Aguja. 
|CONCHA, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Tucuman in Peru ; situate at the mouth of the river of its name, and where it en ters the Pasage. 
|CONCHA, a river in the jurisdiction of the city of Salta, runs e. and enters the Pasage between the river Blanco and that of Metau. 
|CONCHACHITOUU, a settlement of Indians of S. Carolina, where a fort has been built by the English for the defence of the establishment which they hold there. 
|CONCHALI, a river of the province and corregimie/ito of Quillota in the kingdom of Chile. It runs w. and enters the sea. 
|CONCHAMARCA, a settlement of the pro vince and corregimiento of Huanuco in Peru ; an nexed to the curacy of San Miguel de Huacar. 
|CONCHAO, a settlement of the province and 
|CON 
503 
corregimiento of Caxatambo in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Andnjes. 
|CONCHAS, a parish of the province and go vernment of Buenos Ayres ; situate on a river of the same name, about six leagues n. zz. of Buenos Ayres. Lat. 34 24 56" s. Long. 58 23 30" a&gt;. 
|CONCHAS, a small river of the province arid go vernment of Buenos Ayres. It runs n. e. and en ters the river La Plata, at a small distance from the capital. 
|CONCHAS, another river, in the province and captainship of the Rio Grande in Brazil. It is small, rises near the coast, and empties itself at the mouth of that of Amargoso. 
|CONCHAS, another, of the kingdom of Ntieva Espana, which runs into the sea at the bay of Mexico, being first united to the Bravo. 
|CONCHAS, another, a small river of the province and government of Buenos Ayres, distinct from, that of which we have spoken. It runs w. and enters the Parana, close to the settlement of La Baxa&lt;;la de Santa Fe. 
|CONCHATTAS, Indians of N. America, al most the same people as the Allibamis. They first lived on Bayau Chico, in Appelousa district; but, four years ago, moved to the river Sabine, settled themselves on the e. bank, where they now live, in nearly a s. direction from Natch itoch, and distant about 80 miles. They call their number of men about 100 ; but say, if they were altogether, they would amount to 200. Several families of them live in detached settlements. They are good hunters. Game is here in plenty. They kill an uncommon number of bears. One man alone, during the summer and fall hunting, sometimes kills 400 deer, and sells his skins at 40 dollars per 100. The bears usually yield from eight to 12 gallons of oil, each of which never sells for less than a dollar a gallon, and the skin a dollar more. No great quantity of the meat is saved. What the hunters do not use when out, they generally give to their dogs. The Conchattas are friendly with all other Indians, and speak well of their neighbours the Carankouas, who, they say, live about 80 miles s. of them, on the bay, which is the nearest point to the sea from Natchitoches. A few families of Chactaws have lately settled near them from Bayau Bceuf. The Conchattas speak Creek, which is their native language, and ChacJaw, and several of them English ; and one or two of them can read it a little. 
|CONCHOSj SAN FRANCISCO DE LOS, a settle ment and garrison of the province of the Tepeguana, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya ; situate 
504 
|CON 
,on the brinks of the river of its name, near where this river joins that of Florido. It is garrisoned by a captain, a lieutenant, a scrjeant, and 33 sol diers, to guard against the irruptions of the infidel Indians. In its vicinity are the estates of La Cienega, Sapian, and El Pilar
 Fifty-eight leagues to the n.n.e. of the city of Guadalaxara. 
|CONCH UCOS, a province and corrcgimiento of Peru ; bounded n. by the province of Huainachucos, n. e. by that of Pataz, and separated from thence by the river Marauon, e. and s. c. by the province of Humalies, and s. by that of Caxatambo. It is 52 leagues in length, and in some parts 20 in width. It is of a very irregular figure, and of various temperature, according to the dif ferent situation of its territories ; cold in all the parts bordering upon the cordil/era, mild in some parts, and in others excessively hot. Jt is very pleasant, and it has all kinds of fruits, which it produces in abundance, and in the same manner wheat, barley, and pot herbs. On its skirts are found numerous herds of cattle of every species, and from the wools of some of these are made the cloth manufactures of the country, which meet with a ready demand in the other provinces. The principal rivers by which it is watered are three ; and these are formed by various streams : the one of them enters that of Santa to the zc. and the other two the Maranon. The most s. is called De Miraflores, and the other, which is very large, keeps the name of the province. Here are some mines of silver, which were formerly very rich ; as also some lavadcros, or washing places of gold, of the purest quality, the standard weight of it being 23 carats. Also in the curacy of Llamelin are some mines of brimstone, and a fountain or stream, the waters of which, falling down into a deep slough, become condensed and converted into a stone called Catachi, in the form of columns much resembling wax-candles, of a very white colour. The same substance is used as a remedy against the bloody flux, and it is said, that being made into powders, and mixed with the white of an egg, it forms a salve which accelerates in a wonderful manner the knitting of fractured bones. It com prehends 15 curacies, without the annexed settle ments, all of which, the former and the latter, are as follows : lluari del Rey, the ca- San Christoval, 
pital, Yunga, 
Cliavin, Uco, 
1 luantar, Paucas, 
San Marcos, Yanas, 
San Ildefonso, Huachi, 
Rapayan, Llapo, 
Llamelin, Yupan, 
Acso, Ancos, 
Mirgas, Tauca, 
Taquia Cavana, 
Siccican, Huendoval, 
San Luis de Huari, Pallasca, 
Chacas, Pampas, 
Piscobamba, Lacabamba, 
Sihuas, Conchucos, 
Puruay, Huacachi, 
Corongo, 
|CONCHUCOS, a settlement of the same pro vince; annexed to the curacy of Pullasca. 
|CONCHUCOS, a river of the province and rorregimientoof the same name in Peru, which rises in the cordillera. It runs s. and enters the Maranon near the settlement of Uchos in the province of Andahuailas. 
|CONCON, a port of the coast of the kingdom of Chile, in the S. sea, and province and corregimienlo of Quillota. 
|CONCORD, a post-town of New Hampshire, very flourishing, and pleasantly situated on the w. bank of Merrimack river, in Rockingham county, eight miles above Hooksct falls. The legislature, of late, have commonly held their ses sions Irere ; and from its central situation, and a thriving back country, it will probably become the permanent seat of government. Much of the trade of the upper country centres here. A handsome tall bridge across the Merrimack connects this town with Pembroke. It has 1747 inhabitants, and was incorporated in 1765. The Indian name was Penacook. It was granted by Massachusetts, and called Rumford. The compact part of the town contains about 170 houses, a Congregational church, and an academy, which was incorporated in 1790. It is 54 miles w. n. w. of Portsmouth, 58 s. w. of Dartmouth college, and 70 n. from, Boston. Lat. 43 12 n. Long. 71 31 w.l 
|CONCORD, in Essex county, Vermont, Res on Connecticut river, opposite a part of the Fifteenmile falls. 
|CONCORD, in Massachusetts, a post-town, one of the most considerable towns in Middlesex county ; situated on Concord river, in a healthy and pleasant spot, nearly in the centre of the county, and 18 miles n. w. of Boston, and 17 e. of Lancaster. Its Indian name was Musquetequid ; and it owes its present name to the peaceable man ner in which it was obtained from the natives. The first settlers, among whom were the Rev. Messrs. Buckley and Jones, having settled the 
|CON 
purchase, obtained an act of incorporation, Sep tember 3, 1625 ; and this was the most distant settlement from the sea-shore of New England at that time. The settlers never had any contest with the Indians ; and only three persons were ever kill ed by them within the limits of the town. In 1791, there were in this township 225 dwelling houses, and 1590 inhabitants ; of the latter there were 80 persons upwards of 70 years old. For 13 years previous to 1791, the average number of deaths was 17 ; one in four of whom were 70 years old and upwards. The public buildings are, a Congregational church, a spacious stone gaol, the best in New England, and a very handsome county court-house. The town is accommodated with three convenient bridges over the river ; one of which is 208 feet long, and 18 feet wide, supported by 12 piers, built after the manner of Charles river bridge. This town is famous in the history of the revolution, having been the seat of the provincial congress in 1774, and the spot where the first op position was made to the British troops, on the memorable 19th of April 1775. The general court have frequently held their sessions here when contagious diseases have prevailed in the capital. Lat. 42 20 w. 
|CONCORD, a small river of Massachusetts, formed of two branches, which unite near the centre of the town of Concord, whence it takes its course in a n. e. and n. direction through Bed ford and Billerica, and empties itself into Merrimack river at Tewksbury. Concord river is remarkable for the gentleness of its current, which is scarcely perceivable by the eye. At low water mark it is from 100 to 200 feet wide, and from three to 12 feet deep. During floods, Concord river is near a mile in breadth ; and when viewed from the town of Concord, makes a fine appearance. 
|CONCORD, a township in Delaware county, Pennsylvania. 
|CONCORD, a settlement in Georgia, on the e. bank of the Mississippi, about a mile from the s. line of Tennessee, 103 miles n. from the mouth of Yazoo river, and 218 below the Ohio. 
|CONDACHE, a river of the province and go vernment of Quixos in the kingdom of Quito. It runs n. e. and traversing the royal road which leads from Baza to Archidono, enters the river Coquindo on its s. side, in 37 lat. 
|CONDE, Fort, or MOBILE City, is situate on the w. side of Mobile bay, in W. Florida, about 40 miles above its mouth, in the gulf of Mexico. Lat. 30 59 w. Long. 88 1 1 a?. 
|CONDE, a small river of the province and country of the Iroquees Indians, in New France or 
|VOL. I. 
|CON 
505 
Canada. It runs n. and enters the lake On tario. 
|CONDE, another of the same name. See VKHDE. 
|CONDECEDO, or DESCONOCIDA, a cape or promontory of N. America, in the province of Yucatan, 100 miles w. of Mcrida. Lat. 20 50 n. Loner. 90 45 w. i 
|CONDEBAMBA, a large and beautiful valley of the province and correginiiento of Huamachuco in Peru ; celebrated for its fertility. 
|CONDES, River of the, in the straits of Ma
fellan. It runs into the tea opposite the island anta Ana. 
|CONDESA, a settlement of the province and government of Cartagena; situate near the coast, at the mouth of the Dique, which forms a com munication between the sea and the grand river Magdalena. 
|CONDESUIOS DE AREQUIPA, a province and corregimiento of Peru ; bounded n. by that of Parinocochas, e. by that of Chumbivilcas, s. c. by that of Canes and Canches, and s. by that of Collahuas. It is generally of a cold temperature, even in the less lofty parts of the cordillera ; of a rough and broken territory, and with very bad roads. Nevertheless, no inconsiderable proportion of wheat is grown in the low grounds, as like wise of maize, and other seeds and fruits, such as grapes, pears, peaches, apples, and some flowers. Upon the heights breed many vicunas, huanacos, and vizcachas, and in other parts is obtained cochineal, here called macno, and which is bartered by the Indians for baizes of the manufacture of the country, and for cacao. It has some gold mines which were worked in former times, and which, on ac count of the baseness of the metal, the depth of the mines, and hardness of the strata, hare not pro duced so much as formerly they did, although they are not now without yielding some emolu ment : such are those of Airahua, Quiquimbo, Araure, and Aznacolea, which may produce a little more than the expences incurred in working them. The gold of these mines is from 19 to 20 carats, and they produce from three to four ounces each caxon. They are worked by means of steel and powder, and the metals are ground in mills. The greater part of the natives of this province oc cupy themselves in carrying the productions of the valley of Mages, of the province of Camana, such as wines and brandies, to the other provinces of the sierra; also in the cultivation of seeds, and some in working the mines. It is watered by some small rivers or streams, which incorporate them selves, and form two large rivers. The capital is 3 T 
|CON 
Chuqiiibamba, and the other settlements of its juris diction, which comprehend nine curacies, are the following : 
Chuquibamba, Andahua, 
San Pedrode Illomas, Chilca and Marca, A ndaray, Viraco, 
Yanoquihua, Pampacolca, 
Chorunga, Umachulco, 
Alpacay, Hnancarama, 
Llanca, Orcopampa, 
Cayarani, Chachas, 
Arcata, Ayo, 
Salamanca, San Juan Cris6tomo de 
Ohichas, Choco, 
Quechalla, Ucuchacas, 
Belinga, Machahuay, 
Arirahua, Tipan. 
|CONDI RAS, an arm of the river Jamunda, in the country of Las Amazonas, and in the Portu guese possessions. It runs from the lake Maripava, and enters the Maranon. 
|CONDOCONDO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Paria in Peru. 
|CONDO.NOMA, a mine, celebrated for its abundance of silver, of the province and corregimiento of Tinta in Peru. 
|CONI3ORGUASI, a setllement of the province and government of Tucuman in Peru ; belonging to the jurisdiction of Jujui, situate on the shore of the river Laquiaca. 
|CONDOROMA, a settlement and asienlo of the silver mines of the province of Canes and Canches or Tinta in Peru, where, during tempests of thun der and lightning, is experienced a singular phe nomenon ; namely, a certain prickly sensation upon the hands and face, which they called moscas, (flies), though none of these insects are ever seen. It is indeed attributed to the air, which is at that time highly charged with electric fluid ; the effects of which may be observed on the handles of sticks, buckles, lace, and other metal trinkets ; the same effects ceasing as soon as the tempest is over. It is observed, that in no other parts is the same phe nomenon known to exist. 
|CONDOROMA, another settlement, of the pro vince and government of Chucuito in the same kingdom ; situate on the shore of the lake. 
|CONDUITE, or CONDUITA, a small river of the province and country of the Iroquees Indians. It runs w. forming a curve, and enters the lake Oswcgo. 
|CON DUSK EEG, a settlement in the district of Maine, in Hancock county, containing 567 in habitants. 
|CONEDAGUANET, a small river of the pro
vince and colony of Pennsylvania and county of Cumberland. It runs e. and enters the Susquehanna. 
|CON EG A, a small island of the s. coast of the island of Newfoundland, between the isle of Des pair and port Bartran. 
|CONEGHTA, a small river of S. Carolina. It rises in the territory of the Tuscaroras Indians, runs s. e. and enters the Neus. 
|CONEGOCHEAGUE Creek rises near Mercer&burg, Franklin county, Pensylvania, runs s. in a winding course, and after supplying a number of mills, empties into the Potowmack, at William port, in Washington county, Maryland ; 19 miles 5. e. of Hancock, and eight miles s. of the Pennsyl vania line". 
|CONEGOGEE, a small river of the province and colony of Maryland. It runs s. and enters the Potowmack. 
|CONEIUAGA, a small river of the province and colony of Pennsylvania, in the county of York. It runs e. and enters the Susquehanna. 
|CONEMAUGH River, and Little Coremangh, are the head waters of Kiskernanitas, in Pennsyl vania : after passing through Laurel hill and Chesnut ridge, Conemaugh takes that name, and empties into the Alleghany, 29 miles n. e. of Pittsburg. It is navigable for boats, and there is a portage of 18 miles between it and the Frankstown branch of Juriiata river. 
|CONENTES, LAS, a city of La Plata or Paraguay in S. America, in the diocese of Buenos Ay res. 
|CONESTEO, a n. w. branch of Tioga river in New York. See CANICODEO Creek. 
|CONESTOGA, a settlement of Indians of the same province and colony as the former river ; si tuate between the e. and w. arms of the river Si&gt;squehanna, where the English have a fort and establishment for its defence. 
|CONESTOGA, a river of this province, -which runs to. then turns 5. and enters the Susquehanna. 
|CONESUS, a small lake in the Genessee country, New York, which sends its waters n. w. to Genessee river. 
|CONETLA, a settlement of the province arid alcaldia mayor of Comitlan in the kingdom of Guatemala. 
|CONFINES. See VILLANURVA DE LOS IN FANTES. 
|CONFUSO. See TOGONES. 
|CONG, a small river of the province and cap tainship of Rio Grande in Brazil. It rises near the coast, runs e. and enters the sea between the river Goyana and the settlement of Gonzalo. 
|CON 
|CONGACA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Angaracs in Peru ; annexed to the uracy of Yulcamarca. 
|CONGAIll, a large river of S.Carolina. It runs s. e, taking various names, till it enters the sea. It is first called Trente Milles, or Thirty Miles, then Congari, and afterwards Santi. 
|CONGAS, a settlement of the province and cor regimiento of Caxatambo in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Ocros. 
|CONGER, ROCK OF, a small island or rock, close to the . coast of the island of Barbadoes. 
|CONGO, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Darierf
 and kingdom of Tierra N ueva ; situate on the shore of a river, which gives it its name, and of the coast of the S. sea, within the gulf of S. Miguel. 
|CONGOH AS, a settlement of the province and captainship of Espiritu Santo in Brazil ; situate to the w. of the Villa Rica. 
|CONGURIPO, SANTIAGO DE, a settlement of the head settlement of Puruandiro, and alcaldia mayor of ValladoHd, in the province and bishopric of Mechoacan ; situate on a plain or shore of the Rio Grande. It is of a hot temperature, and con tains 12 families of Spaniards and Mustees, and 57 of Indians. Twenty-six leagues from the captital Pasquaro. 
|CONHAWAY, a large river of N. Carolina. It runs many leagues ; first n. e. then n. and after wards . w. and enters the Ohio. It is called also Wood river and New river. 
|CONHAWAY, another, in the province and colony of Virginia, with the additional title of Petit, or Little. It also runs n. w. and enters the Ohio. 
|CONHOCTON Creek, in New York, is the n. head water of Tioga river. Near its mouth is the settlement called Bath. 
|CONICARI, a settlement of the province and government ofCinaloa in Nueva Espaiia; situate on the shore and at the source of the river Mayo. It is a reduction of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of Jesuits. 
|CONIGUAS, a barbarous nation of Indians of the province and government of Tarma in Peru, who inhabit the mountains of the Andes, united with the Cunchos, and of whom but little is known. 
|CONIL, Boc
s DR, entrances which the sea makes upon the coast of the province of Yucatan, between the river Lagartos, and the baxos or shoals of Cuyo. 
|CONILABQUEN, a small river of the district of To 1 ten Alto in the kingdom of Chile. It runs 5. and enters the Toltcn. 
|CONIMA, a settlement of the province and cor
507 
regimiento of Paucarcolla in Peru ; annexed (o the curacy of Moxo. 
|CONNECTICUT, a county of the province and colony of New England in N. America. It is bounded ze. by New York and the river Hudson ; is separated from the large island by an arm of the sea to the s. ; has to the e. Rhode island, with part of the colony of Massachusetts, and the other part of the same colony to the n. It is traversed by a river of the same name, which is the largest of the whole province, and navigable by large vessels for 40 miles. This province abounds in wood, tur pentine, and resins ; in the collecting of which numbers of the inhabitants are occupied, although the greater part of them arc employed in fishing, and in hewing timber for the building of vessels and other useful purposes. The merchants of the province once sent to King Charles II. some tim ber or trees, of so fine a growth as to serve for masts of ships of the largest burthen. The great trade of woods and timbers carried on by means of the river has much increased its navigation. This territory is not without its mines of metal, such as lead, iron, and copper: the first of the&gt;e have yielded some emolument, but the others have never yet produced any thing considerable, notwithstanding the repeated attempts which have been made to work them. This county is well peopled and flourishing, since it numbers upwards of 40,000 souls, notwithstanding the devastationsthat it has suffered through the French, the Indians, and the pirates, in the reign of Queen Anne, when all the fishing vessels were destroyed. When this colony was first founded, many great privileges were given it, which have always been maintained by the English governor, through the fidelity which it manifested in not joining the insurrection of the province of Massachusetts, until, in the last war, it was separated from the metropolis, as is seen in the article UNITED STATI.R OF AMERICA. 
Connecticut, one of the United States of North America, called by the ancient natives Qunnihticut, is situated between lat. 41 and 42 2 n. and between long. 71 20 and 7.3 15 w. Its greatest breadth is 72 miles, its length JOO miles ; bounded n. by Massachusetts ; e. by iihode island ; s. by the sound which divides it from Long island ; and w. by the state of New York. This state contains about 4674 square miles; equal to about 2,640,000 acres. It is divided into eight counties, viz. Fairfield, New Haven, Middlesex, and New London, which extend along the sound from za. to e. : Litchfield, Hartford, Tolland, and Vv indhain, extend in the same direction on the border of the 3r 2 
&gt;08 
|CONNECTICUT. 
state of Massachusetts. The counties are divided and subdivided into townships and parishes; in each of which is one or more places of public worship, and school- houses at convenient distances. The number of townships is about 200. Each township is a corporation invested with powers suf ficient for their own internal regulation. The number of representatives is sometimes 180; but more commonly about 160 ; a number fully ade quate to legislate for a wise and virtuous people, well informed, and jealous of their rights ; and whose external circumstances approach nearer to equality than those, perhaps, of any other people in a state of civilization in the world. 
The principal rivers in this state are, Connecti cut, Honsatonick, the Thames, and their brandies, which, with such others as are worthy of notice, are described under their respective names. The whole of the sea-coast is indented with harbours, many of which are safe and commodious; those of New London and New Haven are the most im portant. This state sends seven representatives to congress. Connecticut, though subject to the ex tremes of heat and cold, in their seasons, and to frequent sudden changes, is very healthful. It is generally broken land, made up of mountains, hills, and valleys ; and is exceedingly well-watered. Some small parts of it are thin and barren. Its principal productions are Indian corn, rye, wheat in many parts of the state, oats, and barley, which are heavy and good, and of late buck-wheat, flax in large quantities, some hemp, potatoes of several kinds, pumpkins, turnips, peas, beans, &c. &c. ; fruits of all kinds which are common to the cli mate. The soil is very well calculated for pas turage and mowing, which enables the farmers to feed large numbers of neat cattle and horses. 
The trade of Connecticut is principally with the W. India islands, and is carried on in vessels from 60 to 140 tons. The exports consist of horses, mules, oxen, oak-staves, hoops, pine-boards, oakplank
 beams, Indian corn, fish, beef, pork, &c. Horses, live cattle, and lumber, are permitted in the Dutch, Danish, and French ports. A large number of coasting vessels are employed in carry ing the produce of the state to other states. To Rhode island, Massachusetts, and New Hamp shire, they carry pork, wheat, corn, and rye ; to N. and S. Carolina, and Georgia, butter, cheese, salted beef, cider, apples, potatoes, hay, &c. and receive in return, rice, indigo, and money. But as New York is nearer, and the state of the markets always well known, much of the produce of Connecticut, especially of the w. parts, is carried there; particularly pot and pearl-ashes, flax-seed, 
beef, pork, cheese and butter, in large quantities. Most of the produce of Connecticut river from the parts of Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Ver mont, as well as of Connecticut, which are adja cent, goes to the same market. Considerable quantities of the produce of the e. parts of the state are marketed at Boston, Providence, and Norwich. The value of the whole exported pro duce and commodities from this state, before the year 1774, was then estimated at about 200,000/. lawful money annually. In the year ending Sept. 30, 1791, the amount of foreign exports was 710,340 dollars, besides articles carried to differ ent parts of the United States, to a great amount. In the year 1792, 749,925 dollars ; in the year 1793, 770,239 dollars ; and in the year 1794, 806 ,746 dollars. This state owns and employs in the foreign and coasting trade 32,897 tons of shipping. 
The farmers in Connecticut, and their fami lies, are mostly clothed in plain, decent, home spun cloth. Their linens and woollens are manu factured in the family way ; and although they are generally of a coarser kind, they are of a stronger texture, and much more durable than those imported from t Fr?.nce and Great Britain. Many of their cloths are fine and handsome. Here are large orchards of mulberry-trees ; and silk worms have been reared so successfully, as to pro mise not only a supply of silk to the inhabitants, but a surplussage for exportation. In New Haven are linen and button manufactories. In Hartford a wool len manufactory has been established ; likewise glass works, a snuff and powder mill, iron works, and a slitting mill. Iron-works are established also at Sa lisbury, Norwich, and other parts of the state. At Stafford is a furnace at which are made large quantities of hollow ware, and other ironmongery, sufficient to supply the whole state. Paper is ma nufactured at Norwich, Hartford, New Haven, and in Litchfield county. Ironmongery, hats, candles, leather, shoes, and boots, are manufac tured in this state. A duck manufactory has been established at Stratford. The state of Connecticut is laid out in small farms, from 50 to 300 and 400 acres each, which are held by the farmers in fee simple ; and are generally well cultivated. The state is chequered with innumerable roads or high ways crossing each other in every direction. A traveller in any of these roads, even in the most unsettled parts of the state, will seldom pass more than two or three miles without finding a house or cottage, and a farm under such improvements as to afford the necessaries for the support of a family. The whole state resembles a well cultivated garden, 
|CONNECTICUT. 
509 
which, with that degree of industry that is neces sary to happiness, produces the necessaries and conveniences of life in great plenty. The inhabi tants are almost entirely of English descent. There are no Dutch, French, or Germans, and very few Scotch or Irish people, in any part of the state. The original stock from which have sprung all the present inhabitants of Connecticut, and the nume rous emigrants from the state to every part of the United States, consisted of 3000 souls, who settled in the towns of Hartford, New Haven, Windsor, Guilford, Milford, and \VeathersfieId, about the years 1635 and 1636. In 1756, the population of the state amounted to 130,611 souls ; in 1774, to 97,856; in 1782, to 202,877 whites, and 6273 Indians and Negroes; in 1790, to 2*37,9-16 per sons, of whom 2764 were slaves ; and by the cen sus of 1810, to 261,942 souls. The people of Connecticut are remarkably fond of having all their disputes, even those of the most trivial kind, settled according to law. The prevalence of this litigious spirit aflbrds employment and support for a numerous body of lawyers. That party spirit, however, which is the bane of political happiness, has not raged with such violence in this state as in Massachusetts and Rhode Island. Public pro ceedings have been conducted generally with much calmness and candour. The people are well ininformed in regard to their rights, and judicious in the methods they adopt to secure them. The state enjoys an uncommon share of political tran quillity and unanimity. 
All religions, that are consistent with the peace of society, are tolerated in Connecticut : and a spirit of liberality and forbearance is increasing. There are very few religious sects in this state. The balk of the people are Congregationalists. Besides these, there are Episcopalians and Baptists. 
The damage sustained by this state in the late war was estimated at461,235/. 16s. Id. To com pensate the sufferers, the general court, in May 1792, granted them 500,000 acres of the w. part of the reserved lands of Connecticut, which lie w. of Pennsylvania. There are a great number of very pleasant towns, both maritime and inland, in Connecticut. It contains five cities, incorporated with extensive jurisdiction in civil causes. Two of these, Hartford and New Haven, are capitals of the state. The general assembly is h olden at the former in May, and at the latter in October, an nually. The other cities are New London, Nor wich, and Middleton. Weathersfield, Windsor, Farmington, Litchfield. Milford, Stratford, Fairfield, Guilford, Stamford, Windham, Suffield, and 
Enfield, are all considerable and very pleasant towns. In no part of the world is the education of all ranks of people more attended to than in Connecticut. Almost every town in the state is divided into districts, and each district has a pub lic school kept in it a greater or less part of every year. Somewhat more than one-third of the moneys arising from a tax on the polls and rateable estate of the inhabitants is appropriated to the sup port of schools in the several towns, for the educa tion of children and youth. The law directs that a grammar-school shall be kept in every county town throughout the state. Yale college is an eminent seminary of learning, and was founded in the year 1700. See YALE College. Acade mics have been established at Greenfield, Plainfield, Norwich, \Vindliam, and Pornfret, some of which are flourishing. 
The constitution of Connecticut is founded on their charter, which was granted by Charles II. in 1662, and on a law of the state. Contented with this form of government, the people have not been disposed to run the hazard of framing a new consti tution since the declaration of independence. Agreeable to this charter, the supreme legislative authority of the state is vested in a governor, de puty-governor, twelve assistants, or counsellors, and the representatives of the people,, styled the general assembly. The governor, deputy-gover nor, and assistants, are annually chosen by the freemen in the month of May. The representa tives (their number not to exceed two from each town) are chosen by the freemen twice a-year, to attend the two annual sessions, on the second Tuesdays of May and October. The general as sembly is divided into two branches, called the up per and lower houses. The upper house is com posed of the governor, deputy-governor, and as sistants ; the lower house of the representatives of the people. No law can pass without the con currence of both houses. 
Connecticut has ever made rapid advances in population. There have been more emigrations from this than from any of the other states, and yet it is at present full of inhabitants. This in crease may be ascribed to several causes. The bulk of the inhabitants are industrious, sagacious husbandmen. Their farms furnish them with all the necessaries, most of the conveniences, and but few of the luxuries of life. They, of course, must be generally temperate, and if they choose, can subsist with as much independence as is consistent with happiness. The subsistence of the farmer is substantial, and does not depend on incidental circumstances, like that of most other professions. 
510 
|CONNECTICUT. 
There is no necessity of serving an apprentice ship to tbe business, nor of a large stock of money to commence it to advantage. Farmers who deal much in barter, have less need of money than any other class of people. The ease with which a comfortable subsistence is obtained, induces the husbandman to marry young. The cultivation of his farm makes him strong and healthful. He toils cheerfully through the day, eats the fruit of his own labour with a gladsome heart, at night de voutly thanks his bounteous God for his daily blessings, retires to rest, ami his sleep is sweet. Such circumstances as these have greatly contri buted to the amazing increase of inhabitants in this state. Besides, the people live under a free go vernment, and have no fear of a tyrant. There arc no overgrown estates, with rich and ambitious landlords, to have an undue and pernicious in fluence in the election of civil officers. Property is equally enough divided; and must continue to be so, as long as estates descend as they now do. No person is prohibited from voting. He who has the most merit, not he who has the most money, is generally chosen into public office. As instances of this, it is to be observed, that many of the citi zens of Connecticut, from the humble walks of life, have arisen to the first offices in the state, and filled them with dignity and reputation. That base business of electioneering, which is so di rectly calculated to introduce wicked and design ing men into office, is yet but little known in Con necticut. A man who wishes to be chosen into office, acts wisely, for that end, when he keeps his desires to himself. 
A thirst for learning prevails among all ranks of people in the state. More of the young men in Connecticut, in proportion to their numbers, re ceive a public education, than in any of the states. The revolution, which so essentially affected the government of most of the colonies, produced no very perceptible alteration in the government of Connecticut. While under the jurisdiction of Great Britain, they elected their own governors, and all subordinate civil officers, and made their own laws, in the same manner and with as little controul as they now do. Connecticut has ever been a re, ublic, and perhaps as perfect and as happy a republic as has ever existed. While other states, more monarchical in their governmen and manners, have been under a necessity of un dertaking the difficult task of altering their old, or forming new constitutions, and of changing their monarchical for republican manners, Connecticut has uninterruptedly proceeded in her old track, both as to government and manners ; and, by these 
means, has avoided those convulsions which have rent other states into violent parlies. 
The present territory of Connecticut, at the time of the first arrival of the English, was pos sessed by the Pequot, the Mohegan, Podunk, and many other smaller tribes of Indians. In 1774, there were of the descendants of the ancient natives only 1363 persons ; the greater part of whom lived at Mohegan, between Norwich and New London. From the natural decrease of the Indians, it is imagined that their number in this state do not now exceed 400. The first grant of Connec ticut was made by the Plymouth council to the Earl of Warwick, in 1630. The year following the earl assigned this grant to Lord Say and Seal, Lord Brook, and nine others. Some Indian traders settled at Windsor in 1633. The 
ame year, a little before the arrival of the English, a few Dutch traders settled at Hartford, and the remains of the settlement are still visible on the bank of Connec ticut river. In 1634, Lord Say and Seal, &c. sent over a small number of men, who built a fort at Saybrook, and made a treaty with the Pequot Indians for the lands on Connecticut river, Mr. Haynes and Mr. Hooker left Massachusetts bay in 1634, and settled at Hartford. The following year, Mr. Eaton and Mr. Davenport seated them selves at New Haven. In 1644, the Connecticut adventurers purchased of Mr. Fenwick, agent for Lord Say and Seal, and Lord Brook, their right to the colony, for J600/. Connecticut and New Haven continued two distinct governments for many years. At length, John Winthrop, Esq. who had been chosen governor of Connecticut, was employed to solicit a royal charter. In 1662, Charles II. granted a charter, constituting the two colonies for ever one body corporate and politic, by the name of " The Governor and Company of Connecticut." New Haven took the affair ill ; but in 1665, all difficulties were amicably adjusted ; and, as has been already observed, this charter still continues to be the basis of their government. The capital is Boston. 
|CONNECTICUT is the most considerable river in the e. part of the United States, and rises in the high lands which separate the states of Vermont and New Hampshire from Lower Canada. It has been surveyed about 25 miles beyond the 45 of latitude, to the head spring of its n, branch ; from which, to its mouth, is upwards of 300 miles, through a thick settled country, having upon its banks a great number of the most flourishing and plea-ant towns in the United States. It is fr.om 80 to 100 rods wide, 130 miles from its mouth. Its course between Vermont and New Hampshire 
|CONNECTICUT. 
511 
is generally*, s. w. as likewise through Massachu setts, and part of Connecticut, until it reaches the city of Middleton ; after which it runs a s. s. e. course to its mouth. The navigation of this beau tiful river, which, like the Nile, fertilizes the lands through which it runs, is much obstructed by falls ; two of these are between New Hampshire and Vermont, the first are called the Fifteen-mile falls ; here the river is rapid for 20 miles : the second remarkable fall is at Walpole, formerly called the Great falls, but now called Bellows falls. Above these the breadth of the river is in some places 22, in other places not above 16 rods ; the depth of the channel is about 25 feet, and com monly runs full of water. In September 1792, however, owing to the severe drought, the water of the river, it is said, " passed within the space of 12 feet wide, and 2| feet deep." A large rock divides the stream into two channels, each about 90 feet wide ; when the river is low, the e. channel is dry, being crossed by a solid rock ; and the \vhole stream falls into the w. channel, where it is contracted to the breadth of 16 feet, and flows with astonishing rapidity. There are several pitches, one above another, in the length of half a mile, the largest of which is that where the rock divides the stream. A bridge of timber was projected over this fall by Colonel Hale, in the year 1784, 365 feet long, and supported in the middle by the island rock, and under it the highest floods pass without doing any injury ; this is the only bridge on the river, but it is contemplated to erect another, 30 miles above, at the middle bar of Agar falls, where the passage for the water, between the rocks, is 100 feet wide ; this will connect the towns of Lebanon in New Hampshire, and Hartford in Vermont ; as the former bridge connects Walpole in New Hampshire with llockingham in Vermont. Not withstanding the velocity of the current at Bellows falls, above described, the salmon pass up the river, and are taken many miles above, but the shad proceed no farther. On the steep sides of the island rock, at the fall, hang several arm chairs, secured by a counterpoise ; in these the fishermen sit to catch salmon with fishing nets. In the course of the river, through Massachusetts, are the falls at Soutli Hadley, around which locks and canals were completed in 1795, by an enterprising com pany, incorporated for that purpose in 1792, by the legislature of Massachusetts. In Connecticut the river is obstructed by falls at Enfield, to ren der which navigable in boats, a company has been incorporated, and a sum of money raised by lot tery, but nothing effectual is yet done. The 
average descent of this river from Weathersfield in Vermont, 150 miles from its mouth, is two feet to a mile, according to the barometrical observations of J. Winthrop, Esq. made in 1786. The rivers or streams which fall into Connecticut river are numerous; such of them as are worthy of notice will be seen under their respective names. At its mouth is a bar of sand, which considerably ob structs the navigation ; it has 10 feet water on it, at full tides, and the depth is the same to Middleton, from which the bar is 36 miles distant. Above Middleton there are some shoals which have only six feet water at high tide, and here the tide ebbs and flows about, eight inches ; three miles above that city the river is contracted to about 40 rods in breadth, by two high mountains ; on almost every other part of the river the banks are low, and spread into fine extensive meadows. In the spring floods, which generally happen in May, these meadows are covered with water. At Hart ford, the water sometimes rises 20 feet above the common surface of the river, and the water hav ing no other outlet but the above mentioned strait, it is sometimes two or three weeks before it returns to its usual bed ; these floods add nothing to the depth of water on the bar at the mouth of the river, as the bar lies too far off in the sound to be affected by them. This river is navigable to Hartford city upwards of 50 miles from its mouth, and the produce of the country for 200 miles above it, is brought thither in boats. The boats which are used in this business are flat-bottomed, long, and narrow, and of so light a make as to be port able in carts : before the construction of locks and canals on this river, they were taken out at three different carrying places, all of which made 15 miles : it is expected that in a few years the ob structions will be all removed. Sturgeon, salmon, and shad, are caught in plenty in their season, from the mouth of the river upwards, excepting stur geon, which do not ascend the upper falls; be sides a variety- of small fish, such as pike, carp, perch, &c. There is yet a strong expectation of opening a communication between this river and the Merrimack, through Sugar river, which runs into the Connecticut at Claremont in New Hamp shire, and the Contoocook, which falls into the Merrimack at Boscawen. From this river were employed, in 1789, three brigs of 180 tons each, in the European trade ; and about 60 sail
 from 60 to 150 tons, in the VV. India trade, besides a few fishermen, and 40 or 50 coasting vessels. The number has considerably increased since. CONNECTICUT, a stream In Long island, Ner/ 
512 
|CON 
York, which falls into a bay at the*, side of the island. It lies two miles to thes. of Rockonkama pond. 
|CONNESTIGUCUNE, an establishment of the English, in the county of Albany, in then, part and to the e. of Chenectady, or of the river Mo hawk, A\here it gives a fall from above 70 feet in height. See ALBANY. 
|CONNETABLE, or COVDESTABLE, a small island of the county of Cayenne, belonging to the French, between the city of Cayenne and cape Orange. 
Co. \NETATJLE, another small island of the same province, with the addition of Petite, to distin guish it. from the former. 
|CONOCOTO, a settlement of the kingdom of Quito, in the correginritnto of the district of the Cinco Leguasdc la Ciudad, in the district of which is a rising ground called Yllalo, and upon the skirts of this are many warm-water mineral streams, much frequented as baths for the curing of in firmities. 
|CONOMA, a lake of the province and country of the Amazonas, in the Portuguese possessions. It is formed from some waste water of the river Madera, very near its shore, and at a small distance from the river of Las Amazonas. 
|CONOME, Cape of, a point of land of the coast of Nova Scotia, in the bay of Fundy, and in the "most interior part of the same. 
|CONORIBO, a river of the province and cap
ainship of Seara in Brazil. It rises near the coast, 
runs n. and enters that of La Concepcion or S. 
Francisco, and that of La Cruz, and then enters 
the sea. 
COiNOSTEE, a settlement of Indians of N. Carolina ; situate on the shore of the river Euphasee. 
|CONSAHATCHEE, a river of the province and colony of Georgia. It runs 5. e. and enters the sea. 
|CONSATA, a settlement of the missions which were held by the religious order of St. Augustin, in the country of Paititi, of the province and cor regimiento of Larecaja in Peru. 
|CONSETS, Point of, on the e. coast of the island of Barbadoes, on the side of the point of Bele. 
|CONSOLACION, NUEST R A SENOR A DE, a settlement of the government of Neiba in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; annexed to the curacy of the town of La Purificacion. It is situate on the shore of the river Pardo, is of a hot temperature, abounding in the vegetable productions of a similar 
|CON 
climate, and in troublesome and venomous in sects. It contains more than 200 house-keepers. 
|CONSOLACION, a point or long strip of land called Possession, on the n. coast of the straits of Magellan; one of those which form Possession, bay, and where are to be seen the ruins of the fort named Jesus, which was founded by the Admiral Pedro de Sarmiento. 
|CONSTANCE, or CONSTANCIA, a small city of the English, in the island of Barbadoes. 
|CONSTANTINO PEREZ, an island of the river Valdivia, in the kingdom of Chile, opposite the same city, with two other small islands, the one before, the other behind it, and which, together, form the celebrated port of this name. The pas sage on both sides is navigable, but the channel on the s. side being the most wide, is the course uni formly taken by large ships and vessels, and in the same manner the n. channel is mostly, as it is narrower, entered by frigates and small craft. 
|CONTAS, Rio DAS, a river in the province and captainship of Ylheos in Brazil. It rises near the coast, runs e. and enters the sea in the Barra or Bar of Camarau, in the river of Ylheos. 
|CONTAS, a town of the above province and kingdom. 
|CONTINENTAL Village was situated on North river, in New York state. Before its de struction by Sir Henry Clinton, in October 1777, there were here barracks for 2000 men. 
|CONTOOK, a settlement of the English, in the province of Hampshire, one of the four of New England ; situate on the shore of the river Pennycook. 
|CONTOOK, a river of the above province. It rises from a small lake, runs s. then turns e. and enters the Pennycook. 
|CONTOY, an island of the N. sea, near the coast of the province and government of Yucatan, close to the cape Cotoche. 
|CONTRE-PASTURAGE, a river of the pro vince and colony of Virginia. It runs n. e. and enters the head of the river James. 
|CONTRERAS, a small island of the S. sea, close to the coast of the province and government of Veragua in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. 
|CONTUMAZA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Caxamarca in Peru. 
|CONIJCO, a settlement of the province and cor regimiento of Ytata in the kingdom of Chile ; situate near the coast, opposite the island of Quinquina. 
CO NUENTOS, a settlement of the province and captainship of Rey in Brazil, at the source of the river Curitaba. 
coo 
|CONUENTOS, another settlement in the province nnd corregimiento of Chilian in the kingdom of Chile. 
|CONUENTILLO, a settlement of the province and government of Tucurnan, in the district of the capital ; situate to the s. of the same. 
|CONVERSATION Point, a headland on the s. side of a bay on the coast of California. Lat. 3230 H. Long. 119o&gt;. 
|CONWAY, a township in the province of New Brunswick, Sudbury county, on the a?, bank of St. John s river. It has the bayofFundyon the s. and at the westernmost point of the township there is a pretty good harbour, called Musquash cove. 
|CONWAY, a township in the n. e. corner of Strafford county, New Hampshire, on a bend in Saco river, incorporated in J765, and contains 574 inhabitants. It was called Pigwacket by the Indians. 
|CONWAY, a thriving township in Hampshire county, Massachusetts, incorporated in 1767, and contains 2092 inhabitants. It lies 13 miles n. w. of Northampton, and 115 n.\za. by w. of Boston. 
|CONYA, a river in Surinam, or Dutch Guinea, S. America. 
|COOK S River, in the n. w. coast of N. Ame rica, lies n. w. of Prince William s sound, and 1000 miles n. w. of Nootka sound. It promises to vie with the most considerable ones already known. It was traced by Captain Cook for 210 miles from the mouth, as high as lat. 61 30 n. and so far as is discovered, opens a very considerable inland navigation by its various branches ; the inhabi tants seemed to be of the same race with those of Prince William s sound, and like them had glass beads and knives, and were also clothed in fine furs. 
|COOKHOUSE, on the Cooquago branch of Delaware river, is situated in the township of Col chester, New York, 18 miles s. of the mouth of Unadilla river. 
|COOLOOME, an Indian town situated on the w. side of Tallapoose river, a branch of the Mo bile.;! 
CO ONI, a settlement of the province and cor* regimiento of Cicasica in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Mecapaca. 
|COOPER, a river of the province and colony of Georgia. It runs s. e. then s. and enters the sea. 
|COOPER S Island, one of the Lesser Virgin isles in the W. Indies, situated s. w. of Ginger island, and uninhabited. It is five miles long, and one broad. 
|YOL. I. 
|COO 
513 
, a large and navigable river which mingles its waters with Ashley river, below Charles ton city in S. Carolina. These form a spacious and convenient harbour, which communicates witli the ocean, just below Sullivan s island, which it leaves on the n. seven miles s. e. of the city. In these rivers the tide rises 6{ feet. Cooper river is a mile wide at the ferry, nine miles above Charles, town. 
|COOPER S Town, a post-town and township in Otsego county, New 1 ork, and is the compact part of the township of Otsego, and the chief town of the country round lake Otsego. It is pleasant ly situated at the s. w. end of the lake, on its banks, and those of its outlet ; 12 miles n. w. of Cherry valley, and 73 w. of Albany. Here are a court house, gaol, and academy. In 1791 it contained 292 inhabitants. In 1789 it had but three houses only ; and in the spring 1795, 50 houses had been erected, ofwhich above a fourth part were respect able two-story dwelling-houses, with every pro portionable improvement, on a plan regularly laid out in squares. Lat. 42 56 n. Long. 74 58 a&gt;. 
|COOPER S Town, Pennsylvania, is situated on the Susquehannah river. This place in 1785 was a wilderness ; nine years after it contained 1800 in habitants, a large and handsome church, with a steeple, a market-house and a bettering house, a library of 1200 volumes, and an academy of 64 scholars. Four hundred and seventy pipes were laid under ground, for the purpose of bringing water from West mountain, and conducting it to every house in town. 
|COOP S Town,inHarford county, Maryland, lies 12 miles n. w. of Harford, and 22 n. e. of Bal timore, measuring in a straight line. 
|COOS, or COHOS. The country called Upper and Lower Coos lies on Connecticut river, be tween 20 and 40 miles above Dartmouth college. Upper Coos is the country s. of Upper Amonoosuck river, on John and Israel rivers. Lower Coos lies below the town of Haverhill, s. of the Lower Amonoosuck. The distance from Upper Coos, to the tide in Kennebeck river, was measured in 1793, and was found to be but 90 miles. 
|COOSADES, an Indian town on Alabama river, about 60 miles above its mouth, on Mobile river, below M 4 Gillivray s town, and opposite the mouth of the Oakfuskee. 
|COOSA HATCHEE, or COOSAW, a river of S. Carolina, which rises in Orangeburg district, and runninga s. s. w. course, empties into Broad river and Whale branch, which separate Beaufort island from the mainland. 
|COOSA, or COOSA HATCHA, a river which 3 u 
514 
|COP 
rises in the high hnds of the Cherokecs country, and joining Tallnpoose, forms Alabama river. Its course is generally s. running through the country of the Natchez, and oilier tribes of the Upper Creeks, the roughest and most broken of the whole nation. Jt is rapid, and full of rocks and shoals, hardly navigable for canoes. 
|COOSAWATCHIE, or COOSAHATCHIE, a post-town in Beaufort district, S. Carolina ; situ ated on the s. w. side of Coosa river, over which a bridge has been lately erected. It is a flourishing place, having about 40 houses, a court-house, and gaol. The courts formerly held at Beaufort are held here. It is 33 miles from Beaufort, and 77 w. s. w. of Charleston. 
|COOTSTOWN, in Berks county, Pennsyl vania, is situated on a branch of Sauhoca creek, a branch of the Schuylkill river. It contains 40 houses, and a German, Lutheran, and Calvinist church united. It is 17 miles n. n. e. of Reading, and 73 n. w. by n. of Philadelphia. 
|COPA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Larecaja in Peru ; annexed to the cu racy of Ambana. 
|COPA, another settlement, in the province and corregimiento of Caxatambo in the same kingdom ; annexed to the curacy of Mangas. 
|COPA, a large and copious river of the kingdom of Quito, which runs n. e. enters the Cipre to the n. and the Quinindi to the s. ; then joins the Blanco on the w. side, a little before this unites it self with the Guaillabamba, and forms the Esmeraldas. Its mouth or entrance is in lat. 26 n. 
|COPACAUANA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento ofOmasuyos in Peru; situate on a Ions: strip of land which runs into the great lake of Titicaca or Chucuito. Here is venerated an image of Nuestra Senora de la Carfdelaria, which, in 1583, was put into a temple, very sump tuous, and of fine architecture, riches, and orna ments. The same is a sanctuary of the greatest devotion, and most resorted to of any in Peru. 
|COPACAUANA, another settlement, in the pro vince and corregimiento of Paria in the same kingdom. 
|COPATAUANA, another, of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of the Jesuits, in the province of Gayra, and govern ment of Paraguay ; situate on the shore of a small river which enters the Parana, and on the skirt of a mountain to the s. e. of the city of Gayra, which was destroyed by the Portuguese of San Pablo. 
|COPACAUANA, a point or long strip of land of tke lake Titicaca, which serves as a limit to the 
|COP 
province of Umamarca, in the province of Umasuyos. 
|COPAMALA, a settlement of the province and alcaldia mayor of Los Zoques in the kingdom of Guatemala. 
|COPAIQUE, a setlement of the province and corregimiento of Larecaja in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Ambana. 
|COPALA, a province of the alcaldia mayor of Nueva Espana ; bounded n. w. by that of Chiametla or Chametlan. It is a mountainous coun try, abounding in wax, honey, and some sugar cane, from which sugar is made in various mills. Its population of Indians is but small, and these for the most part occupy themselves in fishing ; an employment which is readily afforded them by the copious river Mazatan. It is of a very hot temperature, and has many silver mines, which are worked to tolerable advantage. Some salines also on the sea-shore are not less lucrative ; and here there is a small port. This province has been frequently invaded by enemies. .Near the river Piastla, which also waters this province, the re gulars of the company of Jesuits held some mis sions, where there had been formed three settle ments of Indians, reduced to the Catholic faith. The capital is the town called Del Rosario, and the other settlements are, 
Mazatan, Charcas, the same, 
Copala, real of the Cosela, the same, mines, San Xavier de Cavasan. 
|COPALA, with the dedicatory title of San Juan, a settlement and head settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Tepozcolula in Nueva Espana. It is of a hot temperature, pleasant, and abounding in fruits. It contains 104 families of Indians,, and is 15 leagues w. by s. of its capital. 
|COPALA, another settlement in the head settle ment of Tuzcacuesco, and alcaldia mayor of Amola, in the same kingdom. It contains 32 fa milies of Indians, and is five leagues to the n. of its head settlement. 
|COPALA, another settlement and real of the silver mines .of the province and alcaldia mayor of its name ; situate to the n. of the capital. 
|COPALLEN, an ancient province of the Indians, to the 5. of the city of Jaen de Bracamoros in the kingdom of Quito. As yet its limits are not known ; but it is full of woods, uncultivated, and uninhabited. 
|COPALLIN, a settlement of the province and government of Jaen de Bracamoros in the king dom of Quito. 
|COPAN, SANTA MARIA DE, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Cordova in Nueva Espana ; 
|COP 
of a hot and moist temperature, and inhabited by 107 families of Indians; being 15 leagues n.e. of its capital. 
|COPAN, a river of the province and government ofCumana. It rises in l\\e serrania of Imataca, runs s. and enters the Cuyuni on the n. side. 
|COPANDARO, SANTIAGO DE, a settlement of the head settlement of Tuzantla, and alcaldla mayor of Maravatio, in Nueva Espana. It contains 34 families of Indians, and is JO leagues to the s. of its head settlement. In it is a convent of the reli gious order of St. Augustin, which is one of the best convents in the kingdom. 
|COPENAME, a river of the province and go vernment of Guayana, in the Dutch possessions or colony of Surinam. It runs n. and unites itself with the Sarameca at its mouth, to form another mouth, and enter into the sea. 
|COPER, a small settlement of theNuevo Reyno de Granada, in the road which leads from Santa Fe to Muzo ; situate upon an height, near the mountain Apari, where, upon the descent which is called Cuesta de Macanazos, and at its skirt, runs the river Villamisar. Near it has been found a mine of earth, esteemed an excellent antidote against poisons. 
|COPERE, a settlement of the province and ju risdiction of Muzo, in the corregimiento of Tunja, of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of a be nign temperature, produces maize, cotton, yucas t plantains, and the other fruits of its climate. In the territory of this curacy rises the river called Villamisar, memorable for the battle fought there by the Indians and Captain Luis Lanchero, in which the former were routed. It contains 150 housekeepers, and 30 Indians. 
|COPIA, one of the ancient provinces which were formed by that of Popayan in the time of the Indians ; and bounded by the province of Cartama. At present its limits are not known, since the Spaniards have changed botli the divisions and names. 
|COPIAPO, a province and corregimiento of the kingdom of Chile ; bounded n. by the province of Atacama, of the archbishopric of Charcas, and kingdom of Peru ; e. by the territory of the city of Rioja, of the province of Tucuman, the cordillera running between ; s. by the province of Coquimbo, and w. by the Pacific ocean. Its extent is 60 leagues n. s. and from 20 to three e. w. It very sel dom rains here ; cattle is therefore scarce, although it nevertheless produces every sort of grain, of ex cellent quality, and fruits of various kinds. The temperature is very benign throughout the year. 
|COP 
515 
It lias many mines of copper, most pure and rich sulphur, loadstone, lapis lazuli, and gold ; some of which are worked ; and it is not many years ago that some silver mines also were discovered. It produces a kind of small trees, which are planted and cultivated upon the banks of the streams and aqueducts, called pcixaro bobo, and which distil a liquor, which, being prepared over the fire, s -rves instead of pitch for lining the vessels in which the wine in that kingdom is kept. The conger eel abounds upon the coast, and there is a particular tribe of Indians, called Changes, who are devoted to this kind of fishery, living the whole year upon the coasts, and carrying about their wives and chil dren upon rafts, until they find out a creek likely to afford them what they are in search of: these fish are then bought by the natives, and earned to be sold at the capital of the kingdom, Santiago. Here is also a trade of sulphur, since it is so fine that it needs never to be purified, and is conse quently worth three dollars the cantaro [a can faro is about four gallons. It abounds no less in nitre, on which account all the waters here are brackish, and there is little indeed that is sweet. This pro vince is very thinly peopled, since it has no cither population than such as is found in the capital, which is called San Francisco de la Selva. Its in habitants, which should amount to 5000, of all sexes and ages, are dispersed about in country farms. [The province of Copiapo owes its name, according to the Indian tradition, to the great quantity of turquoises found in its mountains. Though these stones ought, with propriety, to be classed amongst the concretions, as they are only the petrified teeth or bones of animals, coloured by metallic vapours, we may place them amongst the precious stones. The turquoises of Copiapo are usually of a greenish blue ; some, however, are found of a deep blue, which are very hard, and known by the name of the turquoises of the old rock. The amazing fertility of the soil of this province has given rise to assertions, which, on the first brush, might appear fabulous. Mr. Sanson, of Abbeville, in his Geography, asserts that its valleys frequently yield 300 for one. See CHILE. 
|COPIAPO, a port of the above province and corrcgimicnlo. 
|COPIAPO, a settlement of the same. 
|COPIAPO, a mountain, in which there is a vol cano, which at different times has occasioned much mischief, and is in lat. 26. [This moun tain consists entirely of a marble, striped with bands of various colours, which have a very beau3 u 2 
tifal appearance. A mountain similar to this is found in the marshes of Maule.J 
|COPIAPO, a river which rises in the cordillera. It runs two leagues to the w. passes near the settle ment of its name, and empties itself into the S. sea, serving as a port for vessels. 
|COPIAPO, a mountain, called Morro de Copiapo, in the coast, at the side of the port of its name. 
|COPILA, a small settlement or ward of the alcaldia mayor of Guachinango in Nueva Espana ; annexed to the curacy of Naupan. 
|COPORAQUE, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Canes and Candies or Tinta in Peru. 
|COPORAQUE, another, in the province and corregimiento of Collahuas of the same kingdom. 
|COPORAQUE, another. Sfee VILCOMAYO. 
|COPPER Mine, a large river of New Britain, reckoned to be the most/2, in N. America. Taking a n. course, it falls into the sea in lat. 72 n. and about long. 119
. from Greenwich. The ac counts brought by the Indians of this river to the British ports in Hudson bay, and the specimens of copper produced by them, induced Mr. Hearne to set out from fort Prince of Wales, in December 1770, on a journey of discovery. He reached the river on the 14th July, at 40 miles distance from the sea, and found it all the way encumbered with shoals and falls, and emptying itself into it over a dry flat of the shore, the tide being then out, which seemed by the edges of the ice to rise about 12 or 14 feet. This rise, on account of the falls, will carry it but a very small way within the river s mouth ; so that the water in it has not the least brackish taste. Mr. Hearne had the most exten sive view of the sea, which bore n. zs). by w. and . e. when he was about eight miles up the river. The sea at the river s mouth was full -of islands and shoals ; but the ice was only thawed away about three-fourths of a mile from the shore, on the 17th of July. The Esquimaux had a quantity of whale-bone and seal-skins at their tents on the shore. 
|COPT A, a settlement of the province and corvegimiento of Arica in Peru. 
|COPTOS, silver mines of the province and corrcgimiento of Guamachuco in Peru ; they are most abundant, and have yielded immense wealth. 
|COPUENO, a settlement of the province and government of Quixos and Macas in the kingdom of Quito. 
|COQUEROSO, a settlement of the province and captainship of Sergipe in Brazil ; situate on the shore of the river Cirti. 
|COQUE-UIELLE, a shoal of the n. coast of the island of St. Domingo, in the French posses sions, between the point Roche-a-Picoler and the river Grande. 
|COQUIBACOA, CABO DE, a point of land which runs into the sea, on the coast of the pro vince and government of Venezuela, distinct from that of Chichibacoa. 
|COQUIMI3O, a province and corregimiento of the kingdom of Chile ; bounded e. by the pro vince of Tucuman, of the kingdom of Peru, the cordillera running between ; s
by the province of Quillota; and w. by the Pacific ocean. It is 80 leagues in length n. s. and 40 in width e. w. Its temperature is very benign ; and on account of its not raining much in the sierra, through the low situation of this part of the province, the snow and frost is not so common here, nor does it stay upon the ground so long as it does upon the parts which lie s. of Santiago. For the same reason the rivers are few, and the largest of them are those of Los Santos or Limari, and that which passes through its capital. Many huanucos and vicunas breed here. The territory is tor the most part broken and uneven, and produces, although not in abundance, the same fruits as in the whole kingdom, such as grain, wine, and oil of excel lent quality. It has many gold mines, likewise some of silver, copper, lead, sulphur, white lime, and salt ; but the most abundant of all are those of copper ; large quantities of this metal having been sent to Spain for founding artillery, and indeed from the same source has been made all the artillery in this kingdom. This metal is found of two sorts, one which is called campanal, and is only fit for founding, and the other, which has a mixture of geld, and is called delubrar, or working metal, and which is known only in this province. Here also they make large quantities of rigging for ships. Its inhabitants may amount to 15,000. [In this province is found the quisco tree, with thorns of eight inches long ; the same being used by the na tives for knitting needles. It is noted for produc ing the best oysters, and for a resin which is yielded from the herb chilca. See CHILE. The capital bears the same name, or that of La Serena. This was the second settlement of the kingdom, and founded by the order of Pedro de Valdivia, by Captain Juan Bohon, in 1543, in the valley of Cuquimpi, which gave it its name, and which, being corrupted, is now called Coquimbo, and El Segundo de la Serena, in memory of the country of Valdivia in Estremadura. It lies at a quartet of a league s distance from the sea, and is situate 
|COR 
upon the loftiest part of that most beautiful llanura, from which the prospect is so enchanting ; shew ing on one side the sea, on another the river which waters the precincts, and on another some shady poplar groves. It is of an extremely benign tem perature, and enjoying throughout the year a per petual spring, being neitlrer incommoded by heat nor cold. It is extremely fertile, and abounds in whatever can conduce to the comfort and conve nience of life. The city is tolerably large ; all the streets arc drawn at straight lines ; and the houses are disjoined from each other by large gardens, which are all well supplied with water brought by aqueducts from the river. The parish church is very beautiful, and not less so are those of the re ligious orders of St. Francis, St. Domingo, St. Augustin, La Merced, San Juan de Dios, and the college which formerly belonged to the regulars of the company of the Jesuits. It has a port, which is convenient and much frequented by ves sels ; upon the shore of which are caught tunnies, abacoras, and various other kinds of fish ; also many delicate kinds of shell-fish. At a small dis tance is a very abundant copper mine, from which much metal is extracted and carried to Europe ; and it is of this, as well as of its excellent breed of horses, its wine, oil, tallow, cow-hides, and dried meats, that its commerce is composed ; send ing, as it does yearly, four or five vessels loaded with these effects to Lima. Although it has mines of the purest gold, yet these are but little worked. The whole of the town is covered with beautiful myrtles, and of these there is a delightful grove. It was destroyed by the Araucanos Indians in 1547 ; and in 1579 it was attempted to be taken by Francis Drake, who was repulsed by the inhabi tants. In 1680 it seemed to be rebuilt only that it might undergo a sacking the same year by the English pirate, Bartholomew Sharps. Its popula tion consists of 500 families of Spaniards and people of colour, and some Indians. Fifteen leagues from the city of Concepcion, and 58 from the capital of the kingdom, Santiago. Lat. 30 s. Long. 71 18 . [See CHILE. 
|COQUIMUO, an island of the coast of this pro vince and ccrregimiento. 
|COQUIN, a settlement of the province and government of Tarma in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Cayna. 
|COQUINOCA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Chichas and Tarija in Peru. 
|CORAI, SANTA CI-AUA BE COSME, a settle ment of the province and corregimienlo of Huanta in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Paucaibamba. 
|COR 
517 
|CORAJAIS, a settlement and village of the Portuguese in the province and country of Las Amazonas ; situate on the shore of the rfver Negro. 
|CORAL, a settlement of the province and cap tainship of Hey in Brazil; situate on the sea-coast, at the mouth of the river Imbau. 
|CORAL River, in New Mexico, runs a course a?, by s. and empties into the head of thegulf of California, close by the mouth of Colo rado river. 
|CORAM, a post-town in Suffolk county, Long island, New York. It has about GO houses, and lies 62 miles e. of New York city, and 10 from Srnithtown. 1 
|CORANI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Carabaya in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Ayapata. 
|CORAS, SANTIAGO DE LOS, a settlement of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of Jesuits in California ; situate at an equal distance from both coasts. It is composed of Indians of the nation of its name, and is the place where the Father Lorenzo Carranza, a mis sionary, suffered martyrdom. 
|CORAS, some shonh-, lying very little undtr water, near the coast of the province and captain ship of Mara nan in Brazil, at the mouth of a river which is also thus called. 
|CORAZON DE JESUS, a settlement of the corregimiento and jurisdiction of Velez in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. Its population is small, and it is situate in a country mountainous and full of pools, being scanty in vegetable pro ductions, with 200 inhabitants, a miserable race. It is near the settlement of Chiquinquira ; and to the s. of Velez. 
|CORAZON, another, called De Maria, of the mis sions which were held by theregnlars ofthecompany of J esuits, in the province and government of Maynas, of the kingdom of Quito ; situate on the shore of the river Aguarico. 
|CORAZON, another, called De Jesus, in the pro vince and government of the Chiquitos Indians in Peru ; situate at the foot of the Cordillera of San Fernando, a reduction of the missions which were held there by the regulars of the company. 
|COKAZOX, another, of the kingdom of Quito, in the corregimiento of the district of Las Cinco Leguas de esta Cindad (the Five Leagues from this City), and in the road which leads down from Guayaquil. 
|CORAZON, a mountain of the kingdom of Quito, on the s. s. e. part, from the which on the w. flow down the rivers of San Lorenzo and Yamboya, 
518 
|COR 
running to unite themselves with that of Toaclii. It is to the . of the paramo of Elenisa, and is sometimes covered with snow. 
|CORCA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Chilques and Masques in Peru ; an nexed to the curacy of Huanoquite. 
|CORCAS, or GRAND CORCAS, an island almost in the form of a crescent, . of St. Do mingo, in the windward passage, about seven leagues w. of Turk s island, and about 20 e. of Little Inagua or Heneagua. Lat. 21 45 n. Long. 713d a&gt;. 
|CORCHUE, a settlement of Indians of the pro vince and government of Valdivia in the kingdom of Chile. 
|CORCOLA, a settlement of the Portuguese, in the territory of the Guayazas Indians, of the king dom of Brazil ; situate at the source and on the shore of the river Tocantines. 
|CORCOUADO, a settlement of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of Jesuits in the province and government of Los Llanos, of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, and which is at present under the charge of the reli gious order of St. Francis. 
|CORCOUADO, a rock or island of the S. sea, op posite the port of Santa, of the province and corregimiento of this name in Peru. 
|CORCULLA, a settlement of the province and corregimfento of Parinacochas in Peru. 
|CORDES. See VERDE. 
|CORDILLERA. See ANDES. 
|CORDILLIERS, MONTAGNE DES, a mountain of the island of Cayenne, on the skirts of which the French have a fort and establishment for its defence. 
|CORDON, PUNTA DEL, a point of the coast of the w. head of the island of St. Domingo, on the shore of the port Pimiento. 
|CORDOVA, a province and akaldia mayor of Nueva Espana; bounded w. by the province of Orizava ; n. by that of San Juan de los Llanos ; e. by that of the ancient Vera Cruz ; and s. by the rugged mountains of Songolica. It has on the s. e. and 5.5. e. the great estate of Mataanona, 10 leagues from Taliscona, the last boundary of Vera Cruz. It is of a hot and moist temperature ; the greater part of its district is composed of broken and uneven grounds, and mountains covered with cedars, walnuts, pines, and ocotales. It has also beautiful and fertile plains, abounds in birds and animals of the chase, and no less in fish, many trout and bobos being caught out of the rivers by which this province is irrigated. In the spacious plain of Altotonga runs a rapid river, by which it is 
|COR 
fertilized, and rendered abundant in every kind of vegetable production. Here also breed many flocks of cattle, which are the chief commerce of the place. The capital bears the same name. 
This was founded in 1618, by order of the vice roy Don Diego Fernandez de Cordova, Marquis of Guadalcazar, who gave it his name. It is of a hot and moist tempera! ure; situate to the w. of some small mountains, which form an half-circle, and are surrounded by many umbrageous trees. The parish church is magnificent, of exquisite architecture, and rich ornaments. Here is a con vent of the religious Descalzos (barefooted order) of St. Francis, and one of St. Hippolyte dela Caridad, in which there is an hospital for the sick Spaniards, and for the black slaves, endowed by the masters and proprietors of certain mills, in which an infinite quantity of sugar is made. It abounds in this article, with those of tobacco, China oranges, ajonjoU, large cattle, and swine ; as also other fruits and articles of merchandize peculiar to Europe and the kingdom itself. [Huntboldt asserts that the environs of Cordova and Orizaba produce all the tobacco consumed in New Spain. Its population consists of 260 families of Spaniards, 126 of Mustees, 70 of Mulattoes and Negroes, and 273 of Mexican Indians ; of many others also who are of various classes, and who work in the sugar-mills. Forty-eight leagues to the e.n. e. of Mexico, in Int. 18 50 ; long. 96 56 . The other settlements of this jurisdiction are, Santa Ana de Zacan, San Diego, Chocaman, San Bartolome, 
Yxhuatlan, Totutla, 
Coscomatepec, Copan, 
Sta. Maria Magdalena, Zentla, Calcahualco, San Diego Huatuzco, 
S. Antonio Huatuzco, San Juan de la Punta, Amatlan de los Reyes, San Lorenzo. 
|CORDOV A, another city, the capital of the province and government of Tucuman in Peru ; founded by the governor of that province, Geronimo Cabrera, in 1573, and not by Juan Nunezde Prado, in 1549, according to the erroneous account of the ExJesuit Coleti. It was in the territory of the Comichingones Indians, and part which they called Kiskisacate, on the shore of the river Pucara ; but removed from thence to the .9. part of the same river ; the parish being dedicated to Nuestra Senora de la Pena of France, and being under the obligation of celebrating its festival on the day of the conception, when it was also usual to display the spectacle of a bull-fight. It is situate in a narrow bay, close to which is a lofty mountain. It is much exposed to inundations in the rainy 
|COR 
seasons, and is flooded by waters rushing down through a neighbouring channel, and in fact would be hereby rendered uninhabitable, but for the mounds which have been raised for its defence. One half of the city experiences in one day a va riation of all the winds from n. to s. These winds, thus changing, are accompanied with great tem pests of thunder and lightning . At one moment the heat which accompanies the n. wind is ex cessive, and at another the cold which accompanies the s. is intolerable. It is, indeed, to this cause that the number of sudden deaths which occur bere are attributed. The city is small, and nearly of a square figure, but the buildings are superior to any in the province. It has three convents; those of the religious order of St. Francis, St. Do mingo, and La Merced, an hospi nl of Hetiilcmites, with the dedicatory title of SHU lloque ; two mo nasteries of nuns, the one of Santa Teresa, the other of Santa Clara, and two coll"ges with the titles of universities. It is the head of a bishopric, erected in 1570, and is very rich, owing to the great com merce which it carries on in mules bought in the province of Buenos Ayres, and fattened in the pastures here, for the purpose of being sold for the supply of the other provinces, and in fact of the whole of Peru. It abounds in all kinds of pro ductions, and is 70 leagues from Santiago del Estero, to the s. in 62 39 ; long. 31 20 s. lat. [For an account of the late revolutions of this place, see LA PLATA. 
|COKUOVA, another city, in the province and government of Cumana, founded by Gonzalo de Ocampo in J525, near the sea-coast. It is so re* duced and poor, that it does not deserve the name of a city. It is bounded by the Caribes Indians. 
Co u no VA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Castro Vireyna in Peru. 
|CORDOVA, another, of the province and goyernment of Santa Marta in the kingdom of Ticrra Firme, situate upon the coast. It was sacked by the English pintte Gauson in 1625. 
|CORDOVES, Rio DEL, a river of the province and government of Buenos Ayres. It runs w. and enters the Yazigua close to the pass of Chileno. 
|CORE, Bank of, an isle of the N. Sea, near the coast of S. Carolina, between those of Ocacook and Drum. 
CoitE Sound, on the coast of N. Carolina, lies s. of, and communicates with Pamlico. 
|COREBO, a river of the province and govern ment of Choco. It rises in the valley of Tatave, at the foot of the mountains of Choco, and enters the Paganagandi. 
|CQRENA, a port on the coast of the province 
|COR 
519 
and captainship of the Rio Janeiro in Brazil, close to the island of Santa Maria. 
|CORENTE, a river of the kingdom of Brazil. It rises in the head of that of the Paraguas and the Verde, runs s. s. e. and enters the above river at mid-course. 
|CORENTIN, a river of the province and co lony of Surinam, or part of Guayana in the Dutch possessions, according to the last advices of the Father Bernardo Rosella of the extinguished so ciety, which advices were received from the Dutch, and served, in 1745, tothe making the map of this province and the Orinoco. It rises in the n. part of the famed lake Parime, which some have thought to exist merely in fable. It runs s. wa tering the Dutch colonies ; and five leagues to the a?. of Berbice, and to the s. c. of the Orinoco, empties itself into the sea, in 5 22 n. lat. : at its entrance it is one league wide. The English call it Devil s creek, which signifies Barranco del Diablo. In the interior of its course it has some sand-banks, which extend ibr three leagues, and render its na vigation difficult,- notwithstanding that at the low tide there are still some channels of water. In this river are likewise three small well cultivated islands, lying in a direction from n. to s. They are very fertile, and covered with trees, and the soundings of the river about them varies from five to six fathoms. 
|CORETIQUI, a settlement of the province and corrfgimiento of Caxaaiarquilla in Peru. 
|CORIANA. See Coro. 
|CORIDON, SALINAS DE, salt grounds in the point and w. head of the island of St. Domingo, on the shore of the port Pimiento. 
|CORIMPO, a settlement of the province of Cinaloa in Nueva Espana ; situate on the shore of the river Mayo, between the settlements of Hecojoa and Nabajoa. 
|CORINIH, a township in Orange county, Vermont, w. of Bradford, containing 578 inha bitants. 
|CORIO, a settlement of the province and cap tainship of San Vincente in Brazil, on the shore and at the source of the river Uruguay. 
|CORIPATA, a settlement of the province and government of Canta in Peru ; annexed to the cu racy of Atabillos Altos. 
|CORIPI, a river of the province and govern ment of Guayana, in the French possessions. It enters the sea between the Oiapoco and cape Orange. 
|CORIS, a settlement of the province and cor regimiento of Huailas in Peru, annexed to the cu racy of Aija. 
520 
|CORIXAS, a river of the kingdom of Brazil. It rises in the sierra Bermeja, runs n. forming a curve, and enters the Tocantines near that of Los Monges, according to the account given by the Portuguese. 
|CORIXAS, some sierras of the same kingdom, which run 5. s. e, and are a continuation of the sierra Bermeja ; they then run e. forming a curve, as far as the river Tocantines, and ex tend their course on as far as the shore of the Araguaya. 
|CORK, a large bay in the e. coast of the island of Newfoundland, between the cape Gull and the island Tuliquet. 
|CORK AM, a fort of the English, in the pro vince and colony of Connecticut, one of the four which compose New England ; situate near the coast. 
|CORMA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Quispicanchi in Peru; annexed to the curacy of Papres. 
|CORMO, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Canta in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Atabillos Altos. 
|CORNE, an island of the N. sea, near the coast of Florida, between the islands Vaisseaux and Massacre. 
|CORNEJO, an island of the S. sea, near the coast of the province and corregimientd of Arequipa, opposite the port of Arantae. 
|CORNISH, a township in Cheshire county, New Hampshire, on the e. bank of Connecticut river, between Claremont and Plainfield, about 15 miles n. of Charlestown, and 16 s. of Dartmouth college. It was incorporated in 1763. In 1775 it contained 309, and in 1790, 982 in habitants. 
|CORNWALL, atownship in Addison county, Vermont, e. of Bridport, on lake Champlain, con taining 826 inhabitants. 
|CORNWALL, Ncwa township in Orange coun ty, New York, of whose inhabitants 350 are electors. 
|CORNWALL, a township in Litch field county, Connecticut, about nine miles n. of Litchfield, 11 s. of Salisbury, and about 40 ?. by n. of Hartford city. 
|CORNWALL, asmalltown in Upper Canada, on the bank of Iroquois river, near lake St. Francis, between Kingston and Quebec, containing a small church, and about 30 or 40 houses. 
|CORNWALLIS, a town in King s county, in the province of New Brunswick, situated on the s. w. side of the basin of Minas ; 18 miles n. w. of Falraouth, and 55 n. w. of Annapolis. 
C O 11 
OoriNWALLis, also a river in the same pro vince, navigable for vessels of 100 tons five miles; for vessels of 50 tons, !0 miles. 
|COIIO, SANTA ANADE, a city of the province and government of Venezuela, thus named in the time of the Indians, after the district called Coriana. It was founded by Juan de Ampues in 1529. The Weltzers, under the orders of Nicholas Federman, were the first who peopled it, giving it the name of Cordoba, to distinguish it from the other city of the same name which had been founded by Gonzalo de Ocarnpo in the province of Cumana. This name it afterwards lost, and took that of Coro, which it preserves to this day, from a small settlement of Indians thus named. It is of a dry and hot temperature, bui so healthy that physicians are said here to be of no use. The territory, al though sandy and lack of water, produces every kind of vegetable production ; so that it may be said to abound in every thing that luxury or con venience may require. Here are large breeds of cow-cattle and i
oats, and a considerable number of good mules. Its articles of merchandize, such as cheese, tanned bides, and cacao, meet with a ready sale in Cartagem, Caracas, and the island of St. Domingo. It has a reduced convent of the re ligious order of St. Francis, and an hermitage dedicated to St. Nicholas. The town is very rich. It was plundered by the English in 1567. Its church was a cathedral, and the head of the bishopric, from the time that it was erected in 1532 until 1636, when (his title was transferred to Santiago of Caracas. It is two leagues distant from the sea, where there is a port insecure, but much frequented by trading vessels. 
From the time that the governor began to re side at Caracas, in 1576, there remained no con spicuous authority at Coro but the bishop and chapter, and they did all they could to follow the governor; and indeed, not being able to leave Coro by legal measures, they put their wishes into effect by flight, in 1636. At three leagues from the city are lands where they cultivate whh success, if not with abundance, all the usual pro duce of the country. The inhabitants, who are much addicted to indolence, glory that they are descended from the first conquerors of the country ; and there is here, generally speaking, more rank than wealth, and more idleness than industry. The little trade that is carried on here consists in mules, goats, hides, sheep-skins, cheeses, &c. which come in a great measure from the interior, and the larger part from Carora ; shipments of these ar ticles are made for the islands. The most common intercourse is with Curacoa, from whence they 2 
|COR 
bring in exchange dry goods, and this they do either by avoiding the vigilance of the guards, or by purchasing a connivance. The population of Coro is composed of 10,000 people of all colours ; few slaves are to be seen here, since the Indians, although they everywhere else have a particular partiality for the blacks, entertain a decided aver sion against them in this city. This antipathy was very useful in 1797 to the public tranquillity, for when the Negro slaves employed at work in the fields, wished to follow the example of the blacks of St. Domingo, and selected chiefs, under whom they committed some robberies, the Indiansof Coro joined the white people, and marched against the rebels with most extraordinary cou rage ; the revolt was thus suppressed almost as soon as it broke out ; the ring-leaders were hang ed, and every thing was restored to order ; the rebel army never amounted to more than 400 blacks. All work at Coro is done by Indians, notwithstanding the wages are very low ; indeed they live here with so much parsimony that a per son cannot fetch fire from his neighbour s without carrying in exchange a piece of wood of the size of the firing he takes away, and even this is not always done without difficulty. The city has no spring, and the water they drink is brought from the distance of half a league by asses in barrels, of which two compose a load. The houses, though originally well built, bear evident marks of misery, and of the ravages of time; those belonging to the Indians are yet more pitiful. The streets run in parallel lines, but are not paved ; the public buildings consist of a parish church, formerly a cathedral, which title is yet given to it by the in habitants, although for more than 160 years it has been without a bishop or a chapter, the duty being performed by two curates, belonging to a convent containing about seven or eight Francis cans, and to a parish church in which are three monks of the same order. The civil power is exercised by a cabildo. Since 1799, a military commandant has been established here, who shares at the same time the judicatory authority, and that of the police ; his revenue being 2000 dollars per annum. Two miles to the n. of Coro is an isthmus of about one league in breadth, which joins the pen insula of Paragona to the continent ; itstretches out from the s. w. to n. w. about 20 leagues ; is inhabit ed by Indians and a few whites, whose only em ployment is the rearing of cattle, which they smug gle over in great numbers to Curacoa ; the butchers shops of that island being always better supplied than those of the principal cities of Tierra Firme. TOL. i, 
|COR 
This was the only city of Venezuela, except Maracaibo, which had not declared independence on the 21st August 1811. See VENEZUELA. The city is in lat. 11 24 n. and long. 69 40 ; it is a league distant from the sea, SO leagues to. of Caracas, 33 n. of Barquisimoto, and 55 of Mara caibo. 
|CORO, a settlement of the province and coregimicnto of Pastes in the kingdom of Quito ; situate on the shore of the river Cascabeles, where this enters the Caqueta. 
|CORO, another, of the province and corregimiento of Carangas in Peru, and of the arch bishopric of Charcas ; annexed to the curacy of Corquemar. 
|COROA GRANDE, a settlement of the province and captainship of Para in Brazil ; situate on the shore of the river Tocantines. 
|COROA, a large shoal near the coast of the pro vince and captainship of Maranan in Brazil, at the entrance of the river Coras. COROAIBO. SeeCossA. COROBAMBA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Chachapoyas in Peru, in which is venerated a miraculous image of Nuestra Senora de Guadalupe. Near it are two caves, each capable of containing 50 horsemen with their spears erect. 
|COUOBAMBA, another settlement in the above province and kingdom. 
|COROBANA, a river of the province and go vernment of Guayana, which, according to Mr. Bellin, in his chart and description of the course of a part of the Orinoco, runs continually n. and enters this river near where it runs into the sea. 
|COROCOTO, a settlement of Indians, of the province and corregimiento of Cuyo in the kingdom of Chile ; situate on the shore of one of the lakes of Huanacache, distinct from the following town. 
|COUOCOTO, a town of the above province and corrcgimienlo, a reduce Jon of the Pampas Indians; situate on the shore of the river Tunuyan, near the high road which leads from Mendozato Buenos Ayres, in the district of which are the estates of Carrizal Grande, Carvalillo, Lulunta, and Meridocinos. 
|COROCUBI, a river of the province and coun try of Las Amazonas, in the Portuguese possessions. It is small, runs s. and enters the Negro, forming a dangerous torrent or whirl-pool, which bears the same name. 
|CORGI, a settlement of the missions which be long to the French in Guayana ; situate near the coast, and at the mouth of the river Kourrou. 
|COR 
|COROICO, a settlement of the province and cotregimiento of Cicasica in Peru ; situate on the shore of the river of its name, where there is a port for small vessels. This river rises in the cordillera of Ancuma, to the s. of the settlement of Palca, and to the e . of the city of La Paz. It runs in a very rapid course to the e. and forming a curve turns n. and enters the.ti?. side of the Bcni, in lat. 16 50 s. 
|CGROMA, a settlement of the province and correginricnto of Porco in Peru. 
|COROMANDIERES, some small islands of the N. sea, near the coast of Acadia in N. America, near the coast of Scatari. They are also called Del Infierno, or Devil s isles. 
|COROMOTO, a settlement of the province and government of Venezuela ; situate on the shore of the river Guanarito, to the s. of the town of Guanaro. 
|CORON, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Chilques and Masques in Peru ; an nexed to the curacy of Huanoquite. 
|CORONA-REAL, a city of the province of Guayana, and government of Cumana, founded on the shores of the river Orinoco in 1759, by the Rear-Admiral Don Joseph dc Iturriaga,fbr which purpose be assembled together some wandering people of the provinces of Caracas and Barcelona. At present, however, it is as it were desert and abandoned, since its inhabitants have returned to their former savage state of life, having been con stantly pursued and harassed by the Charibes Indians, against whom they could no longer main tain their ground, after that the king s garrison had been withdrawn, and since, owing to the dis tance at which they were situate from the capital, it was in vain for them to look for any succour from that quarter. 
|CORONA-REAL, a large bay in the lake of Maracaibo, on the a?, side. 
|CORONA-REAL, a rocky isle, or ridge of rocks, close to the n. coast of the island of Guadalupe, between cape St. Juan and the port or bay of Mole. CORONADOS, a small island of the gulf of California, or Mar Roxo de Cortes; situate very near the island of Carmen, on its n. e. side, which looks to the coast of New Spain. 
|CORONDA, a town of the province and go vernment of Buenos Ay res ; situate on a river forming the island of Santa Fe, about five leagues s. w. of that town, in Lat. 31 58 47". Long. 61 2 w.~ 
|CORONANGO, SANTA MARIA BE, a head settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Cholula in JNupva Espaua. It contains 9i families of In
|COR 
dians, and to its district belong nine other settle ments. It lies one league to the n. of its capital. 
|CORONEL, PUERTO I&gt;EL, a port on the coast of the province arid corregunicnto of Qnillota, and kingdom of Chile, between the port of Longotoma and the river Quilimari. 
|CORONEL, a river of the province and govern ment of Venezuela. It rises to the s. of the city of Nirua, and afterwards unites itself with the Orape, to enter the Tinaco. 
|COKONKL, a point of the coast of the kingdom of Chile, in the province and corregimienfo of Quillota, between the mouth of the river Biobio and the heights of Villagran. 
|CORONGO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Conchucos in Peru. 
|COROPA, a spacious country of the province and government of Guayana, which extends itself between the river Coropatuba to the s. w. the Ma ranon to the s. the Avari to the e. the mountains of Oyacop of the Charibcs Indians to the w. and the mountains of Dorado or Manoa to the n. w. The whole of its territory is, as it were, unknown. The Portuguese possess the shores of the Maranon and the sea-coast as far as the bay of Vicente Pinzon ; the Dutch of the colony of Surinam, by the river Esequevo or Esquivo, called also Rupununi, have penetrated as far as the Maranon, by the river Paranapitinga. The mountains, which some have represented as being full of gold, silver, and pre cious stones, sparkling in the rays of the sun, are merely fables, which, at the beginning of the con quests, deceived many who had gone in search of these rich treasures, and fell a sacrifice to the fatigues and labours which they experienced in these dry and mountainous countries. The Por tuguese have constructed here two forts, called Paru and Macapa. Mr. De la Martiniere, with his usual want of accuracy, says that the Portuguese have a settlement called Coropa, at the mouth of the river Coropatuba, where it enters the Mararion : the Coropatuba joins the Maranon on the n. side, in the country of Coropa, and at the settlement of this name ; this settlement being nothing more than a small fort, and lying in the province of Topayos, on the s. shore of the Maranon, and being known by the name of Curupa, in ihe chart published ia 1744, and in that of the Father Juan Magnin. in 1749, 
|COROPATUBA. See CURUPATUBA. COROPUNA, a desert of the province of Cuzco in Peru, between the provinces of Parinacocha and Canas or Aruni. It extends more than 12 leagues s. to n. and is troublesome and dan gerous to traverse. 
|COR 
|CORORAMO, a small river of the province and government of Guayana. It rises to the tc. of the lake Icupa, runs n. and enters the Paraguay. 
|COROYA, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Tucuman in Peru ; of the district and jurisdiction of the city of Cordoba ; situate on the shore of the river Primero. 
|COROYO, a lake of the province and country of Las Amazonas, in the Portuguese possessions. It is in the island of Topinambes, and is formed by the waters of the Maranon. 
|COROZAL, or Pi LET A, a settlement of the province and government of Cartagena in the king dom of Tierra Firme. 
|CORPAHUASI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Cotabamba in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Huaillati. 
|CORPANQUI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Caxatambo in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Tillos. 
|CORPUS-CHRISTI, a settlement of the mis sions which were held by the regulars of the com pany of Jesuits in the province and government of Paraguay ; situate on the shore of the river Parana, about 11 leagues n. e. of Candelaria. Lat. 27 T 23" s. Long. 55 32 29" w. 
|COUPUS-CHRISTI, a large, beautiful, and fertile valley of the province and government of Mariquita in the Nuevo Reyrio de Granada. 
|CORQUEMAR, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Carangas in Peru, and of the archbishopric of Charcas. 
|CORQUINA, a river of the province and go vernment of Guayana. It runs s. and enters the Orinoco. 
|CORRAL, a settlement of the district of Guadalabquen, of the kingdom of Chile ; situate on the shore of the river Valdivia. 
|CORRAL, QUEMADO, a settlement of the pro vince and corregimiento of Piura in Peru ; situate in an angle formed by a river of this name. 
|CORRALES, a settlement of the province and government of Antioquia ; situate on the shore of the river Perico, in the sierras of Guamoco. 
|CORRALITO, a settlement ol the province and government of Tucuman, in the district and juris diction of the city of Santiago del Estero ; to the e. of the same, and on the shore of the river Guarico. 
|CORRIENTES, S.JUAN DE, a city of the province and government of Buenos Ayres in Peru ; founded in 1588, on the e. coast of the river La Plata, near the part where those of the Parana and Paraguay unite. It has, besides the parish 
|COR 
523 
church, three convents, of St. Domingo, St. Francis? and La Merced, and a college which belonged to the regulars of the company of Jesuits. This city has been harassed by the infidel Abipones Indians, who have here put to death many Spaniards, and taken others prisoners ; on which account a guard of horse-militia has been established for its defence. [It is 100 leagues n. of the city of Santa Fe, and contained, in 1801, 4500 inhabitants. Lat. 27 27 2 1"*. 
|CORRIENTES, S. JUAN DE, a river of the pro vince and government of Darien in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. It rises in the mountains towards the n. and enters the sea in the large plain opposite the Mulatto isles. 
|CORRIENTES, S. JUAN DK, another river, of the province and government of Buenos Ayres, which rises from the lake Yberia, and runs s. w. to enter the river La Plata. 
|COURIENTES, S. JUAN Dr., another, of the pro vince and government of Paraguay. It rises in the serrania which lies between the rivers Paraguay and Parana, runs to. and enters the former between the rivers Mboeri and Fareiri. 
|CORRIENTES, S. JUAN DE, another, of the pro vince and captainship of Rey in Brazil, which runs s. s. e. and enters the large lake of Los Patos. 
|CORIUENTES, S.JUAN DE, a cape of the s. coast of the island of Cuba ; 60 leagues from the island of Trinidad, and 15 from the cape of San An tonio. 
|CORIUENTCS, S. JUAN DE, another cape, called also De Arenas Gordas, on the coast which lies be tween the river La Plata and the straits of Ma gellan, between the capes San Antonio and San Andres. 
|CORRIENTES, S.JUAN n E, another eape or -point of the coast, in the province and captainship of Seara, between the river Molitatuba- and the port Palm eras. 
|CORTLANDT, a township in the n. part of the county of W. Chester, on the e. bank of Hud son river, New York, containing 1932 inhabitants, of whom 66 are slaves. Of its inhabitants, in 179(5, 305 were electors. 
|CORUPA, a river of the province and govern ment of Darien in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. It rises near the coast of the N. sea to the e. of the province, and enters the Tarina. 
|COIIUPA, another river. See CURUPA. 
|CORUPO, SAN FRANCISCO DE, a settlement of 
the head settlement of Uruapa, and akaldia mayor 
of Valladolid, in the province and bishopric of 
Mecboacan. It contains 33 families of Indians
 
3x2 
.524 
|COS 
iii(l lies seven leagues to the w. of its head settle ment. 
|CORUTES, a small river of the province and government of Paraguay. It runs w. n. e. and en ters the Xexuy, opposite the town of Curuguato. 
|CORVVI, a river of the province and govern ment of French Guinea. It enters the sea close to cape Orange. 
|COSACURO, a small river of the province and colony of Surinam, or part of Guayana in the Dutch possessions. It runs w. and enters the Cuyuni. 
|COSANGA, a large river of the province of Quixos in the kingdom of Quito. It runs s. e. then turns its course e. and as it were imperceptibly to the n. and afterwards, in order to receive on the w. the river Bermejo, enters the s. side of the river Coca. 
|COSAPA, a settlement of the province and correginriento of Carangas in Peru, of the arch bishopric of Charcas ; annexed to the curacy of Turco. 
|COSCAOCOAS, a nation of Indians reduced to the Catholic faith, dwelling upon the llanura or level of Cumboso, of the jurisdiction of Lamas. They are few in number, and are bounded by the Amasifucines. 
|COSCOMATEPEC, SAN JUAN DE, a settle ment of the head settlement of Yxhuatlan, and alcaldia mayor of Cordoba, in Nueva Espana. It contains 10 families of Spaniards, 35 of Mustees, 75 of Mulattoes, and 196 of Indians. Seven leagues to the n. n. a?, of its head settlement ; but the roads here are so rugged and full of steeps and precipices that the sight grows dizzy at looking down them. 
|COSCOMITLAN, a settlement of the head settlement and alculdia mayor of Caxititlas in Nueva Espana, from whence it lies one league and a half to the n. w. In its vicinity is a lake. 
|COSELA, a settlement and real of the silver mines of the province of Copala, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya; situate to the n. of that of Char cas. 
|COSEREMONIANOS, a barbarous nation of Indians, of the province and government of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito ; discovered by Father Cypriano Baraza, a Jesuit. It is, however, but little known. 
|COSIGUIRACHI, a town of the province of Taraumara, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya ; one of the most wealthy towns in the kingdom, and of a mild and healthy temperature. Its population is composed of many families of Spaniards and Mustees, no small number of Mulattoes, and very many Indians. It is 24 leagues to the s. zc. $ to 
|COS 
the s. of the real of the mines and town of San Felipe de Chiguagua. 
|COSIGUIRACHI, a settlement and real of the silver mines of the intendancy of Durango in Nueva Espana ; of a cold temperature ; situate in a rough and uneven territory, but being fertile, and abounding in fruits and seeds. [By a very recent memoir of the intendant of Durango, the population of this real was made to amount to 10,700. 
|COSMA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Huamalies in Peru ; annexed to the curacy .of Baiios. 
|COSMA, another settlement, in the province and corregimieHto of Andahuailas, of the same king dom ; annexed to the curacy of Moro in the pro vince of La Santa. 
|COS ME, SAN, a settlement of the head settle ment arid alcaldia mayor of Fresnillo in Nueva Espana. It contains a very large number of Spaniards, Indians, Mustces, and Mulattoes, being very close to the city of Zacatecas, lying from thence only seven leagues to the n. and being 10 to the e. of its capital. 
|COSMK, SAN, another settlement, of the province and government of Sonora in Nueva Espana ; situate in the country of the Sobaipuris Indians, on the shore of a river between the settlements of Santa Catalina and San Francisco Xavier. 
|COSME, SAN, another, with the surname of Viejo
 (Old), a reduction of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of Jesuits, in the province and government of Paraguay ; situate on the shore of the river Parana, between the settle ments of Santa Ana and La Candelaria. 
Cos ME, SAN, another, with the addition of Nuevo, (New), to distinguish it from the former in the same province : also a reduction of the regulars of the company of Jesuits, on the shore of the Parana, and to the w. of the settlement of Jesus. 
|COSME, SAN, a small island of the gulf of Cali fornia, or Mar Roxo de Cortes ; situate very near the coast, in the middle of the canal which is formed by this coast and the island of Carmen, and close to another island called San Damian. 
|COSPALA, a settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Juchipila in Nueva Espana. It is five leagues to the s. of the head settlement. 
|COSSA, or COSAIBO, a river of the province and government of Guayana, in the French posses sions. 
|COSSART, a town of the province and colony of N. Carolina ; situate on the shore of the river Jadquin. 
|COSTA-BAXA, a part of the coast of Brazil, in 
|COT 
525 
the province and captainship of Maranan, between the rivers Camindes and Paraguay. 
|COSTA-DESIERTA, a large plain of the At lantic, between cape S. Antonio to the n. and cape Blanco to the s. It is 80 leagues long, and has on the . the llanuras or pampas of Paraguay, on the a), the province of Cuyo, of the kingdom of Chile, on the s. the country of the Patagones, and on the c. the Atlantic. It is also called the Terras Magellanicas, or Lands of Magellan, and the whole of this coast, as well as the land of the interior terri tory, is barren, uncultivated, and unknown. 
CosTA-RicA, a province and government of the kingdom of Guatemala in N. America ; bounded n. and w. by the province or Nicaragua, s. e. by thai of Veragua of the kingdom of Tierra Firme ; $. w. and n. w. by the S. sea, and . e. by the N. sea. It is about 90 leagues long e. w. and 60 n. s. Here are some gold and silver mines. It has ports both in the N. and S. seas, and two excellent bays, called San Geronimo and Caribaco. It is for the most part a province that is mountainous and full of rivers ; some of which enter into the N. sea, and others into the S. Its productions are similar to those of the other provinces in the kingdom ; but the cacao produced in some of the llanuras here is of an excellent quality, and held in much esti mation. The Spaniards gave it the name of Costa-Rica, from the quantity of gold and silver contained in its mines. From the mine called Tisingal, no less riches have been extracted than from that of Potosi in Peru ; and a telerable trade is carried on by its productions with the kingdom of Tierra Firme, although the navigation is not alwayt practicable. The first monk who came hi ther to preach and inculcate religion amongst the natives, was the Fray Pedro de Betanzos, of the order of St. Francis, who carne hither in 1550, when he was followed by several others, who founded in various settlements 17 convents of the above order. The capital is Carlago. 
|COSTA-RICA, a river of the province and go vernment of Nicaragua in the same kingdom, which runs n. and enters theDesaguadero, or Waste Water of the Lake. 
|COSTO, a settlement of the English, in the island of Barbadoes, of the district and parish of Santiago ; situate near the w. coast. 
|COTA, a settlement of the corregimiento of Zipaquira in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of a very cold temperature, produces the fruits pecu liar to its climate, contains upwards of 100 Indians, and some white inhabitants; and is four leagues from Santa Fe. 
|COTA, a small river of the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres in Peru. It rises in the sierras, or craggy mountains, of Nicoperas, runs w. and enters the Gil. 
|COTABAMBAS, a province and corregimiento of Peru ; bounded n. by the province of Abancay, s. w. and s. and even s. e. by that of Chilques and Masques or Paruro, w. by that of Chumbiviicas, and n.zo. by that ofAimaraez. It is 25 leagues long e. ze. and 23 wide n. s. It is for the most part of a cold temperature, as are the other pro vinces of the sierra; it being nearly covered with mountains, the tops of which are the greatest part of the year clad with snow. In the low lands are many pastures, in which they breed numerous herds of cattle, such as cows, horses, mules, and some small cattle. Wheat, although in no great abundance, maize, pulse, and potatoes, also grow here. In the broken, uneven hollows, near which passes the river Apurimac, and which, after passing through the province, runs into that of Abancay, grow plantains, figs, water melons, and other pro ductions peculiar to the coast. Here are abund ance of tnagiteges, which is a plant, the leaves or tendrils of which much resemble those of the savin, but being somewhat larger ; from them are made a species of hemp for the fabricating of cords, called cabuyas
 and some thick ropes used in the construction of bridges across the rivers. The principal rivers are the Oropesa arid the Chalhuahuacho, which have bridges for the sake of communication with the other provinces. The bridge of Apurimac is three, and that of Chuructay 86 yards across ; that of Churuc, which is the most frequented, is 94 yards ; and there is another which is much smaller : all of them being built of cords, except one, called De Arihuanca, on the river Oropesa, which is of stone and mortar, and has been here since the time that the ferry-boat was sunk, with 15 men and a quantity of Spanish goods, in 1620. Although it is remembered that gold and silver mines have been worked in this province, none are at present ; notwithstanding that in its mountains are manifest appearances of this metal, as well as of copper, and that in a part of the river Ocabamba, where the stream runs with great rapidity, are found lumps of silver, which are washed off from the neighbouring mountains. The inhabitants of the whole of the province amount to 10,000, who are contained in the 2,j following settlements ; and the capital is Tambobamba. 
Cotabambas, Palpakachi, 
Totora, Llikchavilca. 
Cullurqui, Corpahuasi, 
Huaillati, Pituhuanca, 
526 
Airihunnca, 
Curasco, 
Chuquibamba, 
Vilcabamba, 
Mamara, 
Turpay, 
Aquira, 
Llaqua, 
Patahuasi, 
Cocha, 
Mara, 
Pitic, 
Apomarco, 
Palcaro, 
Totorhuailas, 
Chacaro. 
|COTACACHE, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Otavalo in the kingdom of Quito. 
|COTACACUK, a mountain of this province and kingdom, the top of which is eternally covered with snow. From its summit runs the river Cayapas. 
|COTAGAITA, SANTIAGO DE, a settlement of (lie province and corregimiento of Chichas and Tarija. Twenty-nine leagues from Potosi. 
|COTAGAITILLA, a settlement of the same province and corregimiento as the former ; annexed to the curacy of the capital. 
|COTAHUASSI, a settlement of the province and correzimiento of Chumbivilcas in Peru. 
|COTAHUAU, an ancient province of Peru, at the foot of the cordillera of the Andes, and to the :&lt;&gt;. of Cuzco. It is one of those which were con quered by Mayta Capac, fourth Emperor. 
|COTAHUIZITLA, a settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Cuicatlan in Nueva Espafia. It is of a hot temperature, con tains 28 families of Indians, who are busied in making mats, which they call petales. It belongs to the curacy of Atlatlauca, the capital of the alcaldia mayor of this name ; being distant 10 leagues from its capital. 
|COTAPARAZO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Guailas in Peru. 
|COTA-PINI, a settlement of the province and government of Quixos and Macas in the kingdom of Quito. 
|COTAS, a settlement of the province and cor regimiento of Yauyos in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Arma in the province of Castro Vireyna. 
|COTEAUX, Lr.s, a town on the road from Tiburon to port Salut, on the s. side of the s. pen insula of the island of St. Domingo, 13| leagues e. by y. of the former, and four n. w. of the latter. 
|COTICA, a river of Guayana, in the part pos sessed by the Dutch, or colony of Surinam. It runs n. until it comes very near the coast, making many turns, and then changing its course e. enters the Comowini. At its mouth is a fort to defend its entrance, called Someldick. 
|COTIJA, Valley of, of the alcahlia mayor of 
|COT 
Tinguindin in Nueva Espaila, It is more than two leagues in circumference, and in it live 205 1 families of Spaniards. It is of a mild temperature, and abounds in seeds. Seven leagues to the w. of its capital. 
|COTLALTA, a settlement and head settlement of the alcaldia mai/or of Tuxtla in Nueva Espafia. It contains 140 families of Indians, and three or four of Spaniards. It abounds greatly in tamarinds, of which are made excellent conserves. 
|COTOCHE, a cape of the coast of Yucatan, opposite that of San Antonio, in the island of Cuba ; between these lies the navigation leading to this island from Nueva Espafia. 
|COTOCOLLAO, a settlement of the kingdom of Quito, in the corregimiento of the district of the Cinco Leguas de la Capital ; being situate just where the beautiful llanura or plain of Inaquito or Rumi-Pampa terminates. Its territory extends to n. w. upon the skirt of the mountain Pichincha, and is bounded on the n. by the settlement of Pomasque. It is of a somewhat cold and moist tem perature ; and in it is the county of Selva Florida, of the house of Guerrero Ponce de Leon, one of the most ancient and illustrious of the kingdom. 
|COTOE, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Canta in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Lampun. 
COIOPACSI, a mountain and desert, or naramo, of the province and corregimiento of T acunja in the kingdom of Quito, to the s. and onefourth to s. e. It is of the figure of an inverted truncated cone, and is in height 2952 Parisian feet above the level of the sea : on its summit, which is perpetually covered with snow, is a volcano, which burst forth in 1698, in such a dreadful man ner as not only to destroy the city of Tacunja, with three fourths of its inhabitants, but other settlements also. It likewise vomited up a river of mud, which so altered the face of the province, that the missionaries of the Jesuits of Maynos, seeing so many carcases, pieces of furniture, and houses floating down the Maranon, were persuaded amongst themselves that the Almighty had visited this kingdom with some signal destruction : they, moreover, wrote circular letters, and transmitted them open about the country, to ascertain what number of persons were remaining alive. These misfortunes, though in a moderate degree, recurred in the years 1742, 1743, 1766, 1768. From the e. part of this mountain the Napo takes its rise; and from the s. the Cotuche and the Alagues, which, united, form the river San Miguel, and afterwards, with others, the Patate ; to this the Chambo joins itself, which afterwards degenerates 
|COT 
into the Banos, and which, after the great cas cade, is known by the name of Pastaza. To the n. rises the Padregal, afterwards called Pita, as it passes through the llantira of Chillo; and at the skirt of the mountain of Guangopolo, where the plain terminates, it unites itself with the Amaguafia, and then turning s?, lakes the names of Tumbaco and Huallabarnba, to enter the Esmeraldas, which disembogues itself into the S. sea. At the skirt of this great mountain are the estates of Sinipu, Pongo, Pucaguaita, and Papaurca. It is distant from the settlement of Mula-halo half a league, and five leagues from its capital. In lat. 40 11 s. [The height of this volcano was dis covered, in 1802, to be only 260 feet lower than the crater of Antisana, which is 19,150 feet above the level of the sea. 
|COTOPASSA, a river of the province ofCanela in the kingdom of Quito, towards the s. e. It runs s. e. and enters the n. side of the river Pastaza, which, from that point, begins to be navigable. 
|COTOPAXI. See COTOPACSI. 
|COTUA, a settlement of the province and government of Cumana ; situate on the shore of a river near the coast of the gulf of Cariaco, be tween the city of this name and thatofCumanagoto. 
|COTUE, a small island of the N. sea ; situate near the n. coast of the island of Cuba. 
|COTUI, a town of St. Domingo ; founded, in 
1504, by RodrigoMexia deTruxillo, by the order of the comendador mayor of Alcantara, Nicolas de Obando, 16 leagues to the . of the capital, St. Domingo, on the skirt of some mountains which are 12 leagues in height, and at the distance of two leagues from the river Yauna. It is a small and poor town. Its commerce depends upon the salting of meats, and in preparing tallow and hides to carry to St. Domingo, and in the chase of wild goats, which are sold to the French. In its moun tains is a copper mine, Iwo leagues to the s. e. of the town. The Bucaniers, a French people of the island of Tortuga, commanded by Mr. Pouancy, their governor, took and sacked it in 1676. [In 
1505, the gold mines were worked here. Ihe copper mine above alluded to is in the mountain of Meymon, whence comes the river of the same name, and is so rich, that the metal, when refined, will produce eight per cent, of gold. Here are also found excellent lapis lazuli, a streaked chalk, that some painters prefer to bole for gilding, load
* stone, emeralds, and iron. The iron is of the best quality, and might be conveyed from the chain of Sevico by means of the river Yuna. The soil here is excellent, and the plantains produced here are of such superior quality, that this manna of the 
ecu 
587 
Antilles is called, at St. Domingo, Sunday plan tains. The people cultivate tobacco, but are chiefly employed in breeding swine. The inhabi tants are called clownish, and of an unsociable character. The town is situated half a league from the s. w. bank of the Yuna, which becomes unnavigable near this place, about 13 leagues from its mouth, in the bay of Samana. It contains 160 scattered nouses, in the middle of a little savana, and surrounded with woods, 30 leagues n. of St. Domingo, and 15 s. e. of St. Yago.j 
|COUCHSAGE, a settlement of Indians of the province and colony of New York ; situate on the shore of the river Hudson. 
|COUDRAS, a small island in St. Lawrence river, about 45 miles n. e. of Quebec. 
|COUECHI, a settlement of Indians of N. Ca rolina, in the territory of the Cheroquees. 
|COUICAN, a settlement of the head settlement of Guimeo, and alcaldia mayor of Cirindaro, in Nucva Espaiia. It contains 95 families of Indians. 
|COUL, Bay of, on the e. coast of the cape Breton, in Spanish bay, and at the entrance of the lake Labrador. 
|COULEURE, a bay of the island of Marti nique, one of the Antilles, on the n. w. coast, near Pearl island. 
|COULKURE, a small river of this island, which runs n. w. and enters the sea in the bay of its name. 
|CORUGO. Sec CABO. 
|COUNTRY Harbour, so called, is about 20 leagues to the e. of Halifax, in Nova Scotia. 
|COUPEE, a point of the coast and shore of the Mississippi in Canada. [It is also called Cut Point, and is a short turn in the river Mississippi, about 35 miles above Mantchac fort, at the gut of Ibberville, and 259 from the mouth of the river. Charlevoix relates that the river formerly made a great turn here, and some Canadians, by deepen ing the channel of a small brook, diverted the waters of the river into it, in the year 1722. The impetuosity of the stream was such, and the soil of so rich and loose a quality, that in a Short time the point was entirely cut through, arid the old channel left dry, except in inundations ; by which travellers save 14 kagues of their voyage. The new channel has been sounded with a line of 30 fathoms,, without finding bottom. The Spanish settlements of Point Coupee extend 20 miles on the w. side of the Mississippi, and there are some plan tations back on the side of La Fause Riviere, through which the Mississippi passed about 70 years ago. The fort at Point Coupee is a square 
528 
|COW 
figure, -with four bastions, built with stockades. There were, some years since, about 2000 white inhabitants and 7000 slaves. They cultivate In dian com, tobacco, and indigo ; raise vast quan tities of poultry, which they send to New Or leans. They also send to that city squared timber, staves, &c. 
|COUQUECURA, a settlement of Indians of the province and corregimiento of Itata in the kingdom of Chile ; situate on the coast. 
|COURIPI, a river of the province of G nayana, in the French possessions. 
|COUSSA, a settlement of the English, in S. Carolina ; situate on the shore of the river of its name. 
|COUSSA, another settlement, in the same pro vince and colony, on the shore of a river of the same denomination. This river runs n. w. and en ters the Alba ma. 
|COUSSARIE, a river of the province of Guayana, in the part possessed by the French. It enters the Aprouac, 
|COUSSATI, a settlement of Indians of S. Ca rolina ; situate on the shore of the river Albama. 
|COUUACHITOUU, a settlement of Indians of S. Carolina, in which the English have an esta blishment and fort for its defence. 
|COUUANCHI, a river of the province and colony of Georgia, which runs e. and enters the Ogechi. 
COtJUANAIUUlNI, a river of the province of Guayana, in the part which the French possess. 
|COVENTRY, a township in Tolland county, Connecticut, 20 miles e. of Hartford city. It was settled in 1709, being purchased by a number of Hartford gentlemen of one Joshua, an Indian. 
|COVENTRY, in Rhode Island state, is the it. easternmost township in Kent county. It contains 2477 inhabitants. 
|COVENTRY, a township in the n. part of New Hampshire, in Grafton county. It was incorpo rated in 1764, and contains 80 inhabitants. 
|COVENTRY, a township in Orleans county, Vermont". It lies in the n. part of the state, at the s. end of lake Memphremagog. Black river passes through this town in its course to Memphre magog. 
|COVENTRY, a township in Chester county, Pennsylvania. 
|COW AND CALF PASTURE Rivers are head branches of Rivanna river, in Virginia. 
CO WE is the capital town of the Cherokee Indians ; situated on the foot of the hills on both sides of the river Tennessee, Here terminates the 
|COX 
great vale of Cowe, exhibiting one of the most charming, natural, mountainous landscapes that can be seen. The vale is closed at Cowe by a ridge of hills, called the Jore mountains. The town contains about 100 habitations. In the con stitution of the state of Tennessee, Cowe is de scribed as near the line which separates Tennessee from Virginia, and is divided from Old Chota, another Indian town, by that part of the Great Iron or Smoaky mountain, called Unicoi or Unaca mountain.. 
|COWLTAS, a city of the province and colony of Georgia in N. America. It is 500 miles distant from Frederick, belongs to the Creek Indians, and in it General Oglcthorp held his conferences with the caciques or chiefs of the various tribes composing this nation, as also with the deputies from the Chactaws and the Chicasaws, who in habit the parts lying between the English and French establishments. He here made some new treaties with the natives, and to a greater extent than those formerly executed. Lat. 32 12 n. Long. 85 52 w. [Sre APALACHICHOLA Town."} 
|COWS Island. See VACHE. 
|COWTENS, a place so callecf, in S. Carolina, between the Pacolet river and the head branch of Broad river. This is the spot where General Mor gan gained a complete victory over Lieutenant-co lonel Tarleton, January 11, 1781, having only 12 men killed and 60 wounded. The British had 39 commissioned officers killed, wounded, and taken prisoners ; 100 rank and file killed, 200 wounded, and 500 prisoners. They left behind two pieces of artillery, two standards, 800 muskets, 35 bag gage waggons, and 100 dragoon horses, which fell into the hands of the Americans. The field of battle was in an open wood. 
|COX, a settlement of the island of Barbadoes, in the district of the parish of San Joseph, near the e. coast. 
Cox, another settlement in the same island, distinct from the former, and not far distant from it. 
|COXCATLAN, S. JUAN BAUTISTA DE, a settlement and head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Valles in Nueva Espana ; situate on the bank of a stream which runs through a glen bordered with mountains and woods. It contans 1131 families of Mexican Indians, 30 of Spa niards, arid various others of Mulattoes and Mustees, all of whom subsist by agriculture, and in raising various sorts of seeds, sugar-canes, and cotton. Fifteen leagues from the capital. 
|COXCATLAN, another settlement and head settle ment of the alcaldia mayor of Thehuacan in the 
coz 
same kingdom. It contains 180 families of Indians, and 60 of Spaniards, Mmtces, and Mulattocs. Here is an hospital of the religious order of St. Francis. Seven leagues from its capital. 
|COXITALL, a township in York county, dis trict of Maine, containing 775 inhabitants. 
|COX IMA R, a large plain of the coast of the island of Cuba, close by the city of Havana, in which is a fortified tower. On this plain the Eng lish drew up their troops when they besieged that place, in 1762. 
|COXIMES, a settlement of the province and government of Esmeraldas in the kingdom of Quito; situate on the shore of the S. sea, on the point formed by the port Palmar, under the equi noctial line. 
|COXO, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Venezuela ; situate on the sea-coast, close to the settlement of Carvalleda. 
|COXSAKIE, a township in the w. part of Albany county, New York, containing 3406 in habitants, of whom 302 are slaves. Of the citi zens 613 are electors. 
|COXUMATLAN, a settlement of the head settlement of Zanguio and alcaldia mayor of Zamora in Nueva Espana ; situate on the shore of the sea of Chapala, and being backed by a large moun tain covered with fruit-trees of various kinds, and excellent timber arid woods. It contains 17 fami lies of Indians, who employ themselves in fishing and in agriculture. Four leagues to the zc. of its head settlement. 
|COYAIMAS, a barbarous and ancient nation of Indians of the province and government of Popayan in the kingdom of Quito, and district of the townofNeiba. These Indians are valorous, ro bust, faithful, and enemies to the Pijaos. Some of them have become converted to the Catholic faith, and live united in settlements. 
CO YAU, a settlement on Tennessee river. 30 miles below Knoxville. 
CO YONES, a barbarous nation of Indians, who inhabit the s. w. of Toctiyo. They are ferocious and infidels, and live upon the mountains. Their numbers at the present day are much reduced. 
|COYPO. See RALEMO. 
|COZ A L, a settlement of the province and alcaldia mayor of Zacapula in the kingdom of Guatemala. 
|COZALCAQUE, SAN FELIPE DEJ asettlement of the head settlement of Tenant itlan, and alcaldia mayor of Acayuca, in Nueva Espana. It contains 51 families of Indians, and is 10 leagues to the e. and one-fourth to the s. e. of its head settlement. 
|COZAMALOAPAN, a province and alcaldia mayor of Nueva Espaua, the capital of which 
|YOL. I. 
|COZ 
bears the same name, with the dedicatory title of San Martin, and which is situate on a plain half a league long, and somewhat less broad, surrounded by mountains so knit together, that, at the time of its foundation, passes were obliged to be opened. Through this province runs a river, which flows down from the sierras of Zongolica, and which afterwards takes the name of AJvarado. It is of a hot and moist temperature, and continually ex posed to inundations during the rainy seasons, owing to the immense overflowings of the rivers. Its population is composed of 38 families of Spa niards, 128 of Mulattoes, and 34 of Mexican Indians, who maintain themselves by the gathering of cotton and maize ; and this last in such abun dance as to supply Vera Cruz. The Spaniards employ themselves in fishing in the rivers, which abound with fish the three last months of the year, and they carry them for sale into the other juris dictions. It has, besides the parish church, a temple of superior architecture, dedicated to Nuestra Seilora de la Solcdad, though it be com monly called, Of Cozomaloapan, being of such ancient origin as to be said to have existed 12 years before the conquest of the kingdom. This temple Avas inhabited by a religious fraternity, ap proved by his holiness Gregory XIII. he having granted to the same many favours and indulgences, which, through the devotion of the community, were perpetuated, through several prodigies and miracles which afterwards took place in the settlement, and in its district. One hundred and. fifteen leagues s. s. to. of Mexico, in lat. 17 47 , long. 274 50 . The jurisdiction of this alcaldi* consists in the following settlements : Amatlan, Otatitlan, 
Acula, Tuxtepec, 
Ixmaluhacan, Chinantla, 
Chacaltianguis, Utzila, 
Texhuacan, Uzamacin, 
Tlacotalpan, Yetla. 
|COZAQUJ, SANTA MARIA DE, a settlement of the head settlement of Acazingo, and alcaldia mayor of Tepcaca, in Nueva Espana. It contains four families of Spaniards, 33 of JMuslees and Mu lattoes, and 51 of Indians. It is a quarter of a league from its head settlement. 
|COZATLA, SAN JUAN DE, a settlement of the head settlement of Axixique, and alcaldia mayor of Zayula, in the same kingdom. It contains 60 families of Indians, and is two leagues to the w. of its head settlement. 
|COZAUTEPEC, a settlement and head settle ment of the alcaldia mayor of Chichicapa in Nu eva Espana, of the province and bishopric of 
u/ 1 
530 
Oaxoca. It contains only 20 families of Indians, who live by the cultivation of the cochineal plant and seeds. 
|COZCATLAN, a settlement and head settle ment of the alcaldia mayor of Tasco in Nueva Espana. It contains 200 families of Indians, and is "five leagues e. of its capital. 
|COZEL, a settlement of the jurisdiction and akaldia men/or of Culiacan in Nueva Espana. 
|COZINAS, a bay of the coast of the province and government of Yucatan. 
|COZINERA, a shoal of rocks on the coast of the S. sea, of the province and government of Ticrra Firme, very near the point of Paytilla, in the bay of Panama. 
|COZOCOZONQU E, a settlement of the head settlement of Puxmecatan, and alcaldia mayor of Villalta, in Nueva Espana. It is of a hot tem perature, contains 85 families of Indians, and is 29 leagues to the e. of its capital. 
|COZTLA, SAN MIGUEL DE, a settlement of the head settlement of Coronango, and alcaldia mayor of Cholula, in Nueva Espana. It contains 48 families of Indians, and is two leagues to the n. of the capital. 
|COZUMEL, an island of the N. sea, opposite the e. coast of Yucatan, to the province and go vernment of -which it belongs. It is 10 leagues long n. w. 7 s. w. and from four to five wide. It is fertile, and abounds in fruit and cattle, and is covered with shady trees. The Indians call it Cuzamel, which in their language signifies the island of swallows. Here was the most renowned sanc tuary of any belonging to the Indians in this pro vince, and a noted pilgrimage, and the remains of some causeways over which the pilgrims used to pass. It was discovered by the Captain Juan de Grijalba in 1518, and the Spaniards gave it the name of Santa Cruz, from a cross that was de posited in it by Hernan Cortes, when he demolished the idols, and when at the same time the first mass ever said in this kingdom of Nueva Espana, was celebrated by the Fray Bartolome de Olmedo, of the order of La Merced. At present it is inhabited by Indians only. Jt is three leagues distant from the coast. ot Tierra Firme. 
|CRAB-ORCHARD, a post-town on Dick s river, in Kentucky, eight miles from Cumberland river, and 25 miles s. e. of Danville. Tile road to Virginia passes through this place. 
|CRABS, or BORIQUF.N, an island of the N. sea ; situate on the s. side of the island of St. Domingo, first called so by the Bucaniers, from the abundance of crabs found upon its coast. It is large and beautiful, and its mountains and plains a re covered 
with trees. The English established themselves here in 1718, but they were attacked and driven out by the Spaniards of St. Domingo in 1720, who could not suffer a colony of strangers to settle so near them. The women and children were, how ever, taken prisoners, and carried to the capital and Portobelo. See BORIQUEN. 
|CRAMBERRI, a small river of the province and colony of N. Carolina. It runs s. and enters the source of the Conhaway. 
|CRAM BROOK, a river of the province and colony of Pennsylvania in N. America. 
CllANBERRY, a thriving town in Middlesex county, New Jersey, nine miles e. of Princeton, and 16 s. s. zv. of Brunswick. It contains a hand some Presbyterian church, and a variety of manu factures are carried on by its industrious in habitants. The stage from New York to Phila delphia passes through Amboy, this town, and thence to Bordentown.l 
|CRANBERRY Islands, on the coast of the dis trict of Maine. See MOUNT DF.SBRT Island. 
|CRANEY, a small island on the s. side of James river, in Virginia, at the mouth of Eliza beth river, and five miles s. w. of fort George, on point Comfort. It commands the entrance of both rivers. 
|CRANSTON is the s. easternmost township of Providence county, Rhode Island, situated on the w. bank of Providence river, five miles s. of the town of Providence. The compact part of the town contains 50 or 60 houses, a Baptist meeting 1 house, handsome school-house, a distillery, and a number of saw and grist mills, and is called Pawtuxet, from the river, on both sides of whose mouth it stands, and over which is a bridge connecting the two parts of the town. It makes a pretty ap pearance as you pass it on the river. The whole township contains 1877 inhabitants. 
|CRAVEN, a county of the province and colony of Carolina in N. America, situate on the shore of the river Congaree, which divides the province into South and North. It is filled with English and French protestants. The latter of these disem barked here to establish themselves in 1706, but were routed, and the greater p-irt put to death by the hands of the former. The river Sewee waters this county, and its first- establishment was owingto some families who had come hither from New England. It has no large city nor any considerable town, but has two forts upon the river Sarite, the one called Sheniningh fort, which is 45 miles from the entrance or mouth of the river, and the other called Congaree, 65 miles from the other. [It con tains 10,469 inhabitants, of whom 658 are slaves. 
|CRAVO, SANTA BARBARA DE, a settlement of (lie jurisdiction of Santiago de las Atalayas, of the government of Los Llanos of theNuevo Reyno de Granada. It is on the shore of the large river of its name, upon a very pleasant mountain plain, very near to the Wawj/ra at the bottom of the mountain, and \vherc formerly stood the city of San Joseph de Cravo, founded by the governor of this province in 16-A4-, but which was soon after destroyed. The tem perature here is not so hot as in the other parts of the province, from its being, as we have before observed, in the vicinity of the paramos or moun tain deserts. It produces in abundance maize, plantains, and yucas, of which is made the best cazme of any in the kingdom, also many trees of a hard and strong wood, used as a medicine in spotted fevers, and a specific against poisons, so that it is much esteemed, and they make of it drinking cups. Here are other trees, good for curing the flux, their virtue in this disorder having been accidentally discovered as follows. A la bourer, as he was cutting down one of these trees, let his hatchet fall upon his foot; but remembering that by pressing his foot against the tree it would stop the blood, he did so, and a splinter thus getting into the wound, the cut soon healed without the application of any other remedy. Here are large breeds of horned cattle, and the natives, who should amount to 100 Indians, and about as many whites, are much given to agriculture. Eight leagues from the settlement of Morcote. 
|CRAVO, a river of the former province and go vernment. It rises in the province of Tunja, near the lake of Labranza, passes before the city, to which it gives its name, and after running many leagues, enters the Meta. 
|CKAVO, another river, in the district and juris diction of Pamplona, of the Nuevo lleyno de Granada, it rises to the e. of the settlement of Capitanejo, runs s. s. e. and enters the river Cazanare, according to Bellin, in his map of the course of a part of the Orinoco; and indeed we doubt if he be not correct. In the woods upon its shores live some barbarian Indians, the Betoyes, Achaguas, and Guaibas. Its mouth is in lat. 3
 30 n. 
|CHEE INDIANS, The, inhabit w. of Little lake Winnipeg, around fort Dauphin, in Upper Canada/ 
|CREEKS, an Indian nation, described also under the name of MLSKOGUT.GK or MUSKOGEE, in addition to which is the following particulars, from the manuscript journal of an intelligent tra veller: "Coosa river, and its main branches, form the a\ line of settlements or villages of the Creeks, but their hunting grounds extend 200 miles be
531 
yond, to the Tombigbee, which is the dividing line between their country and that of the Chactaws. The smallest of their towns have from 20 to 30 houses in them, and some of them contain from 150 to 200, that are wholly compact. The houses stand in clusters of four, five, six, seven, and eight together, irregularly distributed up and down the banks of the rivers or small streams. Each cluster of houses contains a clan or family of relations, who eat and live in common. Each town has a public square, hot-house, and yard near the centre of it, appropriatad to various public uses. The following are the names of the prin cipal towns of the Upper and Lower Creeks that have public squares ; beginning at the head of the Coosa or Coosa Hatcha river, viz. Upper Utalas, Abbacoochecs, Natchez, Coosas, Oteetoocheenas, Pine Catenas, Pocuntullahases, Weeokes, Little Tallassie, Tuskeegees, Coosadas, Alabamas, Tawasasj Pawactas, Autobas, Auhoba, Wcelumpkees Big, \Veelumpkees Little, Wacacoys, Wacksoy, Ochees. The following towns, are in the central, inland, ajid high country, between the Coosa and Tallapoosee rivers, in the district called thellillabecs, viz. Ilillabecs, Killeegko, Oakchoys, Slakagulgas, and Wacacoys ; on the waters of the Tallapoosee, from the head of the river down ward, the following, viz. Tuckabatchee, Tehassa, Totacaga, New York, Chalaacpaulley, Loguspogus, Oakfuskee, Ufata Little, Ufala Big, Sogahatches,Tuckabatchees, Big Tallassee or Half-way House, Clewaleys, Coosahatches, Coolamies, Shawanese or Savanas, Kenhulka, and Muckeleses. The towns of the Lower Creeks, beginning on the head waters of the Chattahoosce, and so on down wards, are Chelu Ninny, Chattahoosee, Hohtatoga, Cow etas, Cussitahs, Chalagatscaor, Broken Arrow, Euchees several, Hitchatees several, Palachuolo, Chewackala ; besides 20 towns and villages of the Little and Big Chehaus, low down on Flint and Chattahoosee rivers. From their roving and un steady manner of living, it is impossible to deter mine, with much precision, the number of Indians that compose the Creek nation. General M Gillivray estimates the number of gun-men to be be tween 5 and GOOO, exclusive of the Seminoles, who are of little or no account in war, except as small parties of marauders, acting independent of the general interest or the others. The whole number of individuals may be about 25 or 26,000 souls. Every town and village has one established white trader in it, and generally a family of whites, who have fled from some part of the frontiers. They often, to have revenge, and to obtain plunder that may be taken, use their influence to send out pre3 Y 2 
532 
datory parties against the settlements in their vici nity. The Creeks are very badly armed, having few rifles, and are mostly armed -with muskets. For near 40 years past, the Creek Indians have had little intercourse with any other foreigners but those of the English nation. Their prejudice in favour of every thing English, has been carefully kept alive by tories and others to this day. Most of their towns have now in their possession British drums, with the arms of the nation and other em blems painted on them, and some of their squaws preserve the remnants of British flags. They still believe that " the great king over the water" is able to keep the whole world in subjection. The land of the country is a common stock ; and any individual may remove from one part of it to an other, and occupy vacant ground where he can find it. The country is naturally divided into three districts, viz. the Upper Creeks, Lower and Middle Creeks, and Seminoles. The upper dis trict includes all the waters of the Tallapoosee, Coosahatchee, and Alabama rivers, and is called the Abbacoes. The lower or middle district includesjill the waters of the Chattahoosce and Flint rivers, down to their junction ; and although oc cupied by a great number of different tribes, the whole are called Cowetaulgas or Cowcta people, from the Cowetan town and tribe, the most warlike and ancient of any in the whole nation. The lower or s. district takes in the river Appalachicola, and extends to the point of E. Florida, and is called the Country of the Seminoles. Agri culture is as far advanced with the Indians as it can well be, without the proper implements of hus bandry. A very large majority of the nation being devoted to hunting in the winter, and to war or idleness in summer, cultivate but small parcels of ground, barely sufficient for subsistence. But many individuals, (particularly on Flint river, among the Chehaws, who possess numbers of Ne groes) have fenced fields, tolerably well cultivated. Having no ploughs, they break up the ground with hoes, and scatter the seed promiscuously over the ground in hills, but not in rows. They raise horses, cattle, fowls, and hogs. The only nrticles they manufacture are earthen pots and pans, baskets, horse-ropes or halters, smoked leather, black marble pipes, wooden spoons, and oil from acorns, hickery nuts s and chesnuts. 
|CREEKS, confederated nations of Indians. See MUSCOGULGE. 
|CREEKS Crossing Place, on Tennessee river, is about 40 miles e. s. e. of the mouth of Elk river, at the Muscle shoals, and 36 s. zt\ of Nickajack, in the Georgia zo. territory. 
2 
|CREGER S Town, in Frederick county, Maryland, lies on the w. side of Monococy river, between Owing" s and Hunting creeks, which fall into that river ; nine miles s. of Ermmtsburg, near the Pennsylvania line, and about 11 w. of Frede rick town. 
|CREUSE, or River HONDO, a river of Canada, which runs s. w. and enters the St. Lawrence, in the country of the Acones Indians. 
|CRIPPLE, Bay of, on the s. coast of the island of Newfoundland, on the side of Race cape. 
CRISIN, a small island of the N. sea, near the n. coast of the island of St. Domingo, between the , islands of Molino and Madera, opposite to port Delfin. 
|CRISTO. See MANTA. 
|CROCHE, a lake of N. America, in New South Wales, terminated by the portage La Loche, 400 paces long, and derives its name from the appear ance of the water falling over a rock of upwards of 30 feet. It is about 12 miles long. Lat. 56 Q 40 . Long. 1 09 s 25 a&gt;. 
|CROIX, or CROSS, a river of the province and government of Louisiana, the same as that which, with the name of the Ovadeba, incorporates itself with the Ynsovavudela, and takes this name, till it enters the Mississippi. 
|CROIX, another river of Nova Scotia or Acadia. It rises in the lake Konsaki, runs s. and enters the sea in the port of Portages. 
|CROI x, another, of the same province and colony, which rises near the coast of the city of Halifax, runs n. and enters the basin of the Mines of the bay of Fundy. 
Cuoix, an island near the coast of the same province and colony, between that of Canes and the bay of Mirligueche. 
|CROIX, abay of the island of Gnadalupe, on the s. w. coast, between the river Sence, and the port of the Petite Fontaine, or Little Fountain. 
|CROIX, a port of the n. coast of the island of Newfoundland, in the strait of Bellisle. 
|CROIX, a lake of Canada, in the country and territory of the Algonquiris Indians, between that of St. Thomas and the river Bastican. 
|CROIX, a small settlement in the island of Mar tinique. 
Cnoix, ST. See CRUZ. SANTA. 
|CRON, a small river of the province and cap tainship of Seara in Brazil. It rises near the coast, runs n. and enters the sea at the point of Tortuga. 
|CROOKED Island, one of the Bahama islands, or rather a cluster of islands, of which North Crooked island, South Crooke:! island, (coin
533 
monly called Acklin s island), and Long Key, (or Fortune island), are the principal. Castle island (a very small one) is the most s. and is situated at the s. end of Acklin s island, which is the largest of the group, and extends about 50 miles in length ; at the n. extremity it is seven miles in breadth, but grows narrow towards the s. N. Crooked island is upwards of 20 miles long, and from two to six broad ; Long Key, about two miles in length, but very narrow : on this latter island is a valuable salt pond. Near Bird rock, which is the most n. extremity of the group, and at the a?, point of N. Crooked island, is a reef harbour, and a good anchorage ; a settlement has been lately established there, called Pitt s Town, and this is the place where the Jamaica packet, on her return to Eu rope through the Crooked island passage, leaves once every month the Bahama mail from England, and takes on board the mail for Europe ; a port of entry is now established there. There is likewise very good anchorage, and plenty of fresh water at the French wells, which lie at the bottom of the bay, about half-way between Bird rock and the s. end of Long Key. There is also a good harbour, (called Atwood s harbour) at the n. end of Acklin s island, but fit only for small vessels, and another at Major s Keys, on the n. side of N. Crooked island, for vessels drawing eight or nine feet water. The population in 1803 amounted to about 40 whiles, and 950 Negroes, men, women, and children ; and previous to May 1S03, lands were granted by the crown, to the amount of 24,2 18 acres, for the purpose of cultivation. The middle of the island lies in lat. 22 30 n. ; long. 74 w. See BAHAMAS. 
C HOOKED Lake," in the Genessee country, communicates in an e. by n. direction with Seneca lake. 
|CROOKED Lake, oneof the chain of small lakes which connects the lake of the Woods with lake Superior, on the boundary line between the United States and Upper Canada, remarkable for its rug ged cliff, in the cracks of which are a number of arrows sticking. 
|CROOKED River, in Camden county, Georgia, empties into the sea, opposite Cumberland island, 12 or 14 miles n. from the mouth of St. Mary s. Its banks arc well timbered, and its course is e. by . 
|CROSS-CREEK, a township in Washington county, Pennsylvania. 
|CROSS-CIICLKS. See FAYETTRVILLE. 
|CROSS-ROADS, the name of a place in N. Caro lina, near Duplin court-house, 23 miles from 
Sampson court-house, and 23 from S. Washing ton. 
|CROSS-ROADS, a village in Kent county, Mary land, situated two miles s. of Georgetown, on Sassafras river, and is thus named from four roads which meet and cross each other in the village. 
|CROSS-ROAMS, a village in Chester county, Pennsylvania, where six different roads meet. It is 27 miles s. e. of Lancaster, II n. by w. of Elkton in Maryland, and about 18 zv. n. w. of Wil mington in Delaware. 
|CROSSING, a settlement of the island of Barbadocs, in the district of the parish of San Juan. 
|CROSS WICKS, a village in Burlington county, New Jersey ; through which the line of stages passes from New York to Philadelphia. It has a respectable Quaker meeting-house, four miles s.w. of Allen town, eight s. e. of Trenton, and 14 s. zs. of Burlington. 
|CROTON River, a n. e. water of Hudson river, rises in the town of New Fairfield in Con necticut, and running through Dutchess county, empties into Tappan bay. Croton bridge is thrown over this river three miles from its mouth, on the great road to Albany ; this is a solid, substantial bridge, 1400 feet lo rg, the road narrow, piercing through a slate hill ; it is supported by 16 stone pillars. Here is an admirable view of Croton falls, where the water precipitates itself between 60 and 70 feet perpendicular, and over high slate banks, in some places 100 feet, the river spreading into three streams as it enters the Hudson. 
|CROW Creek fails into the Tennessee, from the n. w. opposite the Crow town, 15 miles be low Nickajack town. 
|CROW INDIANS, a people ofjjN. America, di vided into four bands, called by themselves Ahah ar-ro-pir-no-pah, Noo-ta, Pa-rees-car, and Ehart -sar. They annually visit the Mandans, Menetares, and Ahwahhaways, to whom they barter horses, mules, leather lodges, and many articles of Indian apparel, for which they receive in re turn guns, ammunition, axes, kettles, awls, and other European manufactures. When they re turn to their country, they are in turn visited by the Paunch and Snake Indians, to whom they bar ter most of the articles they have obtained from the nations on the Missouri, for horses and mules, of which those nations have a greater abundance than themselves. They also obtain of the Snake Indians bridle-bits and blankets, and some other articles, which those Indians purchase from the Spaniards. Their country is fertile, and wqll watered, and in many parts well timbered. 
534 
|CROW S MEADOWS, a river in ths n. w. ter ritory, which runs n. w. into Illinois river, oppo site to which are fine meadows. Its mouth is 20 yards wide, and 240 miles from the Mississippi. It is navigable between 15 and 18 miles. 
|CRO\VN Point is the most s. township in Clinton county, New York, so called from the celebrated fortress which is in it, and which was garrisoned by the British troops, from the time of its reduction by General A mherst, in 1759, till the late revolution. It was taken by the : Americans the 14th of May 1775, and retaken by the British the year after. The point upon which it was erected by the French in 1731, extends n. into lake Champlain. It was called Kruyn Punt, or Scalp Point, by the Dutch, and by the French, Pointe-a-laChevelure ; the fortress they named Fort St. Fre derick. After it was repaired by the British, it was the most regular and expensive of any con structed by them in America ; the walls are of wood and earth, about 16 feet high and about 20 feet thick, nearly 150 yards square, and surround ed by a deep and broad ditch dug out of the solid rock ; the only gate opened on the n. towards the lake, where was a draw-bridge and a covert way, to secure a communication v/ilh the waters of the lake, in case of a siege. On the right and left, as you enter the fort, is a row of stone barracks, not elegantly built, which are capable of containing 2000 troops. There were formerly several out works, which are now in ruins, as is indeed the case with the principal tort, except the walls of the barracks. The famous fortification called Ticonderoga is 15 miles s. of this, but that fortress is also so much demolished, that a stranger would scarcely form an idea of its original construction. The town of Crown Point has no rivers ; a few streams, however, issue from the mountains, which answer for mills and common uses. In the moun. tains, which extend the whole length of lake George, and part of the length of lake Champlain, are plenty of moose, deer, and almost all the other inhabitants of the forest. In 1790 the town con tained 203 inhabitants. By the state census of 1796, it appears there are 126 electors. The fortress lies in lat. 43" 56 n. ; long. 73 21 a?. 
|CROYDEN, a township in Cheshire county, New Hampshire, adjoining Cornish, and about 18 miles n. e. of Charlestown. It was incorporated in 1763 ; in 1775 it contained 143, and in 1790, 537 inhabitants. 
|CRUAIRE, a settlement of the province of Venezuela, and government of Maracaibo ; situate 
R U 
on the coast, between cape San Roman and the Punta Colorada. 
|CRUCEI1O, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Carabaya in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Coaza. It has a sanctuary where an image o f Nuestra Seiiora del Rosario is held in high veneration. 
|CRUCES, a settlement of the province and kingdom of Tierra Firme ; situate on the shore of the river Chagre, and in a small valley surrounded by mountains. It is of a good temperature and healthy climate, and is the plain from whence the greatest commerce was carried on, particularly at the time that the galleons used to go to Tierra Firme, the goods being brought up the river as far as this settlement, where the royal store-houses are established, and so forwarded to Panama, which is seven leagues distant over a level road. The alcaldia mayor and the lordship of this settlement is entailed upon the eldest son of the illus trious house of the Urriolas; which family is es tablished in the capital, and has at sundry times rendered signal services to the king. The English pirate, John Morgan, sacked and burnt it in J670. 
|CRUCES, another settlement, of the province and government of Cartagena ; situate on the same island as is the city, and on the shore of the great river Magdalena. 
|CRUCCS, another, of the province and corregiitiiento of Paria in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Toledo. 
|CHUCKS, another, of the missions belonging to the religious order of St. Francis, in the province of Taraumara, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya. Twenty-nine leagues to the n. w. of the town and real of the mines of San Felipe de Chiguagiia. 
|CRUCES, another, of the province of Tepeguana, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya. 
|CRUCI:S, another, of the province and corregi miento of Cuyoin the kingdom of Chile ; situate e. of the city of San Juan de la Frontera, and upon the shore of one of the lakes of Iluanacache. 
|CRUCES, another, in the same kingdom ; situate on the shore of the river Biobio. 
|CRUCES, a river in the district of Guadalabqucn of the same kingdom. It is an arm of the Callacalla, which enters the Valdivia, and forms the island of Las Animas. 
|CHUILLAS, a town of the province and go vernment of La Sierra Gorda in the bay of Mexico, and kingdom of Nueva Espana, founded in 1764, by order of the Marquis ot this title and viceroy of these provinces. 
|CRUZ. 
535 
|CRUZ, SANTA, DR LA SIEURA, a province and government of Peru, bounded n. by that of Moxbs, e. by the territory of the Chiquitos Indians, 5. by the infidel Chiriguanos and Chanaes hidians, s. w. by the province of Tomina, and w. by that of Mizque. It is an extensive plain, which on the w. side is covered with Indian dwellings and grazing farms, as far as the river called Grande or Huapay. It extends 28 leagues s. as far as the same river, IS w. as far as the foot of the cordillera, and 24 n. being altogether covered with various es tates, as indeed are the parts on the other side of the Cordillera. It lies very low, and is free both from the extreme cold and parciiing heat of the serranias, although the other provinces of this bishop ric, which lie close by this province, are much infested with t&lt;ie same variations of climate. It is, however, of a hot and moist temperature, and the country is mountainous ; on its plains are found various kinds of wood, good for building, and amongst the rest, a sort of palm, the heart of which is used for making the frame works to win dows of temples and houses, and it is generally cut to the length of 1 1 feet ; there is another kind of palm, which is called montaqw t the leaves of which serve for covering the houses of the poor, and the shoots or buds for making a very argreeable sallad ; the heart of the tree is reduced to a flour, of which sweet cakes are made, and eaten instead of bread, for in this province neither wheat nor vines arc cultivated, the climate being unfavourable to both. It abounds in various species of canes, which serve to bind together the timbers of which the houses are constructed ; one of these species is called huemb&, with which bells, though of #reat weight, are hung. In this pro vince are all kinds of fruits, various birds, tigers, bears, wild boars, deer, and other wild animals ; amongst the fruits of the wild trees are some which grow, not upon the branches, but upon the trunk itself; that which is called huaipuru resembles a large cherry in colour and flavour, and this, as well as others which are equally well tasted, serve as fbo:l for an infinite variety of birds; an equal abundance of fish is likewise found in the neighbouring rivers. Here is cultivated rice, also maize, sugar-cane, yuca.
 camotes, &c. and some wild wax is found iu the trunks of trees ; be ing furnished by various kinds of bees. At the distance of 20 leagues to the s. of the capital, are four settlements of Chiriguanos Indians, governed by their own captains, but subject, in some mea sure, to this government, from being in friendship with it, and trading with the Spaniards in wax, cotton, and maize. Hitherto its natives have been 
averse to embracing the Catholic religion, but in the incursions that have been made against us by the barbarians, they have been ever ready to lend us their assistance, and in fact form for us an out work of defence. In the aforesaid four settlements are 500 Indians, who are skilled in the use of the arrow and the lance, and are divided from the other barbarians of the same nation by the river Grande or Huapay. This river runs from Charcas to the e. by the side of the province of Tomina, and which, after making a bend in the figure of an half-moon, on the e. side of the province of Santa Cruz, enters the Marmore, first receiving- another river describing a similar course, and known by the name of the Pirapiti. On the s. e. and on the opposite side, are some settlements of Ciianaes Indians, the territory of whom is called Isofo. To the s. ands. w. towards the frontiers of Tarija, and still further on, are very many settlements of the infidel Chiriguanos Indians ; and in the valley of Ingre alone,- which is eight leagues long, we find 26; and in some of these the religious Franciscan order of the college of Tarija have succeeded in making converts, though as yet in no consider able numbers. These Indians are the most va lorous, perfidious, and inconstant of all the na tions lying to the e. of the river Paraguay ; 4000 of them once fled for fear of meeting chastisement for their having traitorously put to death the Cap tain Alexo Garcia, a Portuguese, in the time of Don Juan III. king of Portugal; they were cannibals, and used to fatten their prisoners before they killed them for their banquets. Their trea ties with the Spaniards, and the occasional visits these have been obliged to pay them in their ter ritories, have induced them nearly to forget this abominable practice ; but their innate cruelty still exists, and particularly against the neighbouring nations, upon whom they look down with the greatest scorn ; they have increased much, and are* now one of the most numerous nations in America; they are extremely cleanly, so much so that they will go down to the rivers to wash themselves even at midnight, and in the coldest season. The women also, immediately after parturition, plunge them selves into the water, and coming home, lay them selves down upon a little mound of sand, which, for tins purpose, they have in their houses. The inhabitants of this province amount to 16,000, and besides the capital, which is San Lorenzo de la Frontera, there are only the following settle ments : 
Porongo, Chilon, 
Samaipata, Despo
orios, 
Valle Grande, Santa Iia;a. 
536 
Bishops who have presided in Santa Cruz de la Sierra. 
1. Don Antonio Calderon, native of Vilches, dean of the holy church of Santa Fe, bishop of Puertorico and Panama; first bishop in 1605; died at the advanced age of upwards of 100 years. 
2. Don Fray Fernando de Ocampo, of the re ligious order of St. Francis, a native of Madrid. 
3. Don Juan Zapata y Figucroa, native of Velez- Malaga ; he was canon and inquisitor of Seville ; presented to the brishopric of Santa Cruz in 1634. 
4. Don Fray Juan de Arguinao, a religious Dominican, native of Lima, was prior and provin cial in his religion, first professor of theology and writing in that university, qualificator of the in quisition ; presented to the bishopric of Santa Cruz in 1646, and promoted to the archbishopric of Santa Fe in 1661. 
5. Don Fray Bernardino de Cardenas, native of Lima, of the order of St. Francis ; promoted from Paraguay to this bishopric in 1666. 
6. Don Fray Juan de Rivera, of the order of St. Augustin, native of Pisco in Peru ; first pro fessor of theology. 
7. Don Fray Juan de Esturrizaga, of the order of preachers, native of Lima. 
8. Don Pedro de Cardenas y Arbieto, native of Lima, collegian of the royal college of San Mar tin, eanon of its holy church. 
9. Don Fray Juan de los Rios, of the order of St. Dominic, a native of Lima, provincial of his religion in the province of Sun Juan Bautista del Peru. 
10. Don Fray Miguel Alvarez de Toledo, of the order of Nuestra Seiiora de la Merced, elected in 1701. 
11. Don Miguel Bernardo de la Fuente, dean of the holy church of Truxillo, elected in 1727. 
12. Don Andres de Vergara and Uribe, elected in 1744 ; he died in 1745. 
13. Don Juan Pablo de Olmedo, native of Tucuman, elected in 1745, died in 1757. 
14. Don Fernando Perez de Oblitas, native of Arequipa, elected in the aforesaid year, died in 1760. 
15. Don Francisco Ramon de Ilerboso, native of Lima, elected in 1760, promoted to the arch bishopric of Charcas in 1766. 
16. Don Juan Domingo Gonzalez de la Riguera, elected the aforesaid year, and promoted to the archbishopric of the holy metropolitan church of Lima in 1780. 
17. Don Alexandra dc Ochoa, elected in 1782. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, a city of the above province, which was once the capital ; founded by Nurio de Chaves in 1557, after that he had passed along the shores of the river Paraguay to discover a commu nication with the other provinces. Its inhabitants, however, not being able to stay in it through the incessant sallies of the Indians who surrounded them, were under the necessity of changing their settlement ; but disagreeing in the choice of place, some of them united together, and founded the city of Santiago del Puerto, and others that of San Lorenzo de la Frontera, which is to-day the capi tal, the former city being entirely abandoned. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, a settlement of the province arid corregimicnto of Yauyos in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of the settlement of Pacaran in the province of Caiiete. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, another, a conversion of Indians of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of -Jesuits, in the province and go vernment of Mainas of the kingdom of Quito. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, another, of the province and go vernment of Cumana in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, between the cities of Cumanagoto and Cariaco. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, another, of the province and go vernment of Popayan ; situate to the s. of the city of Almaguer, in the limits of the jurisdiction of Quito. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, another, of (lie head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Jochimilco in Nneva Espana ; situate in a mountainous and cold country, containing 46 families of Indians, who live by cut ting timber and making fuel. It is two leagues to the a), of its capital. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, another, of the province andro?-regimiento of Chancay in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Paccho. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, another, of the head settlement of St. Francisco del Valle, and alcaJdin mayor of Zultepec, in Nueva Espana. It contains 28 fa milies of Indians, dedicated to the cultivation of the land, and cutting bark from trees. Ten leagues from its head settlement. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, another, of the province and corregimiento of Caxamarca in Peru. 
Cuuz, SANTA, another, of the province and corregimiento of Lucanas in the same kingdom ; annexed to the curacy of Pucquin. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, another, of the province and corregimiento of Canta in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Pari. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, another, of the head settlement of Huehuetlan, and alcaldia mayor of Cuicatlan, in Nueva Espana ; situate on the middle of a raoun
tain, and containing 72 families of Indians, dedi cated to the commerce of saltpetre and cochineal. Three leagues to the s. of its head settlement. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, another, of the alcaldia mayor of the same kingdom. It contains 36 families of Indians, and is in the boundaries of the jurisdiction of Xalapa. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, another, of the island of Cuba; situate by a creek or bay formed by the sea, on the s. coast, between the settlement of Guanco and the bay of Matanzas. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, another, of the head settlement of Zultepec, and alcaldia mayor of the same name, in Nueva Espana. It contains 36 families of Indians, and is six leagues to the s. of the capital. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, another, of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Toluca in the same king dom. It contains 51 families of Indians, and is at a small distance to the n. of its capital. 
Cauz, SANTA, another, a head settlement of the district of the province and alcaldia mayor of Tlaxcala in the same kingdom. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, another, of the head settlement of Chapala, and alcaldia mayor of Zayula, in the same kingdom ; situate on the shore of the great lake or sea of Chapala. It contains 28 families of" Indians, who cultivate many seeds and fruits from the fertility and pleasantness of the country ; oc cupying themselves also in traffic and in fishing upon the lakes. It is two leagues to the e. of its head settlement. 
Cuuz, SANTA, another
 of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of Je suits, ui the province and government of Mainas of ibe kingdom of Quito ; situate on the shore of the river Napo. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, another, of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Caxititlan in Nueva Espa*ia. Four leagues to the s. of its capital. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, another, of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Tlajomulco in the same kingdom, in which there is a convent of the reli gious order of St. Francis. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, another, of the head settlement ofCacula, and alcaldia mayor of Zayula, in the same kingdom. It contains 50 families of Indians, M ho employ themselves in agriculture, and in cut ting wood upon the mountains of its district. Four leagues between the w. ands. of its head settlement. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, another, of the missions which \yere held by the regulars of the company of Je suits in the province of Tepeguana, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya ; situate on the shore of the river of Las Nasas. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, another, of the missions of the VOL. i. 
537 
religious order of St. Francis, in the province of Taraumara, of the same kingdom as the former. Eighteen leagues to the s. e. of the real of the mines and town of San Felipe de Chiguagua. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, another, called Real de la Cruz, in the province and government of Cartagena, on the shore of the large river Magdalena, and upon an island formed by this river and the waters of the Dique. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, another, of the province and go vernment of Antioquia in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, on the shore of the river Cauca. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, another, of the province and go vernment of Tucuman in Peru, of the district and jurisdiction of the city of Cordoba. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, another, of the missions which are held by the religious order of St. Francis, in the kingdom of Nuevo Mexico. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, another, with the addition of Mayo, in the province and government of Cinaloa; situate at the mouth of the river Mayo, which gives it its name. It has a port convenient lor trade. 
Cuuz, SANTA, another, of the same kingdom of Nuevo Mexico ; situate on the shore of a river which enters the large river Del Norte. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, another, of the province and government of the river Hacha ; situate on the coast, to the e. of the capital. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, another, of the province and go vernment of Antioqnia in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; founded on the shore of the river Sinu, with a good port, which serves as an entrepot for goods to be carried to Clioco, from whence it lies a three-days journey. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, another, of the province and go vernment of Cinaloa in Nueva Espana ; situate at the month of the river Mayo, where this enters the California, or Mar ROX.O de Cortes. Distinct from another, which is upon a shore of the same river. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, another, of the province and go vernment of La Sonora in the same kingdom ; situate in the country of the Apaches Indians, on the shore of a river which enters the Gila. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, another, of the province and alcaldia mayor of Zacapula in the kingdom of Guatemala. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, another, of the province and alcaldia mayor of Verapaz in the same kingdom. 
|CRPZ, a parish of the province and govern ment of Buenos Ayres ; situate on a small river running into the Plata, about five leagues n. of the town of Luxan, in hit. 31 a 16 22". Lon\ 59* 23 30" a?. 
|CRUZ, LA, a settlement of Indians of the pre$ 7, 
538 
vince and government of Buenos Ayres, founded in 1629, inlat. 29 29 I" *. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, an island of the N. sea, one of the Antilles, 22 leagues long and five wide. Its terri tory is fertile, but the air unhealthy at certain sea sons, from the low situation.- It has many rivers, streams, and fountains, with three very good and convenient ports. It was for a long Avhile desert, until some English settled themselves in it, and began to cultivate it ; afterwards the French pos sessed themselves of it, in 1650, and sold it the following year to the knights of Malta, from whom, it was bought, in 1664, by the West India com pany. In 1674, it was incorporated with the pos sessions of the crown by the king of France. Its inhabitants afterwards removed to the island of St. Domingo, demolished the forts, and sold it to a company of Danes, of Copenhagen, who now possess it. It was the first of the Antilles which was occupied by the Spaniards; is 30 leagues 
from the island of St. Christopher s, eight from Puertorico, six from that of Boriquen, and five from that of St. Thomas. It abounds in sugar cane and tobacco, as also in fruits, which render it very delightful. [It is said to produce 0,000 or 40,000 hlids. of sugar annually, and other W. India commodities, in tolerable plenty. It is in a high state of cultivation, and has about 3000 white inhabitants and 30,000 slaves. A. great proportion of the Negroes of this island have em braced Christianity, under the Moravian mission aries, whose influence has been greatly promotive of its prosperity. 
The official value of the Imports and Exports of Santa Cruz were, in 
1809, imports ,435,378, exports aS4,964. 
1810, 422,033, 89,949. And the quantities of the principal articles im ported into Great Britain were, in 
Coffee. 
Sugar. 
Rum. 
Cotton Wool. 
Brit. Plant. 
For. Plant. 
Brit. Plant. | For. Plant. 
Cwt. 1809, 297 1810, 31 
Cwt. 
1479 
Cwr. 
280,211 * .H),933 
Cwt. 374 
Galls. 181,594 236,307 
Lbs. 610,903 174,294 
Santa Cruz is in lat. 70 44 n. Long. 64 43 w. See WEST INDIES. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, a small island in the straits of Magellan, opposite cape Monday. The Ad miral Pedro Sarmiento took possession of it for the crown of Spain, that making the tenth time of its being captured. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, a small island of the coast of Brazil, in the province and captainship of Hey, between that coast and the island of Santa Catalina. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, a sand-bank or islet near the n. coast of the island of Cuba, and close to the sand bank of Cumplido. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, a point of the coast of the province and government of Honduras, called Triunfo cle la Cruz, (Triumph of the Cross), between the port of La Sal and the river Tian, 30 leagues from the gulf, in lat. 15 40 . 
|CRIZ, SANTA, a port of the coast which lies be tween the river La Plata and the straits of Magellan. On one side it has the Ensenada Grande, or Large Bay, and on the other the mountain of Santa Ines. Lat. 50 10 s. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, a river of the coast which lies be tween the river La Plata and the straits of Magel lan. It runs into the sea. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, a small river of the province and captainship of Los Ilheos in Brazil. It rises near the coast, runs e. and enters the sea be tween the Grande and the Dulce, opposite the shoals of S. Antonio. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, another, of the province and captainship of Seara in the same kingdom. It rises near the coast, runs n. and enters the sea between the point of Palmeras and that of Tortuga. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, another, of the province and government of Maracaybo. It rises in the sierra of Perija, runs e. and enters the great lake on the w. side. 
Cnuz, SANTA, a lake of the province and country of the Chiquitos Indians in Peru, formed from a drain issuing from the tr . side of the river Para guay, opposite the cordillcra of San Fernando. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, a small island of the gulfof Cali fornia, or Mar Roxo de Codes ; situate near the coast, between the two islands of Catalana and San Joseph. 
|CIUTZ, SANTA, a small port of the island of Cu racao, in the w. part, opposite the island of Ornba. 
Cuuz, SANTA, a mountain on the coast of the Malvine or Falkland isles. 
|CRUZ, SANTA, a cape or point of the coast of the 
island of Cuba, called Cruz del Principe (Cross of the Prince.) 
|CUA, SAHANTE DE, a village and settlement of the Portuguese, in the kingdom of Brazil ; situate in the sierra of Los Corixes, between the river of this name and that of Araguaya. 
|CUACHIMALCO, a settlement of the head settlement of Olinala, and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa, in Nueva Espana. It contains 66 families of Indians, and is two leagues to the n. e. of its head settlement. 
|CUAITLAN, a settlement of the head settle ment of Metlatlan, zndatealdia mayor of Papantla, in Nueva Espana. It contains 81 families of Indians, and is three leagues from its head settle ment, 16 s. w. of the capital. 
|CUALA, SANTIAGO BE, a settlement and head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Tezcoco in Nueva Espana ; annexed to the cu racy of Capulalpa, and six leagues to the n.e. of its capital. 
|CUALAQUE, a settlement of the head settle ment and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa in Nueva Espana. It contains two families of Spaniards, eight of Mustfes, 140 of Indians, and a convent of the religious order of St. Augustin. It is of a mild temperature, and its principal commerce consists in making painted cups of fine manufac ture. Four leagues n. of its capital. 
|CUAMILA, a small settlement or ward of the alcaldia mayor of Guachinango in Nueva Espana ; annexed to the curacy of the settlement of TIaola. 
|CUANALA, SANTA MAIUA DE, a settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Tez coco in Nueva Espana ; situate on the shore of the pleasant valley of Oculma. It is surrounded by many small settlements or wards, in which there are reckoned 219 families of Indians, and 10 of J\Tuslees and Mulattoes ; all of whom are em ployed as drovers or agriculturalists. Two leagues n. of its capital. 
|CUAPALA, a settlement of the head settle ment of Atlistac, and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa, in Nueva Espaua. It contains 42 families of Indians. 
|CUATALPAN, SANTIAGO DE, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Tezcoco in Nueva Espana. It contains 36 families of Indians, and 27 of Spa niards and Musttes. 
|CUATLAN, a settlement of the head settlement of Ixtlahuacan, and alcaldia mayor of Colima; situate on the margin of a river which fertilizes the gardens lying on cither of its banks, the same abounding in all kinds of fruits and herbs. It is 
539 
of a mild temperature, and its commerce consists in maize, French beans, and in the making of mat?. In its precincts are six estates or groves of coco trees ; and in those dwell nine families of Spaniards and j f us fees. In the settlement are 70 families. It is three leagues e. of its head settle ment. 
|CUAUCHINOLA, a settlement of the head settlement of Xoxutla, and alcaldia mayor of Cuernavaca, in Nueva Espana. 
|CUAUCOTLA, S. DIEGO DE, a settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Cholula in Nueva Espana. It contains 27 families of Indians, and is a quarter of a league from its capital. 
|CUAUTIPAC, a settlement of the head settle ment and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa in Nueva Es pana. It contains 23 families of Indians, and is one league to the s. e. of its capital. 
|CUAUTLA, SAN JUAN DE, a settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Cholula in Nueva Espana. It contains 16 families of Indians, and is one league to the w. of its capital. 
|CUAUTLA, with the dedicatory title of San Miguel, another settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Cuernavaca in the same kingdom ; situate in a fertile and beautiful open plain near the settlement of Mazatepec. It contains 23 families of Indians, and 11 of Spaniards and Mulattoes, who employ themselves in fishing for small but well-flavoured bagres, which are found in great abundance in a river which runs near the town. 
|CUAUTOLOTITLAN, a settlement of the head settlement of Atlistac, and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa, in Nueva Espana. It contains 42 families of Indians. 
|CUB, a small river of the province and colony of Virginia. It runs .9. and enters the Staunlon. 
|CUBA, a large island of the N. sea, and the largest of the Antilles ; situate at the mouth or en trance of the bay of Mexico. It is 235 leagues in length from c. to w. from the cape of St. Antonio to the point of Maizi, and 45 at its widest part, and 14 at the narrowest. To then, it has Florida and the Lucayes isles ; to the e. the island of St. Domingo, and to the s. the island of Jamaica, and the s. continent ; and to the ID. the gulf or bay of Mexico. It is between 1 9 48 and 23
 15 n. Int. and from 74 2 3" to 84 55 zc. long. It was discovered by Admiral Christopher Columbus in 1492, in his first voyage, before he discovered St. Domingo ; and he mistook it for the continent, and landed upon it. In the year 1494, it was found to be an island by Nicholas dc Obando. lie measured its circumference, and careened his vessel in the port of the Havana, which from that time has been 3 z 2 
|CUBA. 
known by the name of Carcnas. It is of a kind, warm, and dry temperature, and more mild than the island of St. Domingo, owing to the refreshing gales which it experiences from the n. and e. Its rivers, which are in number 158, abound in rich fish ; its mountains in choice and vast timber ; namely cedars, caobas, oaks, gnouuMUof, guayacanes, and ebony-trees ; the fields in singing birds, and others of the chase, in flourishing trees and odoriferous plants. The territory is most fertile, so that the fields are never without flowers, and the trees arc never stripped of their foliage. Some of the seeds produce two crops a year, the one of them ripening in .the depth of winter. At the be ginning of its conquest, much gold was taken from hence, and principally in the parts called, at the present day, lagua, and the city of Trinidad ; and the chronicler Antonio de Herera affirms that this metal was found of greater purity here than in the island of St. Domingo. Some of it is procured at the present day at Holguin. Here are some very abundant mines of copper and load-stone ; and artillery was formerly cast here, similar to that which was in the fortified places of the Havana, Cuba, and the castle of the Morro. Here was es tablished an asiento of the mines, under the reign of the King Don Juan deEguiluz, when no less a quan tity than 1000 quintals of gold were sent yearly to Spain. In the jurisdiction of the Havana, an iron mine has been discovered some little time since, of an excellent quality, and the rock crystal found here is, when wrought, more brilliant than the finest stones. In the road from Bayamo to Cuba, arc found pebbles of various sizes, and so perfectly round that they might be well used for cannonballs. The baths of medical warm waters are ex tremely numerous in this island. It contains 1 1 large and convenient bays, very secure ports, and abundant salt ponds, also 480 sugar engines, from which upwards of a million of arrobas are em barked every year for Europe, and of such an esteemed and excellent quality, as without being refined, to equal the sugar of Holland or France; not to mention the infinite quantity of this article employed in the manufacturing of delicious sweet meats : these being also sent over to Spain and various parts of America. It contains also 982 herds oflarge cattle, 617 inclosures for swine, 350 folds for fattening animals, 1881 manufactories, and 5933 cultivated estates ; and but for the want of hands, it might be said to abound in every neces sary of life, since it produces in profusion i/nctis, sweet and bitter, and of which the cazcrce bread is made, coffee, maize, indigo, cotton, some cacao and much tobacco of excellent quality ; this being 
one of the principal sources of its commerce , and that which forms the chief branch of the royai revenue. This article is exported to Europe in every fashion, in leaf, snuff, and cigars, and is held superior to the tobacco of all the other parts of America. The great peculiarity of this climate is, that we find in it, the whole year round, the most delicate herbs and fruits, in full season, native either to Europe or these regions ; and amongst the rest, the pine is most delicious. The fields are so delightful and so salutary, that invalids go to reside in them to establish their health. Throughout the whole island there is neither wild beast or ve nomous animal to be found. Its firs4 inhabitants were a pacific and modest people, and unacquainted with the barbarous custom of eating human flesh, and abhorring theft and impurity. These have become nearly extinct, and the greater part of them hung themselves at the beginning of the con quest, through vexation at the hardships inflicted upon them by the first settlers. At the present day, the natives arc the most active and industrious of any belonging to the Antilles islands. The women, although they have not the complexion of Europeans, are beautiful, lively, affable, of acute discernment, lovers of virtue, and extremely hos pitable and generous. The first town of this island was Baracoa, built by Diego Velazquez in 1512. It is divided into two governments, which are that of Cuba and that of the Havana : these are sub divided into jurisdictions and districts. The go vernor of the Havana is the captain-general of the whole island, and his command extends as far as the provinces of Louisiana anJ Movila ; and his appointment has ever been looked upon as a si tuation of the highest importance and confidence. He is assisted by general officers of the greatest abilities and merits in the discharge of his office. AV hen the appointment becomes vacant, the vice roy of the Havana, through a privilege, becomes invested with the title of Captain-General in the government. The whole of the island is one diocese; its jurisdiction comprehending the pro vinces of Louisiana, and having the title of those of Florida and the island of Jamaica. It is suf fragan to the archbishopric of St. Domingo, erected in Baracoa in 1518, and translated to Cuba by bull of Pope Andrian VI. in 1522. It numbers 21 parishes, 90 churches, 52 curacies, 23 convents, 3 colleges, and 22 hospitals. In 1763 some s\varms of bees were brought from San Agustin tie La Florida, which have increased to such a degree
 that the wax procured from them, after reserving enough for the consumption of all the superior class, and independently of that used in the 
|CUBA. 
541 
churches for divine worship, was exported, in 1776, to the quantity of 12,550 arrobas, from a single port of the Havana ; and all of it of as good a quality as is the wax of Venice. Although the capital of this island is the city of its name, the Havana is } at the present day, looked upon as the principal. Here the governor and captain-general of the kingdom resides ; and it has gained this preference from the excellence of its port, and from other qualifications, which will be found treated of under that article. We must here confine our selves to what we have already said, a more diffuse account not corresponding to our plan, though, and if all were said of which the subject would admit, a very extensive history might be made. The population consists of the following cities, towns, and places. 
Cities* Las Piedras, 
Havana, Cubita, 
Cuba, Vertientes, 
Baracoa, San Pedro, 
Holguin, Pamarejo, 
Matanzas, Cupey, 
Trinidad, Arroyo de Arenas, 
Santa Maria del Rosario, Filipinas, San Juan de Taruco, J iguana, Compostela. Caney, 
Towns. Tiguabos, 
Bayamo, El Prado, 
Puerto del Principe, Moron, 
S. Felipe and Santiago, San Miguel, S. Juan de los Remedios, El Cano, Santi Espiritus, Managua, 
,Santa Clara, Guines, 
Guanavacoa, . Rio Blanco, 
Santiago de las Vegas. Guamutas, 
Settlements. Alvarez, 
Consolacion, Hanavana, 
Los Pinos, Macuriges, 
Baxa, Guanajay, 
Mantua, El Ciego, 
Guacamaro, Cacarajicaras, 
Las Tuscas, Pinal del Rio. 
Yara, 
Cuba, which, in 1774, contained only 171,628 inhabitants, including 44,528 slaves, and from 5 to 6000 free Negroes, possessed, in 1804, a popula tion of 432,000 souls. The same island, in 1792, exported only 400,000 quintals of sugar ; but, in J804, its annual exportation of that article had risen to 1,000,000 of quintals. By a statement of the export of sugar from the Havana, from 1801 to 1810 inclusive, it appears that the average for the last 10 years has been 2,850,000 arrobas, or about 644,000 cwt. a year. Notwithstanding thisj Cuba 
requires annual remittances from Mexico. The number of Negroes introduced into Cuba, from 1789 to 1803, exceeded 76,000 souls; and during the last four years of that period, they amounted to 34,500, or to more than 8600 annually. Accord ingly, the population of the island, in 1804, con sisted of 108,000 slaves, and 324,000 free persons, of whom 234,000 were whites, and 90,000 free blacks and people of colour. The white popula tion of Cuba forms therefore T s o%, or .54 of the whole number of its inhabitants. In Caracas, the whites constitute .20 of the total population ; in New Spain almost .19; in Peru .12 ; and in Ja maica .10. 
In speaking of the origin, manners, and customs, &c. of the natives of Cuba, we are to be understood as giving also an account of those of Hispaniola, Jamaica, and Puerto Rico ; for there is no doubt that the inhabitants of all those islands were of one common origin ; speaking the same language, pos sessing the same institutions, and practising similar superstitions. The fairest calculation as to their numbers, when first discovered, is 3,000,000. But, not to anticipate observations that will more pro perly appear hereafter, we shall now proceed to the consideration, !. Of their persons and personal endowments. 2. Their intellectual faculties and dispositions. 3. Their political institutions. 4. Their religious rites. 5. Their arts. 
1. Persons. ---Both men and women wore no thing more than a slight covering of cotton cloth round the waist; but in the women it extended to the knees : the children of both sexes appeared entirely naked. In stature they were taller, but less robust than the Caribes. Their colour was a clear brown, not deeper in general, according to Columbus, than that of a Spanish peasant who has been much exposed to the wind and the sun. Like the Caribes, they altered the natural con figuration of the head in infancy ; but after a dif ferent mode (the sinciput, or fore-part of the head from the eye-brows to the coronal suture, was de pressed, which gave an unnatural thickness and elevation to the occiput, or hinder part of the skull); and by this practice, says Herrera, the crown was so srengthened that a Spanish broad -sword, instead of cleaving the skull at a stroke, would frequently break short upon it ; an illustration which gives an admirable idea of the clemency of their conquer ors! Their hair was uniformly black, without any tendency to curl ; their features were hard and unsightly ; the face broad, and the nose flat; but their eyes streamed with good nature, and al together there was something pleasing and inviting in the countenances of most of them, which pro- 
512 
|CUBA. 
{[claimed a frank and gentle disposition. It was an honest face, (says Marly r), coarse, but not gloomy ; for it was enlivened by confidence, and softened by compassion. Amongst our islanders, an attach ment to the sex was remarkably conspicuous. Love, with this happy people, was not a transient and youthful ardour only ; but the source of all their pleasures, and the chief business of life : for not being, like the Caribes, oppressed by the weight of perpetual solicitude, and tormented by an unquenchable thirst of revenge, they gave full indulgence to the instincts of nature, while the in fluence of the climate heightened the sensibility of the passions. See Oviedo, lib. v. c. 3. We have nearly the same account at this day of the Arrowauks of Guayana. " In their natural dis position (says Bancroft) they are amorous and wanton :" and Barrere observes, u its sont lubriques au supreme degre." It is related by Herrera, that a deity similar to the Venus of antiquity, was one of the divinities of the Tlascalans, a people of Mexico. In truth, an excessive sen suality was among the greatest defects in their character: and to this cause alone is imputed, by some writers, the origin of that dreadful disease, with the infliction of which they have almost re venged the calamities brought upon them by the avarice of Europe; if indeed the venereal contagion was first introduced into Spain from these islands; a conclusion to which, notwithstanding all that has been written in support of it, an attentive in quirer will still hesitate to subscribe. Their agi lity was eminently conspicuous in their dances, wherein they delighted and excelled, devoting the cool hours of night to this employment. u It was their custom (says Herrera) to dance from evening to the dawn ; and although 50,000 men and wo men were frequently assembled together on these occasions, they seemed actuated by one common impulse, keeping time by responsive motions of their hands, feet, arid bodies, with an exactness that was Avonderful. These public dances (for they had others highly licentious) were appropriated to particular solemnities, and being accompanied with historical songs, were called arictoes ; a singular feature in their political institutions, of which we shall presently speak. Besides the exercise of dancing, another diversion was prevalent among them, which they called bato; and it appears from the account given of it by the Spanish historians, that it had a distant resemblance to the English game of cricket ; for the players were divided into two parties, which alternately changed places, and the sport consisted in dexterously throwing and re turning an elastic ball from one party to the other. 
It was not however caught in the hand, or returned with an instrument, but received on the head, the elbow, or the foot ; and the dexterity and force with which it was thence repelled, were astonishing and inimitable. Such exertions belong not to a people incurably enervated and slothful. 
2. Intellects. The benevolence of these Indians, unexampled in the history of civilized na tions, was soon basely requited by the conduct of a band of robbers, whom Columbus unfortunately left in the island, on his departure for Europe. When any of the Spaniards came near to a village, the most ancient and venerable of the Indians, or the cacique himself, if present, came out to meet them, and gently conducted them into their habi tations, and seated them on stools of ebony curi ously ornamented. These benches seem to have been seats of honour reserved for their guests ; for the Indians threw themselves on the ground, and kissing the hands and feet of the Spaniards, of fered them fruits and the choicest of their viands ; entreating them to prolong their stay, with such solicitude and reverence as demonstrated that they considered them as beings of a superior nature, whose presence consecrated their dwellings, and brought a blessing with it. The reception which Bartholomew Columbus, who was appointed lieu tenant, or deputy-governor, in the absence of the admiral, afterwards met with, in his progress through the island to levy tributes from the several caciques or princes, manifested not only kindness and submission, but on many occasions munifi cence, and even a high degree of politeness. These cnciques had all heard of the wonderful eagerness of the strangers for goki ; and such of them as possessed any of this precious metal, willinjrly presented all that they had to the deputy-governor. Others, who had not the means of obtaining gold, brought provisions and cotton in great abundance. Among the latter was Behechio, a powerful ca cique, who invited the lieutenant and his attend ants to his dominions; and the entertainment which they received from this hospitable chief is thus described by Martyr. " As they approached the king s dwelling, they were met by his wives, to the number of SO, carrying branches of the palm-tree in their hands, who first saluted the Spaniards with a solemn dance, accompanied with a general song. These matrons were succeeded by a train of virgins, distinguished as such by their appearance; the former wearing aprons of cotton cloth, while the latter were arrayed only in the in nocence of pure nature. Their hair was tied simply with a fillet over their foreheads, or suf fered to flow gracefully on their shoulders and bo- 
|CUBA. 
543 
fsoms. Their limbs were finely proportioned, and their complexions, though brown, were smooth, shining, and lovely. The Spaniards were struck with admiration, believing that they beheld the dryads of the woods, and the nymphs of the foun tains, realizing ancient fable. The brandies which they bore in their hands, they now delivered with lowly obeisance to the lieutenant, who, entering the palace, found a plentiful, and, according to the Indian mode of living, a splendid repast al ready provided. As night approached, the Spa niards were conducted to separate cottages, wherein each of them was accommodated with a cotton hammoc ; and the next morning they were again entertained witli dancing and singing. This was followed by matches of wrestling, and running for prizes ; after which two great bodies of armed Indians unexpectedly appeared, and a mock engage ment ensued ; exhibiting their modes of attack and defence in their wars with the Caribes. For three days were the Spaniards thus royally enter tained, and on the fourth the affectionate Indians regretted their departure." 
3. Political institutions. Their kings, as we have seen, were called caciques, and their power was hereditary. But there were also subordinate chieftains, or princes, who were tributaries to the sovereign of each district. Thus the territory in Hispaniola, anciently called Xaraguay, extending from the plain of Leoganeto the westernmost part of the island, was the kingdom of the cacique Behechio; but it appears from Martyr, that no less than 32 inferior chieftains or nobles had jurisdiction within that space of country, who were accountable to the supreme authority of Behechio. They seem to have somewhat resembled the ancient barons or feudatories of Europe ; holding their possessions by the tenure of service. Oviedo relates, that they were under the obligation of personally attending the sovereign, both in peace and war, whenever commanded so to do. The whole island of His paniola was divided into five great kingdoms. The islands of Cuba and Jamaica were divided, like Hispaniola, into many principalities or king doms ; but we are told that the whole extent of Puerto Rico was subject to one cacique only. It has been remarked, that the dignity of these chieftians was hereditary ; but if Martyr is to be credited, the law of succession among them was different from that of all other people ; for he ob serves, that the caciques bequeathed the supreme authority to the children of their sisters, according to seniority, disinheriting their own offspring ; " being certain," adds Martyr, " that, by this policy, they preferred the blood royal ; which 
might not happen to be the case in advancing any of the children of their numerous wives." The relation of Oviedo is somewhat different, and seems more probable : he remarks, that one of the wives of each cacique was particularly distinguished above the rest, and appears to have been considered by the people at large as the reigning queen ; that the children of this lady, according to priority of birth, succeeded to the father s honours; but, in default of issue by the favourite princess, the sisters of the cacique, if there were no surviving brothers, took place of the cacique s own children by his other wives. The principal cacique was distin guished by regal ornaments and numerous attend ants. In travelling through his dominions, he was commonly borne on men s shoulders, after a man ner very much resembling the use of the palanquia in the E. Indies. According to Martyr, he was regarded by all his subjects with such reverence, as even exceeded the bounds of nature and reason ; for if he ordered any of them to cast themselves headlong from a high rock, or to drown themselves in the sea, alleging no cause but his sovereign, pleasure, he was obeyed without a murmur; op position to the supreme authority being consi dered not only as unavailing, but impious. Nor did their veneration terminate with the life of the prince ; it was extended to his memory after death; a proof that his authority, however extra vagant, was seldom abused. When a cacique died, his body was embo welled, and dried in an oven moderately heated ; so that the bones and even the skin were preserved entire. The corpse was then placed in a cave with those of his ances tors, this being (observes Oviedo) among these simple people the only system of heraldry ; where by they intended to render, not the name alone, but the persons also, of their worthies immortal. If a cacique Mas slain in battle, and the body could not be recovered, they composed songs in his praise, which they taught their children. It is related by Martyr, that on the death of a cacique, the most beloved of his wives was immolated at his funeral. Thus he observes that Anacaona, on the death of her brother, King Behechio, ordered a very beautiful woman, whose name was Guanahata Benechina, to be buried alive in the cave where his body (after being dried as above mentioned) was deposited. But Oviedo, though by no means partial towards the Indian character, denies that this custom was general among them. Anacaona, who had been married to a Caribe, probably adopted the practice from the account she had re ceived from her husband of his national customs; and it is not impossible, under a female adminis- 
|CUBA. 
tration, (among 1 savages), but that the extraordi nary beauty of the unfortunate victim contributed to her destruction. These heroic effusions con stituted a branch of solemnities, called aridoes ; consisting of hymns and public dances, accom panied with musical instruments made of shells, and a sort of drum, the sound of which was heard at a vast distance. It is pretended that among the traditions publicly recited, there was one of a pro phetic nature, denouncing ruin and desolation by the arrival of strangers completely clad, and armed with the lightning of heaven. 
6. Religious rites. Like all other unenlightened nations, these poor Indians were indeed the slaves of superstition. Their general theology (for they had an established system, and a priesthood to support it), was a medley of gross folly and childish traditions, the progeny of ignorance and terror. Historians have preserved a remnrkablc speech of a venerable old man, a native of Cuba, who, ap proaching Christopher Columbus with great reve rence, and presenting a basket of fruit, addressed him as follows. " Whether you are divinities," observed he, " or mortal men, we know not. You are come into these countries with a force, against which, were we inclined to resist it, resistance would be folly. We are all therefore at your mercy ; but if you are men, subject to mortality like ourselves, you cannot be unapprised, that after this life there is another, wherein a very different portion is allotted to good and bad men. If there fore you expect to die, and believe with us, that every one is to be rewarded in a future state, ac cording to his conduct in the present, you will do no hurt to those wiio do none to you." This remark able circumstance happened on the 7th of July 1494, and is attested by Pet. Martyr, Decad. i. lib. iii. and by Herrera, lib. ii. c. 14. If it be asked how Columbus understood the cacique, the answer is, that he had carried with him to Spain, in his former voyage, several of the Indians ; one of whom, a native of Guanahani, who had remained with him from October 1492, had acquired the Spanish language. This man, whose name was Didacus, served him, on this and other occasions, both as a guide and interpreter. Their notions of future happiness seem however to have been nar row and sensual. They supposed that the spirits of good men were conveyed to a pleasant valley, which they called coyaba ; a place of indolent tranquillity, abounding with delicious fruits, cool shades, and murmuring rivulets ; in a country where drought never rages, and the hurricane is never felt. In this s&lt; at of bliss (the Elysium of antiquity), they believed that their greatest enjoy 
ment would arise from the company of their de parted ancestors, and o c those persons who were dear to them in life. Although, like the Caribes, our islanders acknowledged a plurality of gods, like them too they believed in the existence of one supreme, invisible, immortal, and omnipotent Creator, whom they named Jocahuna. But un happily, with these important truths, these poor people blended the most puerile and extravagant fancies, which were neither founded in rational piety, nor productive of moral obligation. They assigned to the supreme Being a father and mo ther, whom they distinguished by a variety of names, and they supposed the sun and moon to bo the chief seats of their residence. Their system of idol-worship was, at the same time, more lament able than even that of the Caribes ; for it would seem that they paid divine honours to stocks and stones converted into images, which they called zenri; not regarding these idols as symbolical re presentations only of their subordinate divinities, and useful as sensible objects, to awaken the me mory and animate devotion, but ascribing divinity to the material itself, and actually worshipping the rude stone or block which their own hands had fashioned. Their idols were universally hideous and frightful, sometimes respresenting toads and other odious reptiles ; but more frequently the hu man face horribly distorted ; a proof that they con sidered them, not as benevolent, but evil powers ; as objects of terror, not of admiration and love. To keep alive this sacred and awful prejudice in the minds of the multitude, and heighten its in fluence, their lohitos or priests appropriated a consecrated house in each village, wherein the semi was invoked and worshipped. Nor was it per mitted to the people at large, at all times to enter, and on unimportant occasions approach the dread object of their adoration. The bohilos undertook to be their messengers and interpreters, and by the efficacy of their prayers to avert the dangers which they dreaded. The ceremonies exhibited on these solemnities were well calculated to extend the priestly dominion, and confirm the popular sub jection. In the same view, the bohilos added to their holy profession the practice of physic, and they claimed likewise the privilege of educating the children of the first rank of people ; a combi nation of influence which, extending to the nearest and dearest concerns both of this life and the next, rendered their authority irresistible. Religion was here made the instrument of civil despotism, and the will of the cacique, if confirmed by the priest, was impiously pronounced the decree of heaven. Columbus relates, that some of his people entering 
|CUBA. 
545 
unexpectedly into one of their houses of worship, found the cacique employed in obtaining responses from the zemi. By the sound of the voice which came from the idol, they knew that it \vas hollow, and dashing it to the ground to expose the impos ture, they discovered a tube which was before co vered with leaves, that communicated from the back part of the image to an inner apartment, whence the priest issued his precepts as through a speaking trumpet ; but the cacique earnestly en treated them to say nothing of what they had seen, declaring that by means of such pious frauds, he collected tributes, and kept his kingdom in sub jection. Happily, however, the general system of their superstition, though not amiable, was not cruel. We find among them but few of those barbarous ceremonies which rilled tbc Mexican temples with pollution, and the spectators with horror. 
5. Their arts. Our islanders had not only the skill of making excellent cloth from their cotton, but they practised also the art of dyeing it with a variety of colours ; some of them of the utmost brilliancy and beauty. The piraguas were fully sufficient for the navigation they were employed in, and indeed were by no means contemptible seaboats. We are told that some of these vessels were navigated with forty oars ; and Herrera re lates, that Bartholomew Columbus, in passing through the gulf of Honduras, fell in with one that was eight feet in breadth, and in length equal to a Spanish galley. Over the middle was an awning, composed of mats and palm-tree leaves ; under neath which were disposed the women and chil dren, secured both from rain and the spray of the sea. It was laden with commodities from Yucatan. These vessels were built either of cedar, or the great cotton-tree hollowed, and made square at each end like punts. Their gunnels were raised with canes braced close, and smeared over with some bituminous substance to render Ihem water tight, and they had sharp keels. Our islanders far surpassed most other savage nations in the ele gance and variety of their domestic utensils and furniture, their earthenware, curiously woven beds, and implements of husbandry. Martyr speaks with admiration of the workmanship of some of the former of these. In the account he gives of .a magnificent donation from Anacoana to Bartholomew Columbus, on his first visit to that princess, he observes, that among other valuables she presented him with 14 chairs of ebony beauti fully wrought, and no less than 60 vessels of dif ferent sorts, for the use of his kitchen and table, 
|VOL. I. 
all of which were ornamented with fignres of va rious kinds, fantastic forms, and accurate repre sentations of living animals. The industry and ingenuity of our Indians therefore must have greatly exceeded the measure of their wants. 
Bishops who have presided in the island of Cuba. 
1. Don Fray Juan de Ubite, a monk of the order of St. Francis ; elected first bishop in 1525, and although not placed in the catalogue of this church by Gil Gonzalez Davila, lie certainly pre sided here as bishop. 
2. Don Fray Bernardo de Mesa, of the order of St. Dominic, native of Toledo ; he died in 1538. 
3. Don Fray Juan of Flanders, and native of this country, of the religious order of St. Do minic ; he left the bishopric from being appointed confessor to the queen of France, Doiia Leonor ; succeeded by, 
4. Don Fray Miguel Ramirez de Salamanca, native of Burgos, of the order of St. Dominic, master in his religion, preacher to the Emperor Charles V. collegian in the college of San Gregorio of Valladolid, regent in the university of Lobayna, and bishop of Cuba, in 1539. 
5. Don Fray Diego Sarmiento, native of Bur gos, a Carthusian monk, prior of the convent of Santa Maria de las Cuevas of Seville ; elected bishop in 1540: he renounced the bishopric after having made the visitation of the whole island, and returned to Spain. 
6. Don Fernando de Urango, native of Azpeitia in Guipuzcoa, collegian of the college of St. Bar tholomew in Salamanca, master and professor of theology ; elected bishop in 1551 ; he died in 1556. 
7. Don Bernardino de Villalpando ; he governed until 1569. 
8. Don Juan del Castillo, native of La Orden in the bishopric of Burgos, collegiate of the col lege of Sigiicnza, and of that of St. Bartholomew in Salamanca, professor of arts ; elected bishop in 1567; he governed until I5SO, when he renounced his functions, and returned to Spain. 
9. Don Antonio Diaz de Salcedo, of the order of St. Francis, collegiate of St. Clement of Bolonia, renowned for his virtues and letters ; elected in 1580, through the renunciation of the former, and promoted to the church of Nicaragua in 1597. 
10. Don Fray Bartolome de la Plaza, of the order of St. Francis, in the same year, until 1G02. 
11. Don Fray Juan Cabezas, of the order of St. Dominic, native of Zamora ; he studied laws and 
4 A 
546 
|CUBA. 
canons in Salamanca, passed over to the Indies as vicar of the province of Santa Cruz in the Spanish island, came to Spain at the general capitulation, and was elected bishop of Cuba in 1602 ; he at tempted to translate the cathedral to the Havana, but did not succeed ; visited Florida, and was promoted to the mitre of Guatemala in 1610. 
12. Den Fray Alonso Enriquez de Armendariz, of the order of Nuestra Senora de la Merced, na tive of Navarra ; was comcndador of Granada, titular bishop of Sidonia, and nominated to Cuba in 1610; he wrote, by order of the king, a spiritual and temporal relation of his bishopric, and was promoted to that of Mechoacan in 1624. 
13. Don Fray Gregorio de Alarcon, of the order of St. Augustin ; elected in the same year ; died in the voyage. 
14. Don Leon de Cervantes, native of Mexico ; he studied in Salamanca, and was collegiate in the university of Sigiienza, school-master in the church of Santa Fe, in the Nuevo Rcyno de Gra nada, bishop of Santa Marta, and promoted to this see in 1625, and from this to that of Guadalaxara, in 1631. 
15. Don Fray Geronimo Manrique de Lara, of the order of Nuestra Seuora de la Merced, twice comendador of Olmedo, difinidor of the province of Castille, and master in sacred theology ; elected bishop of Cuba in 1631 ; he died in 1645. 
16. Don Martin de Zelaya Ocarriz, in 1645. 
17. Don Nicolas de la Torre, native of Mexico, first professor of theology in its university, four times rector of the same, canon of that metropo litan church, first chaplain of the college of Nuestra Senora de la Caridad, examiner-general of the archbishopric, and visitor-general of the convents ; presented to the bishopric of Cuba in 1646; died in 1652. 
18. Don Juande Montiel, until 1656. 
19. Don Pedro de Reyna Maldonado, native of Lima, a celebrated writer, who governed un til 1658. 
20. Don Juan de Santa Matia Saenz de Manosca, native of Mexico, inquisitor of that capi tal; elected in 1661, promoted to the church of Guatemala in 1667. 
21. Don Fray Bernardo Alonso de los Rios, of the order of La Trinidad Calzada, until 1670. 
22. Don Gabriel Diaz Vara and Caldron, until 1674. 
23. Don Juan Garcia de Palacios, until 1680. 
24. Don Fray Baltasar de Figueroa y Guinea, a Bernardine monk, until 1683. 
25. Don Diego Ebelino deCornpostela, in 1685. 
26. Don Fray Gcronimo de Valdes, Basilican monk; elected, in 1703, bishop of Portorico, and promoted to this in 1706. 
27. Don Fray Francisco de Yzaguirre, of the religious order of St. Augustin ; he governed until 1730. 
28. Don Fray Gaspar de Molina y Oviedo, of the order of St. Augustin ; elected in 1730, pro moted before he took possession of the bishopric of Malaga to the government of the council, and afterwards to the purple. 
29. Don Fray Juan Laso de la Vega y Cansino, of the religious order of St. Francis ; elected in the same year, 1730. 
30. Don Pedro A gustin Morel de Santa Cruz: he governed until 1753. 
Si. Don Santiago de Echavarria y Elquezaga, native of Cuba ; promoted to the bishopric of Ni caragua in 1753. 
Governors and Captains-general who have presided in the island of Cuba. 
1. Don Diego Velazquez, native of Cuellar, knight of the order of Santiago, a conqueror and settler of this island, nominated by the Admiral Christopher Columbus in 1511; he governed with great applause until his death, in 1524. 
2. Manuel de Roxas, native of the same town as was his predecessor, on account of whose death he was nominated to the bishopric, and in remem brance of the great credit he had acquired in the conquest of the island, receiving his appointment at the hands of the audience of St. Domingo, and being confirmed in it by the emperor in 1525 ; he governed until 1538. 
3. Hernando de Soto, who governed until 1539. 
4. The Licentiate Juan de Avila, until 1545. 
5. The Licentiate Antonio de Chaves, until 1547. 
6. The Doctor Gorizalo Perez Angulo, until 1549. 
7. Diego Ma/ariegos, until 1554. 
8. Garcia Osorio, until 1565. 
9. Pedro Melendez de Aviles, until 1568. 
10. Don Gabriel de Montalvo, until 1576. 
11. The Captain Francisco Carreno, until 1578. 
12. The Licentiate Gaspar de Toro, until 1580. 
13. Gabriel deLujan, until 1584. 
14. The militia colonel Juan de Texeda, until 1589. 
15. Don Juan Muldonado Barrionuevo, until 1596. 
|CUBA. 
547 
J6. Don Pedro Valdes, who was the first who was invested with the captainship-general of the island, which he executed until 1601. 
17. Don Gaspar Ruiz de Pereda, until 1608. 
18. Sancho de Alquiza, until 1616. 
19. Don Francisco Venegas, until 1620. 
20. The Doctor Damian Velazquez, until 1625. 
21. Don Juan Bitrian de Biamonte, until 1630, when he was removed to the presidency of Panama. 
22. Don Francisco de Riaiio y Gamboa, until 1634. 
23. Don Alvaro de Luna y Sarmiento, until 1639. 
24. The Colonel Don Diego Villalva, until 1617. 
25. The Colonel Don Francisco Gelder, until 1650. 
26. The Colonel Don Juan Montana, until 1656. 
27. The Colonel Don Juan de Salamanca, until 1658. 
28. The Colonel Don Rodrigo de Flores, until 1663. 
29. The Colonel Don Francisco Orejo Gaston, until 1664. 
30. The Colonel Don Francisco Lcdesma, until 1670. 
31. The Colonel Don Joseph de Cordoba, until 1680. 
32. Don Diego Antonio de Viana, until 1687. 
33. The Colonel Don Severino Manzaneda, until 1689. 
34. Don Diego de Cordoba, until 1695. 
35. The Colonel Don Pedro Benitez, until 1704. 
36. The Brigadier Don Pedro Alvarez, until 1706. 
37. Don Laureano de Torres, until 1708. 
38. Don Luis Chacon, until 1712. 
39. The Brigadier Don Vicente Raja, until 1716. 
40. The Brigadier Don Gregorio Guazo, until 1718. 
41. The Brigadier Don Dionisio Martinez de la Vega, formerly colonel of the regiment of Galicia, until 1724. 
42. Don Diego Peiialosa, until 1725. 
43. The Brigadier Don Juan Francisco Guemes y Horcasitas, formerly colonel of the regiment of Granada, in 1734, until 1746, when he was pro moted to the vice-royalty of Mexico. 
44. The Brigadier Don Francisco Antonio Tineo, captain of the regiment of Spanish guards, an officer of singular accomplishments; he entered in the aforesaid year, and died a few days after his arrival. 
45. The Brigadier Don Juan Francisco Cagigal, of the order of Santiago ; he was governor of tiie garrison of Cuba at the time that he was nominated, through the death of the predecessor, in 1747 ; htj was intermediate viceroy of Mexico, in 1756. 
46. The Brigadier Don Juan dc Prado, in spector of the infantry, nominated in 1760 ; in his time the English besieged and took the Havana; he was deposed from his situation, and made a member of the council of war, in 1763. 
47. Don Ambrosio Funes de Villalpando, Count of Ricla, a grandee of Spain, of the order of San tiago, lieutenant-general of the royal armies ; no minated to take possession of the place which had been surrendered by the English in the treaty of peace, and to fortify the post of the Cabafui, which he effected, and returned to Spain in 1765. 
48. The Brigadier Don Diego Manrique ; he died the same year, a short time after his arrival. 
49. Don Pasqual de Cisneros, lieutenant-gene ral of the royal armies, twice intermediate go vernor. 
50. Don Antonio Maria Bucaroli Hailio, of the order of San Juan, lieutenant-general of the royal armies, in 1766 ; promoted to the vice-royalty of Mexico in 1771. 
51. The Marquis de la Torre, knight of the order of Santiago, lieutenant-general ; he came over here in the same year, being at the time go vernor of Caracas, and ruled until 1777, when he returned to Spain. 
52. The Lieutenant-general Don Diego Joseph Navarro, who had been captain of grenadiers of the regiment of Spanish guards, and found him self exercising the government of the garrison of Tarragena in Cataluna, when he was nominated to this, and in the same year that he left the former place ; this he kept until 1783, when he returned to Spain. 
53. Don Joseph de Espeleta, brigadier and in. spcctor of the troops of America; nominated as intermediate successor in the aforesaid year. 
|CUBA, with the dedicatory title of Santiago, a capital city of the former island, founded by Diego Velazquez in 1511, with a good port de fended by a castle, called the Morro, as is that of the Havana. It is the head of a bishopric suffra gan to the archbishopric of St. Domi-igo, erected in 1518. It has a convent of the religions order of St. Domingo, and another of St. Francis ; it was at first populous and rich, and even at one time contained 2000 house-keepers, but since that a commerce was established in the Havana, through the excellence of its port, and that the captain-general and the bishop have fixed theic 4 A 2 
548 
cue 
residences hero, it has fallen into decay ; and al though it is now reduced to a small town, the title of Capital has not been taken from it. Its only inhabitants are those who own some estates in its district, and this forms a government subordinate to that of the Havana. [The damage done by the earthquake of October 1810, to the shipping at the Havana, was computed at 600,000 dollars; the injury at St. Jago could not be correctly estimated, but the loss of the lives at both places was believed to be not fewer than 350. In long. 76 3 , and lat. 20 I . 
|CUBAGUA, an island of the N. sea, near the coast of Tierra Firme, discovered by the Admiral Christopher Columbus. It is three leagues in circumference, and is barren, but has been, in former times, celebrated for the almost incredible abundance of beautiful pearls found upon the Coast, the riches of which caused its commerce to be very great, and promoted the building in it the city of New Cadiz; but at present, since the fishery is abandoned, this town has fallen entirely into decay, and the island has become desert. It is a little more than a league s distance from the island of Margareta, in lat. 1042 w. 
|CUBAZ, a settlement of the province and cap tainship of San Vincente in Brazil ; situate between the rivers Pedroza and Recisto. 
|CUBIGIES, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Riobamba in the kingdom of Quito. 
|CUBILLI, a lake of the kingdom of Quito, in the province and corregimiento of Alausi, near (be paramo or mountain desert of Tioloma. 
|CUBZIO, a settlement of the corregimiento of Bogota in the Nuevo Rcyno de Granada; situate on the shore of the river Bogota, near the famous waterfal of Tcquendama. Its climate is agreeable and fertile, and it abounds in gardens and orchards, in which are particularly cultivated white lilies, these meeting with a ready sale for ornamenting the churches of Santa Fe and the other neighbouring settlements. 
|CUCAITA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Tunja in the Nucvo Reyno de Granada; situate in a valley which is pleasant, and of a cold and healthy temperature. It pro duces in abundance very good wheat, maize, truffles, and other fruits of a cold climate ; here are some flocks of sheep, and of their wool are made various woven articles. It is small, but never theless contains 25 families and 50 Indians. It is a league and an half to the s. w. of Tunja, in the road which leads from Leiba to Chiquinquira and Velcz, between the settlements of Samaca and Sora. 
cue 
|CUCHERO, SAN ANTONIO DE, a settlement of the province and government of Guanuco in Peru ; situate at the source and head of the river Guallaga. 
|CUCHIGAROS, a barbarous nation of Indians, little known, who inhabit the shores of the river Cuchigara, which enters the Maraiion, and is one of the largest of those which are tributary to the same. The natives call it Punts ; it is na vigable, although in some parts abounding with large rocky shoals, and is filled with fish of dif ferent kinds, as also with tortoises ; on its shores grow maize and other fruits : besides the nation aforesaid, it has on its borders those of the Curnaiaris, Guaquiaris, Cuyaciyayanes, Curucurus, Quatausis, Mutuanis, and Curigueres ; these last are of a gigantic stature, being 1C palms high. They are very valorous, go naked, have large pieces of gold in their nostrils and ears ; their settlements lie two long months voyage from the mouth of (he river. 
|CUCHILLO, SAN PEDRO DEL, a settlement of the mission which is held by the religious order of St. Francis, in the precinct of New Mexico. 
|CUCHIM.O, with the addition of Parado, ano ther settlement of the missions of the province of Taraumara, and kingdom of Nucva Vizcaya ; sitiiatc on the shore of the river Conchos. 
|CUCHIN, a small river of the territory of Cuyaba in Brazil. It runs n. and enters the Camapoa ; on its shore is a part called La Estancia, through which the Portuguese are accus tomed to carry their canoes on their shoulders, in order to pass from the navigation of this latter river to that of the Matogroso. 
|CUCHIPIN, a small river of the same kingdom and territory as the two former. It rises in the mountains of the Caypos Indians, runs n. n. w. and enters the Taquari. 
|CUCHIPO, a river of the kingdom of Brazil, in the same territory as the former. It rises in the mountains, and runs w. 
|CUCHIRIHUAY, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Chilques and Masques in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Pampachucho. 
|CUCIIIUARA, or CUCHIGUAKA, an island of the province and country of Las Arnazonas, in the part possessed by the Portuguese. It is in the river of its name, at the same mouth by which it enters the Maranon. 
|CUCHIUERO, a river of the province and government of Guayana- or Nueva Andalucia. It rises in the sierra of Mataguaida, runs n. and enters the Ytari. 
|CUCHUMATLAN, a settlement of the king
cue 
dom of Guatemala, in the province and alcaldia mayor of Chiapa. 
|CUCHUNA, a large settlement of Indians, and formerly the capital of a small province of this name in Peru, to the w. of the mountains of the Andes. It was founded by Maita Capac, fourth Emperor of the Incas, after that he had literally starved the country into obedience. These Indians were treacherous, and used to give their enemies a very deadly poison ; the said emperor caused many to be burnt alive for having practised this abominable custom, and their houses to be destroyed, together with their cattle and posses sions. 
|CUCIO, a settlement of the head settlement of Perucho, and alcaldiu mayor of Guimeo, in Nueva Espana. It contains 146 families of Indians, and is a quarter of a league from its head settlement. 
|CUCUANA, a settlement of the province and government of Mariquita in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; situate on the shore of the river Magdalena. 
|CUCUCHO, SAN BARTOLGME DE, a settle ment of the head settlement of Arantzan, and alcal dia mayor of Valladolid, in the province and bishopric of Mechoacan. It contains 27 families of Indians, who employ themselves in agriculture, cutting wood, and making earthen- ware and saddle-trees. 
|CUCUCFIUCHAU, SAN PEDRO DE, a settle ment of the head settlement of the city of Cucupao, and alcaldia mayor of Valladolid, in the province and bishopric of Mechoacan ; situate on the shore of the lake. It contains 18 families of Indians, and is two leagues to the s. of its head settle ment. 
|CUCUISAS, a small river of tfie province and government of Guayana. It rises to the e. of the settlement of Encaramada, and enters the Itari. 
|CUCUMAYA, a river of Spanish island, or St. Domingo, which rises near the s. coast, runs s. and enters the sea between the Seco and the Romana, opposite the island Cataline. 
|CUCUNUBA, a settlement of the correghmento of Ubate in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of a cold temperature, and produces the fruits of this climate. It consists of 100 families, including those of its vicinity, and of 80 Indians ; is nine leagues to the n. of Santa Fe. 
|CUCUNUCO, a mountain to the e. of the pro vince and government of Popayan, eternally covered with snow. From it rises the river Purase, as also the river La Plata. It takes its name from a nation of Indians, by whom it was inhabit
|CUE 
549 
ed, and of whom a few only, who are reduced to the faith, remain. 
|CUCUllPE, a settlement of the province and government of Sonora in Nueva Espana: situate on the shore of the river of its name, between the settlements of Dolores and Ticapa. 
|CUCURULU, a river of the kingdom of Peru, which runs through the country of the Canisiencs Indians to the e. of the Andes. It abounds in fish of a very fine quality, which serve as food to the barbarians ; runs e. and being much swelled by the waters it collects from others, enters the river Santa Rosa. 
|CUCUTA, SAX JOSEPH DE, a settlement of the government and jurisdiction of Pamplona in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of a hot temperature, though healthy, of great commerce, owing to the cacao with which it abounds, and which is brought by persons coming from various parts, the greater portion of it being embarked on the river Sulia for Maracaibo. It contains more than 100 rich Indians, but is infested with snakes, lice, and other noxious insects and reptiles. 
|CUCUTA, an extensive valley of this province, between the cities of Pamplona and S. Christoval, discovered by Juan de San Martin in 1534 ; cele brated for its fertility, and excellent breed of mules, by which the kingdom is supplied. It is watered by many streamlets which render it luxu riant and fertile, and most particularly in cacao of the finest quality. The herb on which the mules chiefly feed is wild marjoram. 
|CUDAJA, a lake of the province and country of Las Amazonas, in the territory possessed by the Portuguese. It is formed by one of the arms which is thrown out by the river Maranon, and returns to enter the same, in the country of the Cabauris Indians. 
|CUDIHUEL, a settlement of Indians of the district of Guadalabquea in the kuigdom of Chile, on the shore of the river Valdivia. 
|CUDUUINI, a small river of the province and government of Cumana. It rises in the serrania of Imataca, runs s. and enters the Curguiu on the n. side. 
|CUEBAYA, a settlement of the province and government of Sonora in Nueva Espana ; situate at the source of the river Bezani, to the w. of the garrison which takes this name. 
|CUECA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Lucanas in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Chipan. 
|CUELLO, a settlement of the jurisdiction of Tocayma, and government of Mariqnita, i* 
550 
|CUE 
the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; situate in a great valley called the Llano Grande, where is bred a large proportion of neat-cattle. Upon its side is the river of its name, which presently enters the Saldana, and is full of fish. It is of a hot tempe rature, abounds in maize, cacao, tobacco, yucas
 and plantains ; and amongst the sand of the river s side is found a great quantity of gold. It contains 700 housekeepers, and a little more than 80 Indians. It is 40 leagues to the s. w. of Santa Fe. 
|CUENCA, a province and corregimiento of the kingdom of Quito ; bounded n. by the province of Riobamba ; s, by that of Jaen de Bracamoros ; e. by that of Guayaquil ; w. by that of Quijos and Macas ; n. e. by that of Chimbo ; and s. e. by that of Loxa. Its temperature is mild, balm and healthy. Great herds of cattle are bred here, and it consequently abounds in flesh-meats ; likewise in every species of birds, grains, pulse, garden herbs, sugar, and cotton ; the natives mak ing of the latter very good woven articles, and in which they trade, as well as in wheat, chick-peas, bark, French beans, lentils, hams, and sweetmeats. Its mines are of gold, silver, copper, quicksilver, and sulphur; but none of them are worked; also in the llanos or plain of Talqui, arc some mines of alabaster, extremely fine, though somewhat soft. The principal traffic of this province are floor-carpets, cabinet articles, and tapestries, here called patios de corte, (cloths of the court), beauti fully worked, and which are so highly esteemed that no house in the kingdom, that has any pre tensions to elegance and convenience, is seen with out them. It is watered by four large rivers, call ed Yanuncay, Machangara, Banos, and Tumebamba; the latter being also called Matadero, and is the largest. It abounds in bark and cochineal, the latter being gathered in great quantities, and employed in the dyeing of baizes, which are esteemed the best of any in America. Its tanned hides and prepared skins are equally in high esti mation. It is, in short, more highly favoured than any other province in natural riches; and it would not have to envy any other, were it not that its inhabitants, who have been called Morlacos, were of a haughty, domineering disposition, great disturbers of peace, and more inclined to riot and diversion than to labour. The capital is 
|CUENCA, SANTA ANA DE, a city founded by Gil Ramirez Davalos, in 1557, in the valley of Yunquilla, celebrated for its pleasantness and fertility ; this valley is six leagues and an half long, and as many wide in the middle of the serrania ; from this sernmta issue, to water the same valley, four large 
|CUE 
rivers, the first called Machangara, which runs r* of the city, and very close to it; the second,, which runs to the n. is called Matadero, being also near the town ; the third Yanuncay, at half a quarter of a league s distance, and the fourth Banos : of all these united is formed a very large one, which af terwards takes the name of Paute, and which has in its environs mines of gold and silver. This city is large, and one of the most beautiful of any in the kingdom. The parish church, which was erected into a cathedral, and head of the bishopric of the province, in the year J786, is magnificent. It has four parishes, the five following convents, viz. of the religious order of St. Francis, St. Domingo, St. Augustin, St. Peter Nolasco, and a college which belonged to the regulars of the company of Jesuits, two monasteries of nuns, one of La Concepcion, and the other of Santa Teresa, and an hospi tal, being one of the most sumptuous, convenient, and well attended possible ; the whole of these being very superior edifices. The streets run in straight lines ; the temperature is kind, mild, and healthy; and the neighbourhood abounds in every kind of flesh, and in whatsoever productions can be required, as pulse, vegetables, and fruits. Some very fine large cheeses are made here, which resemble those of Parma, and are carried as dain ties to Lima, Quito, and other parts. The sugar, which is made in great quantities, is of the finest and most esteemed sort, as are ako the conserves of various fruits, which arc known by the name of caxetas de Cuenca. A few years ago, a hat manu factory was established here, when a stamp was made bearing the resemblance of an Emperor Inca, and with the motto, " Lahore duce, cornite fortuna." This proved one of the best and most useful manufactories of any in the city. In the territory to the s. is the height of Tarqui, cele brated for being the spot where the base of the meridian was taken by the academicians of the sciences of Paris, M. Godin, Bouger, and La Condaminc, assisted by Jorge Juan and Don Anto nio de Ulloa, who accompanied them, in 1742. This city is subject to tempests, which form on a sudden when the sky is clear, and which are ac companied with terrible thunder and lightning, the women apply themselves to labour, and it is by these that is carried on the great commerce which exists in baizes which they fabricate, and arefheld in high esteem, together with other wo ven articles. It is the native place of the Father Sebastian Sedefio, missionary apostolic of the ex tinguished company of the Jesuits in the province oi Mainas. The population of Cuenca is 14,000 
|CUE 
souls. Sixty leagues from Quito, in lat. 2 55 s. and long. 78 50 . 
|CITENCA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Angaraez in Pern ; annexed to the curacy of Conayca. In its district is a spring of Lot water, which issues boiling. 
|CUENCAME, SAN ANTONIO DE, a town of the province of Tepeguana, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya. It is the real of the silver mines, where reside numbers of people of all ranks. It has a convent of the religious order of St. Francis, and in its district are various manufactories for grinding the metals that are extracted from the mines. It is 37 leagues to the n. of the capital Guadiana, and 24 from Durango. 
|CUENCO, a settlement of the head settlement of Tirindaro, KodalealeKa mayor of Valladolid,in (he province and bishopric of Mechoacan; situate in a glen surrounded by many mountains. Through its gutters runs a crystalline stream of sweet water, which serves to fertilize its orchards and cultivated grounds. It contains 66 families of Indians, and is two short leagues to the . of its head settle ment. 
|CUENTLA, a settlement of the head settlement of San Francisco, of the valley and alcaldia mayor of Zultepec in JNueva Espana. It contains 53 families of Indians. 
|CUERNAVACCA, a town of the intendancy of Mexico, the ancient Quauhnahuac, on the s. declivity of the cordillera of Guchilaque, in a tem perate and delicious climate, finely adapted for the cultivation of the fruit-trees of Europe. Height 1655 metres, or 5429 feet. 
|CUERNO, Island of, or of the HORNS, in the N. sea, near the coast of Florida, between the islands Delfina and De Navios. 
|CUERO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Riobamba in the kingdom of Quito. Some write it with a Q. 
|CUERNOS, a small river of the province and government of Maracaibo. It is an arm of the Palmar, which enters the great lake. 
|CUES, SAN JUAN DE LOS, a settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Cuicatlan in Nueva Espana. It contains 72 families of Indians, whose commerce is in maize, French beans, and fruits. In its vicinity is a sugar-mill, at which 60 families of Negro slaves assist. v 
|CUES, SAN ANTONIO DE LOS, in the intend ancy of Oaxaca in Nueva Espana. A very po pulous place on the road from Oi i/aba to Oaxaca, celebrated for the remains of ancient Mexican for tifications. 
|CUEUAS, SAN AGUSTIN DE LAS, a settlement 
C U 1 
551 
and head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Coyoacan in Nueva Espana. It is of a very good temperature and of a healthy situation, abounding in waters and fruit-trees, and covered with country houses, orchards, and gardens, which serve as a recreation to the people of Mex ico. It has a convent of the religious order of St. Domingo, and 751 families; lying three leagues to the s. of Mexico, and two from its capital. 
|CUEUAS, another settlement, of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of Jesuits in the province of Tepeguana, and kingdom of Nueva Espana; situate on the shore of the river Florido, and at the distance of six leagues from the garrison of the valley of San Bartolome. 
|CUKUAS, another, of the missions which wore held by the same regulars of the company, in the province of Taraumara, of the same kingdom a* the former, 20 leagues to the s. of the real of the mines of Chiguagua. 
|CUEYTE, a river in the island of Cuba, which abounds with alligators. 
|CUGUI, a small river of the district of Toltenbaxo in the kingdom of Chile, it runs n. and enters the Tolten. 
CUIABA, JESUS DE, a town of the province of Matagroso in Brazil ; situate on the shore of the river Paraguay, at its source, near the large lake of LosXareyes. In its vicinity arc some abundant gold mines, which have been worked by the Por tuguese since the year 1740. Lat. 14 33 . 
|CUIABA, a river of this kingdom, and in the territory of its name. It rises in the mountains, runs n. and afterwards turning its course to the w. enters the sea. 
|CUIABENO, a lake of the province and go vernment of Quijos and Macas in the kingdom of Quito. It is to the s. of the settlement of San Antonio de Amoguajes. 
|CUIAC, SANTIAGO DE, a settlement of the head settlement of Amatlan, and alcaldia mayor of Zacatlan, in Nueva Espana. It lies four leagues from its head settlement, but the journey to it from thence is almost impracticable, owing to its being situate in the middle of the sierra. 
CUiACLAZALA, a settlement of the head settlement of San Luis dc la Costa, and of the al caldia mayor of Tlapa, in Nueva Espana. It produces a great quantity of cochineal, this being the only production in which its inhabitants mer chandize. These are composed of 60 families of Indians. It is seven leagues to the s. of its capital. 
|CUIANA, a small river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas. It flows in (be territory of the Carigueres or Mutuanis Indians, runs e, and enters the Madera opposite the great cataract. 
|CUIAPAN, a settlement of the head settlement of Atoyaque, and alcaldia mayor of Zayula, in Nueva Espafia. It contains 70 families of Indians, who live by agriculture and making coarse stuffs. It is one league to the s. of its head settle ment. 
CUIATAN, a settlement of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Caxitlan, being a league and a half s distance to the s. w. 
|CUIAUTEPEC, SANTIAGO DE, a settlement of tiic head settlement of Olinala, and alcaldia mqj}or of Tlapa, in Nueva Espana. It contains 32 families of Indians, and is two leagues to the n. e. of its head settlement. 
|CUIAUTEPEC, another settlement of the head settlement of Ayotitlan, and alcaldia mayor of Amola, in the same kingdom. It contains 13 fa milies of Indians, who live by agriculture and breeding cattle; is 10 leagues to the w. of its head settlement. 
|CUICATLAN, the alcaldia mayor of the pro vince and bishopric of Mechoacan. It is 19 leagues in length from e. to w. and 1 1 in width n. s. It is of a hot temperature, abounds in salt petre, scarlet-dye, and cotton, of which beautiful ornamental dresses are made ; these being the prin cipal source of its commerce. The capital is the settlement of the same name, inhabited by 125 fa milies of Cuicatecos Indians, who cultivate great quantities of maize, French beans, and cotton. It is 70 leagues to the e. with a slight inclination to the s. of Mexico. The other settlements of this district are, 
Alpizagua, Teponastla, 
Cotahuiztla, Teutitlan, 
Nacantepec, Santa Ana, 
Quiotepeque, San Lucas, 
Coyula, San Antonio, 
Izcatlan, San Mateo, 
Papalotipac, San Martin, 
Santiago, Casa Blanca, 
San Lorenzo, Nanahuatipac, 
San Geronimo, San Juan de los Cues, 
Santa Cruz, Thecomahuaca, 
Santa Maria, Teopuxco, 
San Lorenzo, Santiago, 
Los Santos Reyes, Huehuetlan, 
Tepeuzila, San Pedro, 
San Pedro, San Juan, 
San Andres, Huahutla, 
Santa Maria, Chilchola. 
C U 1 
the province and bishopric of Mechoacan ; bounded e. by the province of Acambaro ; n. by that of Zelaya ; w. by that of Pasquaro ; and s. by that of Valladolid. It is in length eight leagues from e. to w. and five in width n. s. It is surrounded by a lake of wholesome water, which gives its name to the jurisdiction, and which, towards the n. part, becomes dry in the summer season, its waters being supplied from certain drains from another large lake which lies on its s. side. The temperature here is, for the most part, mild and dry, and the place abounds with salutary waters, which bubble out from a fountain in an island of the above mentioned lake. Its commerce is very small, since it produces only maize, French beans, and Chile pepper, and a kind of fish found in great abundance in both the lakes, called charaes. 
The capital is the settlement of the same name ; situate in front of the island formed by the lake. It contains a convent of the religious order of St. Augustin, and 190 families of Indians, including those of the wards of its district, 72 of Spaniards, 11 of Mulattoes, and 43 of Mustees. It is 50 leagues to the w. of Mexico. The other settlements arc, 
San Marcos, San Buena Ventura, 
San Geronimo, Cupandaro, 
Sta. Ana Maya, San Juan. 
|CUICOCHA, a large lake of the province and corregimicnto of Octavalo in the kingdom of Quito, surrounded by living stone. To the e. it has a rock, where it forms a streamlet, which after wards enters the river Blanco. It does not appear to receive its waters from any source, and is thought to be filled through subterraneous aque ducts from the mountain of Cota-cache, which is covered with eternal snow. In the middle of this lake rise two hills, which have the appearance of two beautiful isles, the one being covered with trees, and filled with stags and mountain goats, and the other being bedecked with a herb called pajon, amongst which thrive many Indian rabbits, which, in the language of the country, are called cuy, and from thence the name of Cuy-cocha, which means the lake of Indian rabbits. The water which runs between the two islands, forms a channel of 3000 fathoms. This lake belongs to the noble family of the Chiribogas of Quito. 
CUILAPA, a settlement of the head settlement ana alcaldia mayor of Ygualapa in Nueva Espaua, half a quarter of a league s distance from its ca pital. 
Cm LAP A, a town, the head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Quatro Villas in Nueva Espana ; situate at the skirt of a mountain. 
It is of a mild temperature, but rather inclined to cold than heat. It contains 264 families of Jndians, and a convent of the religious order of St. Domingo, and in its district are various estates, in which, and in the 10 settlements of which its dis trict consists, are collected scarlet dye, seeds, fruits, coal, woods, and timber. It is two leagues s. e. of the capital. 
|CUILOTO, a river of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It rises in the mountains of Bogota, runs c. through the llanos or plains of Casanare and Meta, and afterwards enters the river Meta. Some barbarian Indians, the liraras and Chinalos, live about its borders, dispersed amongst the woods. 
CUIQUE, a settlement of the province and go vernment of Venezuela ; situate on the shore of the lake Tacarigua, towards the s. 
CUIQUILA, SANTA MARIA DE, a settlement and head settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Tepozcolula in Nueva Espana. It is of a cold tem perature, contains 76 families of Indians, whose only employment is that of making stone flags ; and these in sufficient quantity to supply the wliole province. Is nine leagues s.w. of its capital. 
|CUISILLO, SAN FRANCISCO DE, a settlement and head settlement of the alcaldia mayor of the town of Leon, in the province and bishopric of Mechoacan, contains 83 families of Indians, who employ themselves in the cultivation of maize and many fruits. It is very close to its capital. 
|CUITES, a settlement of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of Je suits, in the province and government of Cinaloa of Nueva Espana. 
|CUITI, a river of the province and govern ment of Darien, of the kingdom of Tierra Firme. It rises in the mountains towards the n. and enters the sea between the islands Palmas and Pinos. 
|CUITINA, a settlement of the province and corregimienlo of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; situate in the llanura of Sogamoso, be tween the settlement of this name and that of Tota. It is of a cold temperature, produces wheat, maize, papas, and the other fruits of a cold climate. It contains 60 housekeepers, and as many Indians; lies eight leagues to the n. of Tunja. 
CUIXTLAHUACA, SAN JUAN DE, a settle ment of the alcaldia mayor of Yanguitlan in Nueva Espana. It contains 604 families of Indians, with those of the wards of its district. It is of a hot temperature, and lies 16 leagues s. w. of its capi tal. It produces some scarlet dye and seeds. 
|CUIXTLAHUACA, SAN JUAN J)E, another settle ment, of the alcaldia mayor of Tlapa in the same kingdom. It contains 15 families of Indians. 
|VOL. I. 
|CUL 
553 
|CDJENA, CANO DE, an arm of the river Negro, in the country of Las Amazonas. It runs nearly due s. and joins the Parime. 
|CUJILLOS, a settlement of province and go vernment of Jaen de Bracamoros in the kingdom of Quito; situate on the shore of the river Ma ra non. 
|CUJO. SeeCuYA. 
|CUL DE SAC, a settlement and parish of the French, in the part possessed by them in the island of St. Domingo. It is in the head of the w. and upon the w. coast, on the shore of a river be tween port Principe and the river of Naranjos or Oranges. 
|CUL DE SAC, another settlement and parish in the island of Guadalupe. It lies on the shore of the bay of its name, between the rivers Vondi* piques and Testu. There is also another settle ment in the same bay, between the rivers Lezard and Sarceiles. 
|CUL DE SAC, a large bay and convenient port of the same island, which is the principal of the whole island, and in which are many smaller islands. There is also another close to it, dis tinguished by the title of Cul de Sac Petit ; and these are divided by an isthmus of land, which al lows a communication to the same lakes by a nar row channel. 
|CULATAS, a small settlement of the district and jurisdiction of the town of San Gil, in the corregimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra nada; annexed to the curacy of Oiba. It lies be tween the settlements of Socorro and Charala. 
|CULAUI, a river of the island of La Laxa, in the kingdom of Chile. It runs w. forming a bend between those of Huaque and Duqueco, and enters the Biobio. 
|CULCHE, a settlement of Indians, of the dis trict of Guadalabquen, and kingdom of Chile; situate at the source of the river Valdivia. 
|CULEBRAS, Rio DE, a river on the coast of the province and government of Costarica, of the kingdom of Guatemala. It runs into the N. sea, between the river Bocaes and the bay of Almirante. 
|CULEBRAS, Rio DE, another river in the pro vince and kingdom of Tierra Firme. It rises in the mountains of the n. coast, and point of San Bins, and runs into the sea to the w. 
|CULEBRAS, Rio DC, another, of the island of Santo Domingo, in the e. head ; runs into the sea in the great bay of Samami, between the rivers Magua and Yaina. 
|CULEBRAS, Rio DE, a lake of the province and government of Venezuela, between the river of Sa* 4 B 
554 
linas and that of Chirgua, in the space left by these rivers as they run to enter the Portuguesa. 
|CTLEBUAS, Rio DE, a settlement of the same province and government as is the former lake ; situate on the shore of the river Yaraqui, to the e. of the town of San Felipe. 
|CULEBRAS, Rio DE, an island of the N. sea, near the coast of the province and government of Cartagena, at the entrance of the large river of La Magdalcna. 
|CULEBRILLAS, a small island of the S. sea, in the bay of Panama, of the province and go vernment of Tierra Firme ; is one of those which form with that of Perico the port of this name. 
|CULIACAN, a province and alcaldia mayor of the kingdom of Nueva Galicia ; bounded ;?. and n. e. by the province of Cinaloa, s. by that of Copala, s. w. by the kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya, 3. by that of Chiamatlan, and w. by the gulf of California. It is 60 leagues in length and 50 in width. It is fertile, and abounds in all sorts of productions; is watered by various rivers, par ticularly the Umaya, which is very large, and in which are caught great quantities offish. It emp ties itself into the S. sea, in the port of Navitoos. It abounds in various earths, salt, and silver mines, and in many settlements of Mexican Indians, reduced by the missionaries of the religion of St. Francis. The capital is of the same name. Lat.2458 tt. 
|CULIACAN, with the dedicatory title of San Mi guel, a town which was founded by Nunez de Guzman in 1531 ; situate on the banks of a small river, which afterwards unites itself with the Umaya. It is 160 leagues from Guadalaxara, and 260 from Mexico. The other settlements of this province arc, 
Cozela Real de Minas, Binapa, Tacuchameta, . Baita. 
Buya, 
|CULIACAN, a settlement of the intendancy of Sonora in Nueva Espana, celebrated in the Mexican history under the name of Hueicolhuacan. The population is estimated at 10,800 souls. ~\ 
|CULIACAN, a river of this province, which di vides the jurisdiction of the same from that of Ci naloa. It runs into the sea at the entrance of the gulf of California, or Mar Roxo de Cortes. At its mouth or entrance are some very dangerous shoals of the same name. See ST. MICHAEL. 
|CULLI, a settlement of the province and cor regimiento of Canta in Peru j annexed to the cu racy of Pari. 
|CUM 
|CULLOUMAS,a settlement of Indians, of the province and colony of Georgia ; situate on the shore of the river Apalachicola. 
|CULLOUMAS, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Canta in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of San Buenaventura. 
|CULLU E, a large lake of the province and corregimiento of Tarma in Peru. From it is formed the canal which empties itself into the river Paria. 
|CULLU RI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Paria in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Toledo. 
|CULLU RQUI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Cotabambas in Peru, in the vici nity of which, in an estate for breeding cattle, is a poor chapel of Santa Rosa, and near to this two very large rocks, which, being touched with small stones, send forth a sound similar to bells of the best temper and metal. 
|CULPEPPER, a county in Virginia, between the Blue ridge and the tide waters, which con tains 22,105 inhabitants, of whom 8226 are slaves. The court-house of this county is 45 miles from Fredcricksburg, and 95 from Charlottesville.l 
|CULTA, a settlement of the province and correginiienlo of Paria in Peru ; annexed to the cu racy of Condocondo. 
|CULTEPEQUE, a settlement of the real of the silver mines of the province and alcaldia mayor of Tlaxcala in Nueva Espana. 
|CULUACAN, SAN LUCAS DE, a settlement of the head settlement and alca dia mayor of Yzucar in Nueva Espana. It contains 50 families of Indians, and was formerly the capital of the juris diction. Here there still remain some baths of warm water, celebrated for the cure of many in firmities. It is two leagues to the s. with a slight inclination to the s. e. of its head settlement. 
|CUMA, SAN ANTONIO DE, a town of the pro vince and captainship of Maranan in Brazil. It contains a good parish-church, two convents of monks, one of the order of Carmen, and the other of La Merced; and at a short distance from the town is a house which was the residence of the re gulars of the company of JeMiits. This town be longs to the lordship of the house of Antonio Alburquerque Coello de Carballo. It is three leagues from its capital. 
|CUMA, SAN ANTONIO DE, another settlement in this province and kingdom ; situate near the coast and the cape of its name. 
|CUMA, SAN ANTONIO DE. This cape is also in the same captainship, between a bar and the bay of Cabelo de Velha. The aforesaid bar is a 
|CUM ANA. 
555 
hoal of rock, which runs into the sea at the en trance of the river Maraiian, in the same pro vince. 
|CUMAIPI, a small river of the country of Las Amazonas, or part of Guayana possessed by the Portuguese. It runs e. under the equinoctial line, and enters the Maranon, at its mouth or entrance into the sea. 
|CUMANA, a province and government of S. America, called also Nueva Andalucia ; though, properly speaking, the latter is only a part of Cu mana, which contains in it also other provinces. It extends 76 geographical leagues from e. to w. from the point of Piedra, the oriental extremity of Tierra Firme, on the coast of Paria, and great mouth of Drago, as far as the mouth of the river Unare, the deep ravines of which form, as it were, limits to the w. between this province and that of Venezuela; the waters of the aforesaid river run ning for a great distance towards the serrania or settlement of Pariguan ; from which point the line of division is undecided as far as the river Orinoco, 20 leagues to the s. From the n. to s. it is 270 leagues, namely, from the sea-coast to the great river or country of Las Amazonas, the terri tory of which is divided by the renowned river Orinoco. On the e. it is terminated by the sea, which surrounds the coast of Paria, the gulf Triste, the mouths of the Orinoco, the river Esquivo and Cayenne ; on the s. w. it is bounded by the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, which extends its limits as far as the river Orinoco, being divided by this river from Guaj ana. It is a continued serrania t running along the whole coast from e. to w. being nine or 10 leagues wide ; and although it is not without some llanos or extensive plains, these are but little known, and are entirely impassable, owing to the swamps and lakes caused by the in undations of the rivers which flow down from the sierra. The sierra, in that part which looks to the n. is barren, and in the vicinities of the coast the soil is impregnated with nitre, and is unfruitful. The temperature is healthy but cold, especially at night. The most common productions of this pro vince are maize, which serves as bread, supplying the want of wheat, yuca root, of which another kind of bread is made, cazabe, plantains, and other fruits and pulse peculiar to America ; also cacao , although with great scarcity, and only in the n. part ; and sugar-canes, which are only cultivated in a sufficient degree to supply the sugar consumed here. It has some cattle ; and although there are means of breeding and feeding many herds, the natives choose rather to supply themselves from 
the neighbouring province of Barcelona, notwith standing the difficulty of bringing them hither over such rugged and almost impassable roads. The whole of the coast yields an immense abundance of fish, also of shell fish of various kinds, and of the most delicate flavour. Of these the consumption is very great, and a great proportion of them are salted, and carried to the inland parts ; and to the province of Venezuela alone upwards of 3000 quintals yearly. It has several convenient and se cure ports and bays, and indeed the whole coast is covered with them, as the sea is here remarkably calm, and peculiarly so in the celebrated gulf of Cariaco, as also in the gulfs of the lake of Obispo, J uanantar, and Gurintar. It has many very abun dant saline grounds, so much so, that the whole coast may be looked upon as forming one ; since in any part of it as many might be established as were necessary ; and this without mentioning that celebrated one of Araya, and those of the gulf Triste, between the settlements of Iraca and Soro, and the Sal Negra, (Black Salt), used only by the Indians. In this province there are only three rivers of consideration, that of Cariaco, of Cumana, and of Guarapiche : the others which flow down from the serrania are of little note, and incorporate themselves with the former before they arrive in the valley. Its jurisdiction contains six settle ments belonging to the Spaniards, seven belonging to the Indians, 13 to the missions supported by the Aragonese Capuchin fathers, and 16 belong ing to the regular clergy. [From the river Unare to the city of Cumana, the soil is very fertile. From the Araya to the distance of between 20 and 25 leagues, more to the e. the coast is dry, sandy, and unfruitful. The soil is an inexhaustible mine both of marine and mineral salt. That which is near the Orinoco is fit only for grazing, and this is the use to which it is put. It is here that all the pens of the province are kept. All the rest of this country is admirably fertile. The prairies, the valleys, the hills, proclaim by their verdure and by the description of the produce, that nature has de posited here the most active principles of vegetable life. The most precious trees, the mahogany, the Brazil and Campechy woods, grow even up to the coast of Paria ; and there are found here many rare and agreeable birds. In the interior of the go vernment of Cumana are mountains, some of which are very high : the highest ifc the Tumeriqufri, which is 936 fathoms above the surface of the sea. The cavern of Guacharo, so famous among the Indians, is in this mountain. It is immense, and serves as an habitation for thousands of night bird*, 4 B 2 
556 
C U M A N A. 
a new species of the caprimulgas of Linnaeus, the Fat of which makes the oil of Guacharo. Its situa tion is majestic, and ornamented with the most brillant vegetation. A pretty large river issues from the cavern, and in the interior are heard the dismal cries of the birds, which the Indians ascribe to departed souls, which they think are all obliged to enter this cavern, to pass into the other world. The principal colonies belonging to Cumana lie to the ao. ; as Barcelona, Piritu, Clarinas, &c. At 12 leagues to s. e. of Cumana is the valley of Cu manacoa, where are tobacco plantations belonging to the king. The soil there is so adapted to this species of produce, that the tobacco ground has obtained a decided preference throughout the country over that which is cultivated in any other part of Tierra Firme. Cigars made of the tobacco of Cumanacoa fetch easily double the price of those made with the tobacco of any other place. In the environs of Cumanacoa, are the Indian villages of San Fernando, Arenas, Aricagua, which are all situated on an extremely fertile soil. Farther in the interior are the valleys of Carepe, Guanaguana, Cocoyar, &c. which are also very fertile, but un cultivated ; but the part which appears most to promise prosperity is the coast of the gulf of Paria, between the most s. mouth of the Orinoco and the mouth of the Guarapiche. The whole territory of the government of Cumana is completely hemmed in by ravines, rivulets, and rivers, equally useful for the purposes of watering the land, working hydraulic machines, and for navigation. The rivers that discharge themselves into the sea to the . are the Neveri ajid Mansanares, both possessing little water, and having but short courses. Those that fall into the gulf of Paria to the e. flow through greater extent of country. Some join the river Guarapiche, which is navigable as far as 25 leagues from the sea ; and of these are the Colorado, Guatatar, Caripe, Punceres, Tigre, Guayuta, &c. There are others which run to the s. and after having watered the province, fall into the Orinoco. The produce of the government of Cumana can therefore be shipped, according to convenience, to the n. by Barcelona and Cumana; to the e. by the gulf of Paria, and to the s. by the Orinoco. At an average of four years, from 1799 to 1803, the quantity of cacao exported from this province amounted to 18,000 fanegas. Its population is 80,000 persons, including the missions of the Aragonese Capuchins. The capital is 
|CUMANA, SANTA INES DE, a city founded by Gonzalo de Ocampo in 1520. It is of a hot and unhealthy temperature, and its territory is dry and 
unfruitful. It lies within a cannon s shot of the sea shore, in the gulf formed by the sea in the shape of a semicircle, where all kinds of vessels may be built. On its beech is a saline ground, which, without being regularly worked, supplies sufficient salt both for the use of the city and of the immediate settlements. It lies in the middle of the llanura, or plain of the river of its name. The same river passes in front of the city, serving as a barrier to it,, and so enters the mouth of the gulf. At the back begins the serrania, which for more than eight leagues is sterile and impassable, on account of brambles and thorns. The soil towards the front of the city is composed of pebble, gypsum, and sand, which, during the prevalence of the wind Brisa, occasions an excessive heat, {and is very offensive to the eyes ; bad sight being here a very common malady. Nearly in the centre of the town, upon an elevated ground, stands the castle of Santa Maria de la Cabeza, which is of a square figure, and commands the city. In the lofty part of the sierra are seen three round hills ; upon the highest of which stands a castle called San Anto nio, and upon the lowest a fort called La Candelaria. There is upon the beach another castle y which is denominated the fort of Santa Catalina : The same is at the mouth of the river, just where a sand bank has of late been formed, so as to block up the entrance of the river, and to render it dan gerous for large vessels. The fort is at some dis tance from the gulf; and as a wood has of late sprung up between this and the shore, it is not possible to see the water from the fort. It has, be sides the parish church, which is very poor, two convents of monks, one of St. Francis, and the other of St. Domingo. These form its population, amounting to 600 souls, who maintain themselves in the poor estates, which are about 50 in number, and produce some sugar-canes, of which are made brandy, and sugar of the colour of a yellow wax used in the country : some fruits and j/ucas t maize and cacao, are also grown here, but in such small quantities that a crop never yields upwards of 100 bushels. These estates are, for the most part, at some distance from the city, and the greater number of them are inhabited by their masters, the poorer inhabitants alone dwelling in the city. At a small distance from it, is an hermitage dedi cated to Nuestra Senora del Carmen. [Reaumur s thermometer rises here generally in the month of July to 23 during the day and to 19 during the night. 
The maximum, 27. 
The minimum, 17 
C U M A N A. 
557 
The elevation of the city above the level of the sea is 53 feet. In July, Duluc s hydrometer ge nerally indicates from 50 to 53 of humidity. The maximum, 66. 
The minimum, 46 3 . 
By Seaussure s cyanometer, there are 24
 of blue in the sky, whilst at Caracas there are only 18, and in Europe generally 14. 
The seat of the government of the two pro vinces is at the city of Cumana. The governor, nominated for five years, is also rice-patron, and in this capacity nominates to all vacant cures, and fills all the church offices, the appointment to which forms a part of the prerogative of the crown. He has the administration of the finances of his department, as deputy of the intendants - and in this capacity he superintends the levying of the taxes, decides disputes, directs the ordinary expences, and receives the accounts of the offices of administration ; but the political relations with fo reign colonies, and all military matters, depend on the captain-general of Caracas. The governor is also under the orders of the intendant in his fis cal regulations and commercial measures. To the . of the city of Cumana lies the gulf of Cariaco. The river Mansanares, which separates on the s. the city from the suburbs inhabited by the Guayqueris Indians, surrounds the s. and the w. sides of the town. This is the only water that the inhabitants of Cumana drink. It has the inconve nience of often being not limpid, though rarely unwholesome. The city enjoys a healthy, but scarcely ever a fresh air ; the heat is continual. The sea-breeze is nevertheless very regular, and moderates, during a great part of the day, the blaze of the sun. The only defence that
 Cu mana has is a fort, situated on an elevation rang ing along the back of the city. The city itself has but a garrison of 231 troops of the line, and a company of artillery. The militia increases the public force in time of war. The total number of inhabitants is 24,000. The city is now four times as large as it was fifty years ago. Jt increases with so much rapidity that the ancient boundaries not affording convenient space for new houses, people have been obliged, within this short time, to build upon the left bank of the Mansanares, to the to. of the village of the Guayqueris. These new houses are already so numerous as to form a village com municating with the city by a bridge ; and the in habitants, for their convenience, had built, in 1803, a church. The first street that was formed was named Emparan, in honour of the governor of this name. All the houses of Cumana are low, and rather solidly built. The frequent earthquakes 
experienced here since these ten years, have obliged them to sacrifice beauty and elegance to personal safety. The violent shocks felt in De cember 1797, threw down almost all the stonebuildings, and rendered uninhabitable those that were left standing. The earthquake experienced here in November 1799, caused a variation of the needle of 45 minutes. According to M. de Humboldt, Cumana is exposed to these earthquakes in con sequence of its proximity to the lake of Cariaco, which appears to have some communication with the volcanoes of Cumucuta, which vomit hydrogen gas, sulphur, and hot bituminous writer. It is observed that the earthquakes happen only after the rains, and then the caverns of the Cuchivano vomit during night inflammable gas, which is seen to blaze 200 yards high. It is probable that the decomposition of the water in the slate marl, which is full of pyrites, and contains hydrogenous particles, is one of the principal causes of this phe nomenon. The population of Cumana, amount ing to 80,000 souls, is a great part composed of white Creoles, amongst whom much natural capa city is discovered. They are very much attached to their native soil, and generally give themselves up entirely to the occupation that birth or fortune has assigned them. Some are employed in agri culture, commerce, and navigation, and others in fishing. The abundance of fish found about Cu mana enables them to salt an astonishing quantity, which they send to Caracas and the other cities of these provinces, as well as to theWindward islands, from whence they import in return iron tools for husbandry, provisions, and contraband merchan dise. The cargoes are always of little value. They are satisfied with small profits, which they augment by the frequency of the voyages. Capi tals of 4 or 5000 dollars, which in other places would appear insufficient for any commercial enterprise, support five or six families at Cu mana. Activity and perseverance form almost the only source of the comfort that reigns here. The Creoles of Cumana w,ho engage in literary pur suits are distinguished 1 by their penetration /judg ment, and application. They h?.ve not exactly the vivacity observable in the Creoles of Maracaibo, but they compensate for this by superior good sense and solidity of parts. The retail trades of Cumana are carried on by Catalonians and people from the Canaries. Among the produc tions in which this city trades, the cacao and cacaeo!l deserve to be mentioned. Medicinal plants might also form an important article of commerce, were not the inhabitants ignorant of their qualities, and the manner of preparing them , There is. 
553 
|CUM 
found in the environs of Cumana what the Spa niards call tuspa, a species of the Jesuits bark ; the calaguala, a plant, the root of which is dissolvent, aperitive, and sudorific ; the plssipini, a species of emetic ; the caranapire, a species of sage ; and the tualua, a inure powerful purga tive than jalap. There are also a great number of spices, which are suffered to rot on the spot where first they grew. In lat. 10 27 . Long. 64 13 . The settlements of the province of Cumana are, San Baltasar de los Curupa, 
Arias, Rio Caribes, 
San Felipe de Austria, A raja. 
Those of the missions, Cocuisas, San Francisco, 
San Feliz, Santa Maria de los An
San Lorenzo, geles, 
Chacaracuan, San Antonio. 
Of the doctrines (doctrinas)
 Cacuar, Unare, 
Punccres, Guauaguana, 
Soro, Caicara, 
Irapa, Yaguara, 
Caripe, Teresen, 
Guayula, Tipirin, 
Amacuro, Paio. 
|CUMANA, a river of the above province and government, which rises in the spot called Cocoyan, in the serrania. It runs n. following this course continually through the sierra until it flows down to the plain near the city, from whence it enters the gulf, first having divided itself into four arms. In the winter time it generally over flows ; but as the distance from the sierra to its mouth, or where it enters the sea, is so short, it quickly subsides within its proper bed, when it leaves water enough for the navigation of a barge ; and there would be sufficient for large vessels, were it not for the bar which is at its mouth and im pedes its entrance. In the summer time, how ever, it becomes so dry, that it is scarcely navi gable for canoes. 
|CUMANACOA, a city lying s. e. of Cumana 14 leagues; in the middle of the valley of the same name. The population amounts to 4200 people ; the air is wholesome, the waters have a diureticquality not commonly to be met with. This city wants nothing but hands to avail itself of the produc tions which the richness of the land would yield, if it were cultivated. The fruits have here an un commonly fine savour, taste, and substance. The government gives this city the name of San Bal tasar de los Arias, but that of Cumanacoa has so much prevailed, that it is the only one by which it is now known. See CUMANA. 
2 
|CUM 
|CUMANAGOTA, a city of tlie former pro vince and government, in the kingdom of Tierra Firmc, called also San Baltasar de los Arias. It has a good, convenient, and secure port ; is situate on the skirts of the most elevated part of the serrania, in a fertile valley, which abounds in streams, which irrigate 26 estates of yucales, some small plantations of cacao, and some cattle. The productions of all these estates are consumed in the country ; since, through the unevenness of the roads, it is impossible to carry them out of it, with the exception, however, of tobacco, with which Cumana is supplied. The soil is the most fertile of any in the province, especially to the n. of the sierra, where there might be established some very good cacao estates ; but this is not to be accom plished, considering the scarcity of its inhabitants, and their great poverty. This city, just after the con quest of these countries, was noted for its famous pearl-fisheries, which were afterwards abandoned. Its vicinity was inhabited by many gentile Indians, who were at continual enmity with the Spaniards and the other inhabitants ; but these troublesome people were reduced to obedience by Don Juan de Urpin, who had held consultations for that pur pose with the council of the Indies. The popu lation amounts to 800 souls, including the Negro slaves and the people of colour. 
|CUM API, a large lake of the country of Las Amazonas. It is a waste water of the large river Caqueta, in the territory of the Guayonas Indians. 
-CUMARA, a river of the province and coun try of Las Amazonas, in the territory possessed by the Portuguese, is an arm of the Cuchivara or Purus, which enters the Maranon before the other streams Avhich are tributary to this river. 
|CUMAREBO, a settlement of the province and government of Venezuela ; situate on the seacoast, and at the point of its name, with a good, though small port, and one that is much frequented by vessels. 
|CUMARU, Los SANTOS ANGELES DE, a settle ment of the province and country of Las Amazonas, in the part possessed by the Portuguese ; situate on the shore of a large river. 
|CUMATEN, a small river of the province and colony of Surinam, or part of Guayana possessed by the Dutch. It rises in the mountain of Areyuctuquen, and runs, collecting the waters of many others, to enter the Cuyuni on the s. side. 
|CUMATI, a small river of the province and government of Paraguay. It runs s. and enters the large river of the Portuguese. 
|CUMAYARIS, a barbarous nation of Indiana, 
|CUM 
\vho inhabit the woods tying near the river Cuchigara, bounded by the nation of the Curnanaes. It is but little known. 
|CUMBA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Luya and Chillaos in Peru. 
|CUMBAL, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Pastes in the kingdom of Quito. 
|CUMBAL, a very lofty mountain of this pro vince, always covered with snow ; from it rises the river Carlosama, which runs e. and the Mallama, which runs n. In Lat. 54 n. 
|CUMBAYA, a settlement of the kingdom of Quito, in the corregimiento of the district of Las Cinco Leguas de su Capital. CUMBE. See CHUMBE. CUMBERLAND, Bay of, on the most n. coast of America. Its entrance is beneath the polar circle, and it is thought to have a commu nication with Baffin s bay to the n. In it are seyeral islands of the same name. The bay was thus called by the English, according to Martiniere, who, however, makes no mention of the islands. 
|CUMBERLAND, a port of the island of Cuba, anciently called Guantanamo; but the Admiral Vernon and General Wembort, who arrived here in 1741 with a strong squadron, and formed an encampment upon the strand, building at the same time a fort, gave it this name in honour to the Duke of Cumberland. It is one of the best ports in America, and from its size capable of shelter ing any number of vessels. The climate is salu tary, and the country around abounds in cattle and provisions. Here is also a river of very good fresh water, navigable for some leagues, and named Augusta by the said admiral. It is 20 leagues to the e. of Santiago of Cuba, in lat. 20 . and long. 75 12 w. 
|CUMBERLAND, another bay, of the island of Juan Fernandez, in the S. sea. It lies between two small ports, and was thus named by Admiral Anson. It is the best in the island, although ex posed to the n. wind, and insecure. 
|CUMBERLAND, an island of the province and colony of Georgia, in N. America, near 20 miles distant from the city of Frederick. It has two forts, called William and St. Andrew. The first, which is at the s. extremity, and commands the entrance, called Amelia, is well fortified, and gar risoned with eight cannons. There are also bar racks for 220 men, besides store-houses for arms, provisions, and timber. 
|CUMBERLAND, a harbour on the e. side of "Washington s isles, on the n. a?., coast of N. Ame
559 
rica. It lies s. of Skitikise, and n. of Cummashawaa. J 
|CUMBERLAND House, one of the Hudson sbay company s factories, is situated in New South Wales, in N. America, 158 miles e. n. e. of HiuU son s house, on the s. side of Pine island lake. Lat. 53 58 n. Long. 102 5 w. See NELSON River. 
|CUMBERLAND, a fort in New Brunswick; situated at the head of the bay of Fundy, on the e. side of its n. branch. It is capable of accom modating SOO men. 
|CUMBERLAND, a county of New Brunswick, which comprehends the lands at the head of the bay of Fundy, on the bason called Chebecton, and the rivers which empty into it. It has seve ral townships ; those which are settled are Cum berland, Sackville, Amherst, Hillsborough, and Hopewell. It is watered by the rivers. A u Lac, Missiquash, Napan Macon, Mernramcook, Petcoudia, Chepodie, and Herbert. The three first rivers are navigable three or four miles for ves sels of five tons. The Napan and Macon are shoal rivers ; the Herbert is navigable to its head, 12 miles, in boats ; the others are navigable four or five miles. 
|CUMBERLAND, a town of New Brunswick, in the county of its own name. Here are coal mines. 
CuMBERLAi
County, in the district of Maine, lies between York and Lincoln counties ; has the Atlantic ocean on the ,v. and Canada on the n. Its sea-coast, formed into numerous bays, and lined with a multitude of fruitful islands, is nearly 40 miles in extent in a straight line. Saco river, which runs s. e. into the ocean, is the dividing line be tween this county and York on the s. w. Cape Elizabeth and Casco bay are in this county. Cum berland is divided into 24 
ownships, of which Portland is the chief. It contains 25,450 inha bitants. 
|CUMBERLAND County, in New Jersey, is bounded s. by Delaware bay, n. by Gloucester county, s. e. by cape May, and w. by Salem county. It is divided into seven townships, of which Fairfield and Greenwich are the chief; and contains 8248 inhabitants, of whom 120 are slaves. 
|CUMBERLAND, the w. easternmost township of the state of Rhode Island, Providence county. Pawtucket bridge and falls, in this town, are four miles n. e. of Providence. It contains 1964 inha bitants, and is the only town in the state which has no slaves. 
|CUMBERLAND County, in Pennsylvania, is
560 
|CUM 
bounded n. and n. w. by Mifflin ; e. and . e. by Susquehannah river, which divides it from Dau phin ; 5. by York, and s.w. by Franklin county. It is 47 miles in length, and 42 in breadth, and has 10 townships, of which Carlisle Is the chief. The county is generally mountainous ; lies between North and South mountain ; on each side of Conedogwinet creek, there is an extensive, rich, and well cultivated valley. It contains 18,243 inhabi tants, of whom 223 are slaves. 
|CUMBERLAND, a township in York county, Pennsylvania. Also the name of a township in Washington county, in the same state. 
|CUMBERLAND County, in Fayette district, N. Carolina, contains 8671 inhabitants, of whom 21SI are slaves. Chief town Fayettcville. 
|CUMBERLAND, a township of the above county, in N. Carolina. 
|CUMBERLAND, a post-town and the chief township of Alleghany county, Maryland, lies on the n. bank of a great bend of Potowmack river, and on both sides of the mouth of Will s creek. It is 148 miles w. by n. of Baltimore, 109 mea sured miles above Georgetown, and about 105 n. w. of Washington city. Fort Cumberland stood formerly at the w. side of the mouth of Will s creek. 
|CUMBERLAND County, in Virginia, on the n. side of Appamatox river, which divides it from Prince Edward. It contains 8153 inhabitants, of whom 4434 are slaves. The court-house is 28 miles from Pawhatan court-house, and 52 from Richmond. 
|CUMBERLAND Mountain occupies a part of the uninhabited country of the state of Tennessee, between the districts of Washington and Hamilton and Mero district, and between the two first named districts and the state of Kentucky. The ridge is about 30 miles broad, and extends from Crow creek, on Tennessee river, from s. zo. ton.e. The place where the Tennessee breaks through the Great ridge, called the Whirl or Suck, is 250 miles above the Muscle shoals. Limestone is found on both sides the mountain. The moun tain consists of the most stupendous piles of craggy rocks of any mountain in the w. country; in several parts of it, it is inaccessible for miles, even to the Indians on foot. In one place particularly, near the summit of the mountain, there is a most remarkable ledge of rocks, of about 30 miles in length, and 200 feet thick, shewing a perpen dicular face to the s. e. more noble and grand than any artificial fortification in the known world, and apparently equal in point of regularity. 
|CUM 
|CUMBERLAND River, called by the Indiana &lt;* Shawanee," and by the French " Shavanon," falls into the Ohio 10 miles above the mouth of Tennessee river, and about 24 miles due e. from fort Massac, and 1113 below Pittsburg. It is navigable for large vessels to Nashville in Ten nessee, and from thence to the mouth of Obed s or Obas river. The Caney-fork, Harpeth, Stones, Red, and Obed s, are its chief branches ; some of them are navigable to a great distance. The Cumberland mountains in Virginia separate the head waters of this river from those of Clinch river ; it runs 5. w. till it comes near the s. line of Kentucky, when its course is w. in general, through Lincoln county, receiving many streams from each side ; thence it flows s. w. into the state of Tennessee, where it takes a winding course, in closing Sumner, Davidson, and Tennessee coun ties ; afterwards it takes a n. w. direction, and reenters the state of Kentucky ; and from thence it preserves nearly an uniform distance from Tennes see river to its mouth, where it is 300 yards wide. It is 200 yards broad at Nashville, and its whole length is computed to be above 450 miles. 
|CUMBERLAND-RIVER, a place so called, where a post-office is kept, in Tennessee, 13 miles from Cumberland mountain, and 80 from the CrabOrchard in Kentucky. 
|CUMBICOS, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Piura in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Trias. 
|CUMBINAMA. See LOYOLA. 
|CUMINACA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Asangaro in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Combaya. 
|CUMMASHAWAS, or CUMMASHAWAA, a sound and village on the e. side of Washington island, on the n. w. coast of N. America. The port is capacious and safe. In this port Captain Ingraham remained some time, and he observes, in his journal, that here, in direct opposition to most other parts of the world, the women main tained a precedency to the men in every point ; insomuch that a man dares not trade without the concurrence of his wife, and that he has often been witness to men s being abused for parting with skins before their approbation was obtained ; and this precedency often occasioned much disturbance. 
|CUMMJNGTON, a township in Hampshire county, Massachusetts, having 873 inhabitants; lying about 20 miles n. w. of Northampton, and 120 w. w. by w. of Boston. It was incorporated in 1779.1 
|CUMPAYO, a settlement of the province of 
Ostimuri in Nueva Espana ; situate 45 leagues from the river Chico. 
|CUMPLIDA, an island of Paraguay, in the province and government of this name. It issues from an arm thrown out on the w. side of the river, and forms the lake Jayba. 
|CUMPLIDA, another island, of the Itenes or Guapore, in the province and country of Las Arnazonas. 
|CUMPLIDO, CAYO, an inlet of the N. sea, near the coast of the island of Cuba, the Cayo Ro mano, and the Cayo de Cruz. 
|CUNCHES, Indians of Chile. See index to additional history respecting that country, chap. IV. 
|CUNDAUE, a settlement of the province and government of Antioquia in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. 
|CUNDINAMARCA. See GRANADA. CUNDURMARCA, a settlement of the pro vince and corregimiento of Caxamarquilla in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of its capital. 
|CUNEN, a settlement of the province and alcaldia mayor of Zacapula in the kingdom of Guatemala. 
|CUNGAYO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Angaraez in Peru. 
|CUNGIES, a barbarous nation of Indians, who inhabit the n. of the river Napo, between the rivers Tambur to the e. and the Blanco, a small river, to the w. These infidels are bounded n. by the Ancuteres, and dwell near to the Abijiras and the Icahuates. 
|CUNIUE, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Cuenca in the kingdom of Quito ; in the district of which are many estates, as those of Pillachiquir, Guanacauri, Tianorte, Pugni, Tarnbo de Marivina, Alparupaccha, and Chi lian. 
|CUNIUOS, a barbarous and ferocious nation of the province and country of Las Amazonas, to the e. of the river Ucayale, and to the s. of the Marauon. It is vry numerous, and extends as far as the mountain of Guanuco, and the shore of the river Beni. These Indians are the friends and allies of the Piros, and were first converted by the regulars of the company of Jesuits, the mission aries of the province of Maynas ; but in 1714 they rose against these holy fathers, and put to death the Father Bicter, a German, and the Licentiate Vazquez, a regular priest, who accompanied the said mission. 
|CUNTUQUITA, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Carabaya; annexed to the curacy of Coaza. 
|VOL, I. 
|CUP 
561 
|CUNUMAL, SAN GERONIMO DE, a settle ment of the province and corregimiento of Lnya and Chillaos in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Olto. 
|CUNURI, a settlement of the province and government of Guayana, one of those belonging to the missions held there by the Capuchin fathers. It is on the shore of the river Yuruario, near the settlement of San Joseph de Leonisa. 
|CUNURIS, a river of the same province as the above settlement. It rises in the mountain of Oro, or of Parima, and runs s. until it enters the Maraiion, in lat. 2 30 s. It takes its name from the barbarous nation of Indians who live in the woods bordering upon its shores. 
|CUPALEN, a river of the province and go vernment of Buenos Ayres. It runs e and enters the Uruguay, between the rivers Gualeguay and Saspoy. 
|CUPANDARO, SANTIAGO DE, a settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Cuiceo in Nueva Espafia ; situate on the shore of the lake. It contains 33 families of Indians, who have the peculiarity of being very white and good looking ; they live by fishing in the same lake. The settlement is two leagues from its capital. 
|CUPE, a large and abundant river of the pro vince and government of Darien, and kingdom of Tierra Firrne. It rises in the mountains in the interior, runs many leagues, collecting the waters of other rivers, and enters the Tuira. 
|CUPENAME, a river of the province and government of Guayana, or country of the Ama zonas, in the part of the Dutch colonies. 
|CUPI, a settlement of the province and corre gimiento of Chumbivilcas in the same kingdom ; annexed to the curacy of Toro. 
|CUPICA, a bay or small port to the s. e. of Panama, following the coast of the Pacific ocean, from cape S. Miguel to cape Corientes. The name of this bay has acquired celebrity in the kingdom of New Granada, on account of a new plan of communication between the two seas. From Cupica we cross, for five or six marine leagues, a soil quite level and proper for a canal, which would terminate at the Embarcadero of the Rio Naipi ; this last river is navigable, and flows below the village of Zatara into the great Rio Atrato, which itself enters the Atlantic sea. A very intelligent Biscayan pilot, M. Gogueneche, was the first who had the merit of turning the attention of government to the bay of Cupica, which ought to be for the new continent what Suez was formerly for Asia. M. Gogupiieche pro posed to transport the cacao of Guayaquil by the 4 c 
562 
Rio Naipi to Cartagena. The same way offers the advantage of a very quick communication be tween Cadiz and lama. Instead of dispatching couriers by Cartagena, Santa Fe, and Quito, or by Buenos Ay res and Mendoza, good quick-sail ing packet-boats might be sent, from Cupica to Peru. If this plan were carried into execution, the viceroy of Lima would have no longer to wait five or six months for the orders of his court. Besides, the environs of the bay of Cupica abounds with excellent timber fit to be carried to Lima. We might almost say that the ground between Cupiea and the mouth of the Atrato is the only part of all America in which the chain of the Andes is entirely broken. 
|CUPIN, a small river of the province and cap tainship of Para in Brazil. It runs n. n. w and enters the Guama, before it runs into the Amazonas or Mara non. 
|CUPIRA, a river of the province of Barcelona, and government of Cumana, in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. It rises in the serrania, and runs s. until it enters the sea, close to the settlement of Tucuyo. 
|CUPITA, CANO DE, an arm of the river Orinoco, which runs out by the w. side, and takes its course n. opposite the mouth of the Caura. 
|CUPLICOS, a river of the province and alcaldia mayor of Tabasco in Nueva Espana, which falls into the sea in the bay of Mexico, between the Dos Bocas and the Tabasco. 
|CUPO, a small river of the province and coun try of Las Amazonas, in the part possessed by the Portuguese. It rises in the territory of the Nourises Indians, runs s. and enters the Trombetas. 
|CUQUE, a large river of the province and government of Darien, and kingdom of Tierra Firme. It rises near the N. sea, to the e. of the province, and following an e. course, enters the canal of Tarena. 
|CUQUIARACIII, a settlement of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of Jesuits, in the province and government of La Sonora. 
|CUQTJIO, the akaldia mayor and jurisdiction of Nueva Espana, in the kingdom of Nueva Galicia, and bishopric of Guadalaxara ; is one of the most civilized and fertile, abounding in fruits and seeds, and being of a mild temperature. It is watered by three rivers, which are the Verde on the e. the Mesquital on the w. and the Rio Grande on the s . in which last the two former become united. 
The capital is the settlement of its name, in habited by a large population of Indians, some 
|CUR 
Musten and Mulattoes, and a few Spaniards ; is 13 leagues to the n. e. of Guadalaxara, in long. 268 ; and lat. 21 40 . The other settlements are, Cantla, Tcnalucan, 
Manalisco, Quaquala, 
Huisculco, Ocotic, 
Yagualica, Tepunahuasco, 
Acatico, Yotahuacan, 
Mestitlan, Tacotan, 
Nochistlan, San Christoval, 
Toyagua, Iscatlan. 
Apulco, 
|CUR A, with the surname of St. Louis de, is situate in a valley formed by mountains of a very grotesque appearance ; those on the s. w. side are capped with rocks. The valley is, however, fer tile, and covered with produce, but the greater part of the property consists in animals." The temperature is warm and dry ; the soil is a reddish clay, which is extremely muddy in the rainy sea sons ; the water is not limpid, although it is whole some. The inhabitants are 4000, governed by a cabildo. In the church is an image of our Lady of Valencianos, the claim to which was long a subject of dispute between the curate of Cura and that of Sebastian de los Reynos ; and after a 30 years contest, it was ordered by the bishop Don Fran cisco de Ibarro to be returned to this place, when it was received in a most triumphant manner. This city is in lat. 10 2 ; twenty-two leagues s. w. of Caracas, and eight leagues s. e. of the lake of Valencia.! 
|CURABlCO, a river of the province and cap tainship of Maranan in Brazil. 
|CURACOA, or CURAZAO, an island of the N. sea, one of the Smaller Antilles; situate near the coast of the province and government of Vene zuela. It is 30 miles long, and 10 broad, and is the only island of any consideration possessed by the Dutch in America. It was settled in 1527, by the Emperor Charles V. as a property upon the house of Juan de Ainpues ; is fertile, and abounds in sugar and tobacco, large and small cattle, also in very good saline grounds, by which the other islands are pro vided : but its principal commerce is in a contra band trade carried on with the coasts of Tierra Firme ; on which account its storehouses are filled with articles of every description imaginable. Formerly its ports were seldom without vessels of Cartagena and Portobelo, which were employed n the Negro trade, bringing home annually from 1000 to J 5,000 Negroes, with various other ar ticles of merchandise, although this branch of com merce has, from the time that it was taken up by the English, greatly declined, On the s. part of  the island, and at (lie a), extremity, is a ood port, called Santa Barbara ; but the best port is near three leagues to the s. e. of the w. part. The Dutch send annually from Europe many vessels richly laden, and carrying merchandise much in request in every part of America, and this is &lt;he principal cause of the flourishing state of this colony. The Dutch took this island from the Spaniards in 1632; it was captured by the English in 1798, and again in 1806, when the conductor Captain Brisbane, who had only three frigates under his command, afforded one of the moslt wonderful ex ploits of the British navy. The island, notwith standing what Albedo remarks, is not only barren and dependent on the rains for its water, but the harbour is naturally one of the worst in America ; yet the Dutch have entirely remedied that defect, they have built upon this harbour one of the largest, and by far the most elegant and cleanly towns in the W. Indies. The Dutch ships from Europe used to touch at this island for intelligence or pilots, and then proceed to the Spanish coasts for trade, which they forced with a strong hand, it having been very difficult forthe Spanish guardacostas to take these vessels ; for they were not only stout ships, with a number of guns, but were manned with large crews of chosen seamen, deeply interested in the safety of the vessel and the success of the voyage ; they had each a share in the cargo, of a value proportioned to the station of the owner, supplied by the merchants upon credit, and at a prime cost; this animated them with an uncom mon courage, and they fought bravely, because every man fought in defence of his own property. Besides this, there was, and still is, a constant in tercourse between this island and the Spanish con tinent. Curacoa has numerous warehouses, always full of the commodities of Europe and the East Indies. Here are all sorts of woollen and linen cloth, laces, silks, ribbands, iron utensils, naval and military stores, brandy, the spices of the Moluccas, and the calicoes of India, white and painted. Hither the Dutch West India, which was also their African company, annually brought three or four cargoes of slaves, and to this mart the Spaniards themselves yet come in. small vessels, and carry off, at a very high price, great quantities of all the above sorts of goods ; and the seller has this advantage, that the refuse of warehouses and mercers shops, and every thing that is grown unfashionable and unsaleable in Europe, go off here extremely well; every thing being sufficiently recommended by its being Euro pean. The Spaniards pay in gold or silver, coin ed or in bars, cacao, vanilla Jesuits bark, cochi neal, and other valuable commodities. The trade of Curacoa, even in times of peace, was said to be annually worth no less than 500,000/. ; but in time of war the profit was still greater, for then it becomes the common emporium of the W. Indies ; it affords a retreat to ships of all nations, and at the same time refuses none of them arms and amunition to destroy one another. The intercourse with Spain being then interrupted, the Spanish colonies have scarcely any other market from whence they can be well supplied either with slaves or goods. The French come hither to buy the beef, pork, corn, flour, and lumber, which are brought from the continent of N. America, or exported from Ireland ; so that, whether in peace or in war, the trade of this island flourishes extremely. The official value of the Imports and Exports of Curacoa were, in The trade between Curacoa and St. Domingo has already greatly fallen off; first, by means of supplies from other parts, especially from Dun kirk, but principally from the commotions in that devoted island : little cultivation is carried on here; but as a naval station, Curacoa is pre-eminently important. Its secure and excellent harbour is capable of containing and protecting against all winds, as well as against any hostile force, up wards of 300 ships of the largest size. All repairs can be conveniently made. In the time of war, it may serve as a rendezvous for merchant vessels bound to Europe, who can always take refuge here, on account of its situation to windward. A fleet defeated at sea may find a safe asylum, and conveniences for refitting ; it is an excellent station for privateers, and in the war of 1780 the cruisers from Curacoa greatly annoyed the Eng lish W.India trade; so that there was a balance accounted for by the treasury of 190,000 francs, (about 17,275/.), arising from the duties on the prize-cargoes. This had been invested on mort gage for the benefit of the company. The governor should be a military man: &lt;he mixed nature of the inhabitants renders a strict and more arbitrary form of government necessary here than in the other colonies. Excepting a few merchants, there are scarcely any white inhabitants at the chief town, Williamstad, or on the opposite side of the harbour; such as have any lands live upon them, and the public officers and servants of the com pany reside in or near the fort. The town s people are a mixture of Jews, Spaniards, sailors, free Mulattoes, free Negroes, Musquito and other Indians. The licentiousness of the Negro slaves is very great here, and attributable to various causes; they are nevertheless worse off than in other colonies, as, in case of a scarcity of provi sions, the distress falls chiefly on them. The manumission of slaves, as practised here, is very preposterous ; for it is generally when they are too old to work, that their proprietors pay a small fine to government to emancipate them, and then they must either acquire a precarious subsistence by begging, or are exposed to perish by want, as there is no provission for such objects. There are still at Bonaire a few remaining of the original in habitants, and three or four aged people at Cura coa ; with these exceptions the natives have be come extinct. There are hardly half a dozen families of whites who have not intermarried with Indians or Negroes on the intermediate coasts. At Williamstad there is a Dutch reformed church, a Lutheran church, a Roman Catholic chapel, and a Jewish synagogue ; houses are built so near the walls of the fort, that a ladder from the upper stories would be sufficient to get within the walls. A remarkable blunder of the engineer is noticed, who, in building a stone battery, turned the em brasures inwards instead of outwards. In the front of that battery of the fort which is intended to command the entrance of the harbour, a range of warehouses has been built, which are not only themselves exposed to the fire of an enemy, but impede the use of the guns of the fort, which would first have to level those warehouses to a certain height before their shot could reach a hostile force. The powder magazine was placed at a distance from the fort, and in such a situa- * tion as to expose the road or access to it, to the fire of any ship coming round on that side. The town, harbour, and fort, are however capable of being made impregnable by any force attacking them from the sea-side ; yet they would be greatly exposed on the land-side, and there are several places on the shores of the island where an enter prising enemy might find means to effect a landing with small craft ; these spols ought, therefore, likewise to be fortified, and a garrison ought to be maintained, numerous enough to dispute the ground foot by foot, which, in such a rocky island, abounding with difficult passages and de files through the broken rocks, could easily be done; and an enemy, however strong at their landing, if they should effect it, would be exhaust ed by a well contested retreat, before they could reach the chief settlement. Curacoa is in lat. 12 6 . Long, C9 2 . 
|CURACOA. This beautiful city is well situated ; its buildings are large, convenient, and magnificent ; is full of store-houses and shops well provided with every species of merchandise, and of all kinds of ma nufactories ; so that you may see at one glance a vessel building, the sails and rigging, and all its other necessary equipments preparing, and even the articles being macufactured with which it is to be laden. It has a good port, in which vessels from all parts are continually lying ; its entrance is defended by a castle, but dangerous and difficult to be made, and to effect it, it is necessary to make fast a cable to the same castle, although a vessel, when once in, will lie very safe. It has a synagogue for the convenience -of the many Jews who inhabit the city, and who are the principal merchants. The French, commanded by M. Caissar, bombarded it in 1714 ; but the commanding ship of his squa dron was wrecked upon the coast. 
|CURAGUATE, a river of the island and go vernment of Trinidad. It runs to the w. extremity, and enters the sea in the n. coast, near the capital, San Joseph de Orufia. 
|CURAGUATA, a point of the . coast of the same island, close to the port Maracas. 
|CURAGUE, a small river of the island of La Laxa in the kingdom of Chile. It runs n. n. w. and enters the Huaque, opposite the mouth of the Raninco. On its shores the Spaniards have built a fort, called De los Angeles, to restrain the incur sions of the Araucanos Indians. 
|CURAHUARA DE CARANGAS, a settlement of this province and corregimiento, and of the arch bishopric of Charcas in Peru. 
|CURAHUARA DE CARANGAS, another settle ment, with the additional title of Pacajes, to dis tinguish it from the former ; belonging to the above province and corregimiento. 
|CURAHUARJ, an ancient province of Peru, to the w. of Cuzco. The Inca Capac Yupanqui, fifth Emperor, conquered and united it to the em pire. 
|CURAHUASI, a settlement of the province and co teginiiento of Abancay in Peru, 23 leagues distant from the city of Cuzco. 
|CURAI, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Cuxatambo in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Churin. 
|CURAL, a settlement of the province and cap tainship of Rio Janeyto in Brazil ; situate on the coast, opposite the Isla Grande. 
|CURAMA, a river of the province and govern ment of Guayana. It enters the Meta, and loses its name. 
|CURAMPA, an ancient settlement of the pro vince of Chinchastiyu in Peru. The Prince Yahuar Ilnacar, eldest son of the first Emperor, the Inca Roca, took it by force of arms, and subjected it to the crown. It was then one of the strong places of the province. 
|CURANARIS, a barbarous and numerous nation of Indians, divided into bodies of militia, who in habit the woods near the river Bayari to the s&gt; of the Maranon. 
|CURANTA, an islet or rocky shoal of the coast of the kingdom of Chile, close to the point of Los Humos. 
|CURAPO, a settlement of the missions which are held by the religious Capuchins, in the pro vince and government of Guayana. 
|CURAliAUA, a river of the kingdom of Chile, in the district and jurisdiction which belonged to the city Imperial. It runs w. and forms with the Eyou the great lake of Puren, out of which it runs on the s. w. side, uniting itself with the Cauten, or the Imperial. 
|CURASAY, a large and navigable river of the province and government of Maynas in the king dom of Quito. It rises in the paramos of Tacunga, and after running e. for more than 90 leagues, enters the Napo ; first collecting the wa ters of the Soetuno, iNoesino, and Turibuno, on the . and on the s. the Villano. The woods on the s. are inhabited by some barbarous nations of Iquitos, Ayacores, and Scimugaes Indians, and the w. parts by the Yates and Zaparas. 
|CURARICARU, a river of the province and government of Guayana. It rises in the country of the Maraucotos Indians, runs e. and turning its course 5. enters the Parime or Puruma. 
|CURASANA, a river of the province of Barce lona, and government of Cumana. It rises near the settlement of Cari, towards the e. runs s. and enters the Orinoco, near the Angostura, or narrowpart. 
|CURASCO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Cochabamba in Peru ; annexed to the cnracy of Ayruhanca. 
|CURASENI, a small river of the province and government of San Juan de los Llanos in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It runs e. and enters the Orinoco between the settlements of the missions which were held by the regulars of the company of Jesuits, called Santa Teresa, and San Ignacio. 
|CURASIRI, a small river of the province and government of Cumana. It rises in the serrania of Ymataca, runs s. and enters the Cuyuni on the n. side. 
|CURATA QUICHE, a settlement of the pro vince of Barcelona and government of Cumana; situate on the shore of the river Nevery, to the s. of the city of Barcelona. 
|CURAZAICILLO, a small river of the province and government of Mamas in the kingdom of Quito. It rises in the country of the Abijiras Indians, runs e. and turning afterwards to the n. enters the Napo, close to the settlement of Oravia. CURAZILLO, or CUBAZA CHICO, or LITTLE, a small island of the N. sea, near the coast of Tierra Firme, and close upon the e. side of Cura
|CURBA, a settlement of the province and cor regimiento of Larecaxa in Peru; annexed to the curacy of Charazani. 
|CURBATI, a small settlement of Indians of the province and government of Maracaibo; an nexed to the curacy of the city of Pedraza. Its natives, although few, are docile and well in clined. 
|CURE, River of, in the island of Guadalupe, one of the Antilles or Windward isles. It rises in the mountains to the e. and enters the sea between the bay of La Barque and the port of Las Goayabas. 
|CURECA, a river of the province and captain ship of Para in Brazil. It runs nearly due n. and enters that of Las Amazonas. 
|CURIACO, a bay in Tierra Firme, S. Ame rica, on the N. sea. 
|CURIANCHE, an habitation or palace, built by the first Emperor of the Incas, Manco Capac, of very large stones, and covered with straw ; from whence the city of Cuzco has its origin. This palace was afterwards dedicated to the sun, and became converted into a temple, being the most beautiful and rich structure of any in Peru, in the time of the Indians ; the inside of it being cased with gold, and the outside with silver, these metals having been taken out of the mine of Porco. Upon the ruins of this edifice stands, at the pre sent day, the convent of the religious order of St. Domingo. 
|CUIilBISA, a river, of the province and go vernment of Quijos and Macas, in the district of the second, and in the kingdom of Quito. It rises in the country of the Xibaros Indians, runs inclin ing to the s. e. and enters the Santiago. 
|CURICO, SAN JOSEPH DE, a town of the provinceand corrcgitnicnto of Maule in the kingdom of Ghile ; situate on the shore of the river llnaico. Jt is small, and but thinly peopled, its inhabitants being for the most part composed of people of colour. [The metal of the mine lately discovered here has obtained the name of natui at avantut ine, from its being filled with brilliant particles that give it a beautiful appearance. This metal is used by the goldsmiths for rings, bracelets, and other ornaments of jewellery. 
|CURICURARI, a river of the province and country of Las Amazonas, in the part posses sed by the Portuguese. It runs e. between the rivers Cicayuri and Yurubechi, and enters the Negro. 
|GURIEPE, a settlement of the province and government of .Venezuela ; situate on the coast, near the point or cape of Godera, on the shore of the river of Its name. 
|CURIEPE. This river rises in. the mountains near the coast, runs e. and enters the sea in the bay formed by the cape Codera. 
|CURIES, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Yea in Peru ; annexed to one of the curacies of the Indians of its capital. 
|GURIGUAGURU, or UHUNA, a river of Nueva Andalucia, Austral or Inferior, in the pro vince of Guayana. It flows down from the moun tains of the Caribes Indians to the n. and running s. and increasing its waters by many other streams, enters the Maraiion. 
|GURIGUIMAR, a lake of the province and government of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia, on the shore of the river Orinoco, close to the town of Sanchez. 
|CLJRIGUIRES, a barbarous nation of Indians, who inhabit the woods bordering upon the source of the river Cuchigaras, and bounded by the Indians of this name, as also by the Gumayaris. Some of these Indians are warlike, and of gigantic stature. 
|CURIMON, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Aconcagua inthe kingdoraof Ghile, in the district of which is a convent of the religious recollects, or strict observers of the order of St. Francis, bearing the title of Santa IJosa tie Viterbo. 
|CURINAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, who inhabit the s. part of the river Maranon. It is but little known, and all that is traced of them is, that they are in continual warfare with the Agnus ; so that their numbers are gradually diminishing. 
|CUHIPANA, a port of the coast of the JSl. sea, in the province and government of Gnmana, to the s. oHhe cily of Cariaco. 
|GURIQUAXES, S. FRAXCISCO ns LOS, a settlement of (he province and government of Quixos and Macus in the kingdom of Quito. It belongs to the district of the former, and is one of those which compose the reduction of the Sucumbos Indians, held at the charge of the regulars of the company of Jesuits. 
|CUII1TI, a small settlement of the jurisdiction of the town of San Gil, and corrcgimiento of Tunja, in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; annexed to the curacy of Guane. It is of a very good temperature, pleasant and agreeable. Its natives, who should amount to 30 or 40 Indians, arc do* cilo, mild, arid of good dispositions. 
|CURITIMI. SeeCoRRNTiN. 
|GURITUBA, a town of the province and cap tainship of Key in Brazil ; situate near the coast. 
|CURITUBA, a river, called also Yguazn, in the province and government of Paraguay. It runs w. collecting the waters of many other rivers, and enters with a large stream into the Parana. See YGUA/U. 
|GURU, a river of the province and captainship of Seara in Brazil. It runs n. and enters the sea, between the coast of Los Humos and the point of Los Baxos or Arricifes. 
|GURUA, a river of the province and captain ship of Para in Brazil. It rises in the country of the Aritues Indians, runs to the n. n. e. and enters the river of Las Amazonas on the s. side. 
|GURQARI, a river of the kingdom of Brazil, in the territory of the Gayapos Indians. It rises in its mountains, rims s.s.e. and enters the n. side of the large river Parana. 
|CURUAT, a small river of the province and government of Guayana. It runs nearly parallel with the river Caroni, collecting the waters of many others in its course, until it enters this river. 
|CURUAU, or QUARIANA, an island of the N. sea ; situate at the mouth or entrance of the river of Las Amazonas, to the s. of the island of La Penitencia. 
|GURUA-UASU, a village and settlement of the Portuguese, in the kingdom of Brazil ; situate 
|CUR 
c u s 
567 
on the sliorc of a small river which enters the Sono. 
|CURUCAG, a small river of the province and government of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia. It rises to the w. of the settlement Murucuri, runs zo. and afterwards turning n. enters the Orinoco oppo site the mouth of the Curusama. 
|GURU CAY, a river of the province and cap tainship of San Vicente in Brazil. It rises near the coast, and runs to the w. 
|CURUC DANES, a barbarous nation of Indians but little known, who inhabit the shores of the river Paraguay towards the w. 
|CURUGUATI, a settlement of the province and government of Paraguay ; situate on the shore of the river Xexuy. It was in former times very considerable, but at present reduced to a scanty population of people of colour, who live in a mise rable way. [About 39 leagues n. e. of Asun cion. Lat. 24 28 10". Long. 55 54 25" w. 
|CURULAUA, a valley or llanura of the king dom of Chile, in the country and territory of the Araucanos Indians ; celebrated for their having here surprised the Spaniards, and having at the same time put to death the governor Don Martin Garcia Ofiez de Loyola, with 50 others who ac companied him. 
|CURUMA, a settlement of the province and government of Valparaiso in the kingdom of Chile; situate on the coast and at the point of its name. 
Cuitu.MA, a river of the province and govern ment of Cumana. It rises in the serrania of Ymataca, runs s. and unites itself with the Tucupu to enter the Cuyuni. 
|CLIRUME, an ancient and large province of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, to the re , of the river Cauca : discovered by the Marshal George Robledo. The Indians who inhabited it, and Avho were called Curumenes, have become extinct, not withstanding that they were in great numbers at the time of the entrance of the Spaniards in 1542. Some believe that they have retired within the woods, and to the mountains of Darien. This pro vince, which is bounded by that of Popayan, and is at the present day contained in the same, is mountainous, rough, barren, and of an unhealthy climate ; and although rich in gold mines, these are not worked. 
|GURU MK, a small town of the same province ; situate in an extensive valley, which also takes this denomination, near the river Tonusco. 
|CURL PA, or COROPA, a settlement of the pro vince and captainship of Para in Brazil ; situate on the shore of the river Marailon. j a river of the province and government of Buenos Ayres, which runs e. and enters the Aguapey. 
|CURUPARER, a small river of the province and government of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia. It rises in the country of the Parecas Indians, near the settlement of San Joseph de Otomacos, runs n. and enters the Orinoco to the w. of the settlement of Encaramada. 
|GURU PI, a river of the province and govern ment of San Juan de los Llanos, in the "Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It rises near the Curaseni, runs e. and nearly parallel to the same river, and enters the Orinoco. 
|CURUPUTUBA, a river of the province and country of Las Amazorias, or part of Guayana possessed by the Portuguese. It rises in the sierra of Tumucuraqne, runs s. many leagues, between the rivers Ubuquara to the e. and Tombetas to the 10. and enters the Maranon on the ??. side, in lat. 152 s. The infidel Curuputubas Indians live more than 40 leagues to the n. of the river, near the mouth of the Topajocos. 
|CURUPUTUBA, a settlement of the Portuguese, being a reduction of Indians of this name; situate on the shore of the above river, after which it is called. 
|CURURU, a small river of the province and captainship of Pernambuco in Brazil. It rises near the coast, runs s. s. e. and enters the sea between the Ypoba and the Yquen. 
|CURUTUTE, a river of the province and country of Las Amazonas, which, according to Mr. Bellin, runs s.s.e. and enters the Marailon, between the rivers Uruparate and Puturnayo. 
|CURUZICARIS, or YUMAGUARIS, which sig nifies Founder of Metals, a barbarous and nume rous nation of Indians, who inhabit the woods near the river Maranon, towards the s. and extending as far as the mountains to the w. of the kingdom of Brazil. The same extract from the mines great quantities of gold. They have some sort of civil government, are industrious, and fond of labour. 
|CUSABATAY, or COCOMAS, a river of the province and government of Muinas in the king dom of Quito, runs e. for many leagues, and enters the Ucayale. 
|CUSAHUAYA, a settlement of the province and correghniento of Larecaja in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Ambana. 
|CUSCO. See Cuzco. 
|CUSCOPANG, a river of the province and colony of N. Carolina. It runs n. and enters the sea in the strait of Albemarle. 
|CUSCOWILLA, in E. Florida, is the capital of the Aluchua tribe of Indians, and stands m the most pleasant situation that could be desired, in an inland country, upon a high swelling ridge of sand hills, within 3 or 400 yards of a large and beautiful lake, abounding with fish and fowl. The lake is terminated on one side by extensive forests, consisting of orange groves, over-topped with grand magnolias, palms, poplar, tilia, live-oaks, &c. ; on the other side by extensive green plains and meadows. The town consists of 30 habita tions, each of which consists of two houses, nearly of the same size, large, and convenient, and covered close with the bark of the cypress tree. Each has a little garden spot, containing corn, beans, to bacco, and other vegetables. In the great Alachua savannah, about two miles distant, is an inclosed plantation, which is worked and tended by the whole community, yet every family has its parti cular part. Each family gathers and deposits in its granary its proper share, setting apart a small contribution for the public granary, which stands in the midst of the plantation. 
|CUSE, a river of the kingdom of Peru. It rises in the mountains of the province of Moxos, and runs c. w. from the river and lake of Sara to the river Ubay. It follows its course to the n. and enters the last mentioned river. 
|CUSHAI, a small river which empties into Albemarle sound, between Chowari and the Roanoke, in N. Carolina. 
|CUSHETUNK Mountains, in Hunterdon county, New Jersey. 
|GUSHING, a township in Lincoln county, district of Maine, separated from Warren and Thoruaston by St. George s river. It was incor porated in 1789, contains 942 inhabitants, and lies 216 miles w. by n. of Boston. 
|CUSHNOE, a waterfal of the river Kenebec, in the province of Sagadahoc, opposite fort Wertern. 
|CLISI, a settlement of the province and corregfmiento of Yauyos in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Pampas. 
|CUSIANA, a settlement of the jurisdiction of Santiago de las Atalayas, and government of San Juan de los Llanos, in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra nada ; annexed to the curacy of Santiago. It is much reduced and very poor, of a hot temperature, and producing only maize, yucas, plantains, &c. 
|CUSIANA, a river of the same province. It rises from a small lake near the settlement of Gameza, in the jurisdiction and corregimiento of Tunja, and there enters the Meta. 
|CUSIBAMBA, a river of the province and corregimiento ot Chilques and Masques in Peru. It rises in the cordillera of the Andes, runs o&gt;, and enters the Apurimac, opposite the settlement of Curaguasi. 
|CUSIBAMBA, a valley of this province. 
|CUSICAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, who dwell to the e. of the nation of the Chiquitos, and to the n. of the settlement of San Juan Bautista de los Xamoros. All that is known of them is, that they are numerous and ferocious. 
|CUSITAS, a settlement of Indians of the pro vince and colony of Georgia ; situate on the shore of the river Apalachicola. 
|CUSMO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Santa in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Guarmey. 
|CUSS ENS, a small river in Cumberland coun ty, Maine, which runs a s. e. course to Casco bay, between the towns of Freeport and N. Yar mouth. 
|CUSSEWAGA, a settlement in Pennsyl vania. 
|CUSSIA, a settlement of the Salivas Indians, forming the greater part of this nation, in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; situate near the river Sinaruco, in the llanuras or plains of the Orinoco. The Caribes destroyed and burnt it in 1684. 
|CUSSIQUINA, a river of the province and country of Las Amazonas, which laves the terri tory of the Mayorunas Indians, who live upon its borders to the s. This river, after running many leagues to the n. e. enters the said territory, in lat. 3 20 s. 
|CUSSITAII, an Indian town in the w. part of Georgia, 12 miles above the Broken Arrow, on Chattahoosee river. 
|CUSTODIO, a river of the kingdom of Brazil. It runs /i. w. w. is small, and enters the Tocantines, between that of San Elias and the river Preto or De la Palma. 
|CUSUMPE, a small lake of the province of Hampshire; one of those of New England, be tween the rivers Pennycook and Pygwaket. 
|CUTACO, a river in a narrow vale of the Andes, the bed of which was ascertained byHumboldt, in 1802, to be at the vast depth of 4200 feet. On its banks are many plantations of sugar-canes. 
|CUTAGOCHI, a settlement of Cherokees Indians, in the province and colony of S. Carolina ; situate at the source of the river Euphase, where the English have a commercial establishment. 
|CUTA WA, or CATAWBA, a river of N. Caro lina. It runs w. and enters the Ohio; its waters are always full of coal. 
|CUTERUO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Caxamarca in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Huarabos. 
|CUT! , a river of the province and captainship of Maranan in Brazil. 
|CUTIGUBA, a settlement of the Portuguese, in the province and captainship of Para in Brazil ; situate on the shore of the river of Las Amazonas ; to the n. of the city of Para. 
|CUTIGUBA, an island of the river of Las Ama zonas, opposite the city of Para. 
|CUTIMERIN, a river of the province and cap tainship of Maranan in Brazil. 
|CUTINANAS, SANTO TOME DE LOS, a settle ment of the missions which were held by the re gulars of the company of Jesuits, in the province of Mainas and kingdom of Quito. 
|CUTQUISCANAS, a barbarous and ferocious nation of Indians, who inhabit the n. e. of the an cient province of Los Panataguas. They are few, and little more is known of them than their name. 
|CUTTS Island, a small island on the coast of York county, Maine. See NEDDOCK. River. 
|CUTUBUS, a settlement of the province and government of Sonora in Nueva Espaiia ; situate on the shore of the river Besani. 
|CUTUCUCHE, a river of the province and government of Tacunga in the kingdom of Quito. It flows down on the s. side of the skirt of the mountain and volcano of Cotopacsi, and united with the Alaques, forms the San Miguel, which laves part of the llanura of Callo, runs near the settlement of Mulahalo, and by a country seat and estate of the Marquisses of Maenza, who have here some very good cloth manufactories. This river runs very rapid, and in 1766, owing to an erup tion of the volcano, it inundated the country, doing infinite mischief; again it was, a second time, thrown out of its bed, though the damage it then did was nothing like what it was on the former occasion. 
|CUTUN, a settlement of the province and corrro-imiento of Coquimbo in the kingdom of Chile* 
|COTUNLAQUE, a pass of the road which leads from the city of Quito to Machache, almost impracticable in the Avinter time, and only noted for being a place of infinite difficulty and vexation to such as are obi iged to travel it. 
|CUTUPITE, CANO ne, an arm of the river Orinoco, in the province and government of Guayana, one of those which form its diflerent mouths or entrances; it is that which lies most close to the coast of Tierra Firme, and which, with the coast, forms part of the canal of Manao. 
|CUXUTEPEC, a settlement of the province and alcaldia mayor of San Salvador in the king dom of Guatemala, 
|CUYO, CUTIO, or Cu Jo, a large province of the kingdom of Chile, and part of that which is called Chile Oriental or Tramontano, from its being on the other side of the cordillera of the Andes; bounded e. by the country called Pampas; n. by the district of Rioxa, in the province and government of Tucuman ; s. by the lands of Ma gellan, or of the Patagonians ; and w, by the cordil lera of the Andes, which is here called the West ern, Cismontana, part of those mountains. It is of a benign and healthy climate ; and although in the summer, the heat on the llanuras is rather op pressive, extremely fertile, and abounding, inde pendently of the fruits peculiar to the country, in wheat, all kinds of pulse, wine, and brandies, which were formerly carried to the provinces of Tucuman and Buenos Ayres, although this traf fic has of late fallen into decay, from the frequent arrivals of vessels from Spain. It abounds in all kinds of cattle, and in the cordillera, and even in the pampas, are large breeds of vicunas, huanacos, vizcachas, turtles, two kinds of squirrels, ostriches, tigers, leopards, and an infinite quantity of par tridges, pigeons, and turtle-doves. The flesh of the swine and mules is esteemed the best in all America ; and, generally speaking, victuals are so cheap that it may be procured at little or no expence. The skirts of the mountains are covered with beautiful woods, and their tops are over spread witli snow. Throughout nearly the whole province is found a great quantity of glass- wort, and in the cordillera are some mines of silver, espe cially in the valley of Huspallata, which were formerly worked by fusion, to the great detriment of the metal, but which are to this day worked in the same manner as those of Peru, and conse quently afford greater emolument. Here are also some gold mines, and others of very good copper. The rivers which water this province all rise in the cordillera, and the most considerable of them are the Tunuyan, which is the first to the s. those of Mendoza, San Juan, Jachal, and the Colorado to the n. e. In the cordillera, near the high road leading from Santiago to Mendoza, is the great lake of the Inca, wherein are said to be great treasures deposited by the Incas at the beginning of the conquest, to keep them from the Spaniards, This lake is bottomless, and it is thought to be formed of the snows melted and flowing down from the mountainous parts of the district. On the side towards Chile the lake has a vent by six or seven small branches, forming the river of Aconcagua ; and from the opposite side issue some other streams in a contrary direction, and form the Mendoza. Jn the very heat of summer this lake is as cold as snow itself. This province, likeall (he others of the kingdom which lie to the s.e. of the cordillcra, is ever subject to terrible tempests of thunder and lightning, accompanied with bois terous winds and rains from October to March ; the same not happening in the provinces which He to the ic. The Indians of this province are of a darker complexion than those of any other ; but they are also of loftier stature, better made, agile, and extremely addicted to the chase, in which they greatly excel, and more particularly in the taking of ostriches, which abound in the llanuras to the s. ; and by all of these exercises they become so light and active as to be able to keep pace with a horse. These Indians are generally known here by the name of G napes, and are descendants of the Pampas, their neighbours to the e. with whom they trade in the fruits of the country in exchange for clothes and other articles, money not being known amongst any of these barbarians. The Guapes are of a docile and generous disposition, but of great spirit, and very warlike, robust, and well formed. This countrv, considering its ex tent, is but thinly peopled, since its inhabitants amount to only 25,000 of all sexes and ages, ac cording to the latest calculation. The capital is the city of Mendoza. [See CHILE. 
|CUYO, a shoal formed by two rocks in the N. sea, near the coast of the province and govern ment of Yucatan, close to the cape of Cotoche. 
|CUYOACAN, a settlement of the intendancy of Mexico, containing a convent of nuns founded by Hernan Cortes, in which, according to his testa ment, this great captain wished to be interred, " in whatever part of the world he should end his days." This clause of the. testament was never fulfilled.) 
|CUYOCUYO, a settlement of the province and corregimicnto of Carabaya in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of its capital. 
|CUYOTAMBO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Quispicanchi in Peru ; an nexed to the curacy of Quishuares. 
|CUYOTEPEC, SAN BARTOLOME DP, a head settlement of the district of the alialdia mayor of Antequera, in the province and bishopric of Oaxaca in Nueva Espana. It is of a middle tem perature, contains 3.58 families of Indians, and a convent of Hie religious order of St. Dominic. In its district are sown in abundance various kinds of seeds and American aloes, of which is made pulque. Four leagues s. of its capital. 
|CUYUANA, an island of the province and country of Las Amazonas, in the territory of the Portuguese, formed by two arms of the river Cuchivara or Purus, which separate before they enter the Maranon. It is large, and of an irregu lar square figure. 
CU YUM, orCuYUNi, a large river of the pro vince of Guayana, and government of Cumana. Its origin is not known for certain ; but, from the accounts of the Caribes Indians, it is somewhere near the lake Parime, in the interior of the pro vince, and to the n. e. of the said lake. It runs nearly due from n. ios. making several turnings, until it enters the Esquivo. By this river the Dutch merchants of this colony, assisted by the Caribes, go to entrap the Indians, to make them labour in the estates ; and they have built two forts on either side of the mouth of this river. 
|CUZABAMBA, a large settlement of the pro vince and corregimiento of Lamas in Peru ; close to which passes a small river of the same name, and which afterwards unites itself with the river Moyobamba. 
|CUZABAMBA, another settlement in the province and corregimiento of Tacunga, of the kingdom of Quito. 
|CUZALAPA, a settlement of the head settle ment of the district of Ayotitlan, and alcaldia mayor of Amola, in Nueva Espana. Its popula tion is very small, and its inhabitants employ them selves in the cultivation of seeds and breeding of cattle. Nine leagues to the w. of its head settle ment. 
|CUZAMALA, a head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Azuchitlan in Nueva Es pana, lying 10 leagues to the n. of its capital, and being divided from the same by two large rivers. It is of a hot and dry temperature ; its population is composed of 36 families of Spaniards, 30 of Mustees, 48 of Mulattoes, and 53 of Indians, who speak the Taracan language. The trade here consists in large cattle, in the cultivation of maize, and making cascalofe. Some emolument also is derived from renting the lands belonging to the ca pital and the neighbouring settlements. 
|CUZCATLAN, a settlement of the province and alcaldia mayor of San Salvador in the king dom of Guatemala. 
|CUZCO, or Cozco, as it is called by the Indians, a city, the capital of a corregimiento in Peru, the head of a bishopric, erected in 1536, founded by the first Emperor of the Incas, Manco Capac, in 1043, who divided it into Hanam Cozco and Hurin Cozco, which signify Cuzco Lofty and Low, or Superior and Inferior ; the former towards the n. and the second towards the s. It is situate upon a rough and unequal plain formed by the skirts of various mountains, which are washed by the small river Guatanay ; the same being nearly dry, save in the months of January, February, and March ; though the little water found in it just serves to irrigate the neighbouring plains. The grandeur and magnificence of the edifices, of the fortress, and of the temple of the sun, struck the Spaniards with astonishment, when, at the con quest, they first beheld them, and upon their en tering the city, in 1534, when the same was taken possession of by Don Francisco Pizarrro, for Charles V, It was then the capital of the whole empire of Peru, and the residence of the empe rors. Its streets were large, wide, and straight; though at the present day Lima stands in compe tition with it in regard to grandeur. The houses are almost all built of stone, and of fine proportions. The cathedral, which has the title of La Asun cion, is large, beautiful, rich, and of very good architecture, and some even prefer it to the cathe dral of Lima. Here are three curacies in the chapel of the Sagrario, two for the Spaniards, and another for the Indians and Negroes ; and the pa rishes are Nuestra Senora de Belen, San Christoval, Santa Ana, San Bias, S-.intiago, and the hos pital ; besides two others, which are without the city, called San Geronirno and San Sebastian. Here are nine convents of the following religious orders; one of St. Dominic, founded on the spot where the Indians had their celebrated temple of the sun ; two of St. Francis, one of the Observers, and another of the Recolctans, one of St. Augustin, one of La Merced, two colleges which belonged to the regulars of the extinguished com pany of Jesuits, the principal, in the part lying towards the e. being destined, at the present time, for an armoury ; and the other at the back of the same, in which was the house for noviciates and students, serving now as barracks for the troops ; add to these the chapel of ease to the cathedral. Here are four hospitals ; the first and most ancient is that of the Espiritu Santo, in which are received Indians of both sexes, subject to the patronage of the secular cabildo, and governed by a junta of 33 persons, the president of whom, the alcalde, has the first vote, and afler him the administrator or first brother. It has two chaplains and very ample revenues ; one of the sources being the du ties paid upon all effects passing over the bridge of Apurimac, the which droits belonged to the royal exchequer until the year 1763, at which time, at the instance of the king s ensign, Don Gabriel de Ugarte, they were conceded by the king to the hospital, toge.her with the right and property of the bridge, in redemption of same crown grants which \We left to the hospital by Rodrigo de Leon, in Seville; and it was by tlu s means that the hospital, having brcorue so well endowed, has now no less than 250 beds. A jubi lee has been granted by the apostolical see to its chapel; and this is celebrated at the octave of Pentecost with much solemnity, and by an unusu ally great concourse of people, and was once the best observed jubilee of any in America. The se cond hospital, being of the religious order of San Juan de Dios, is for the men, and has 50 beds ; the third, called, Of Nuestra Senora de la Almudena, is for all descriptions of individuals, and has also 50 beds ; the fourth, called San Andres, has 30 beds for Spanish women. Here are three monasteries of nuns ; the firs( of Santa Cutalina de Sena, founded where the Incas kept the virgins dedicated to the sun ; and the others are of Santa Clara and the bare-footed Carmelites. Here are also four other religious houses, which are that-of the Nazarenes, that of Nuestra Senora del Carmen, that of Santiago, and that of San Bias; three col leges, which are, that of San Bernardo, wherein are taught grammar, philosophy, and theology, and was founded by a Vizcayan for the sons of the conquerors, having been formerly under the charge of the regulars of the company of Jesuits, and at present under an ecclesiastical rector ; that of San Borja, for the sons of the Indian caciques, where they are initiated in their letters, and in the rudiments of music, at least as many of them as show any disposition to this science, (this accom plishment having been formerly taught by the same regulars of the company) ; and that of San Antonio Abad, which is a seminary and univer sity, arid is a very sumptuous piece of architec ture. This city preserves many monuments of its ancient grandeur ; and amongst the rest, the great fortress built for its defence, which, although, injured by time, bears testimony to the powers of the Incas, and excites astonishment in the mind of every beholder, since the stones, so vast and shapeless, and of so irregular a superficies, are knit together, and laid one to fit into the other witU such nicety as to want no mortar or other material whereby to fill up the interstices ; and it is indeed difficult to imagine how they could work them in this manner, when it is considered that they knew not the use of iron, steel, or machinery for the purpose. The other notable things are the baths : the one of warm and the other of cold water ; the ruins of a large stone-way, which w;is built by or der of the Incas, and which reached as far as where Lima now stands ; the vestiges of some sub terraneous passages which led to the fortress from .the bouses or palaces of the Inca, and in which pay vote ; and in 1783, it was ordered by the king- of Spain, that in consideration of the resistance it offered in the late rebellion of the Indians of the province of Tinta and the other immediate pro vinces, it should be endowed with the title or Most Noble, Most Loyal, and Most Faithful, and that it should enjoy the same privileges as Lima. In 1784, the office of corrcgidor was extinguished, and his Majesty established an intendant and go vernor vice-patron; and in 1787, the tribunal of royal audience, composed of a president, four oidorSj and a. fiscal. It has for arms a golden castle upon a blue field, with various trophies and colours on the sides, and an eagle at the top. It has been the native place of many illustrious men, and of these are, 
Don Bernardo de Aviza y Ugarte, oidor of Panama, bishop of Cartagena and Truxillo, and elected archbishop of Charcas. 
Don Cayetano Marcellano y Agramont, bishop of Buenos Ayres, and archbishop of Charcas. 
Don Gabriel de Ugarte, royal ensign of the said city. 
Don Diego Esquivel and Navia, dean of its church. 
Don Ignacio de Castro, curate of San Geronimo and rector of the university. 
Don Francisco Espinosa and Medrano, alias El Lunarejo, magistral canon of its church. 
Don Francis Xavier de Lagos, penitentiary canon. 
The Father Maestro Fray Pedro de la Sota, of the order of La Merced ; a subject who was often consulted by the viceroys in matters of the utmost importance. 
The Inca Garcilaso de la Vega, a celebrated historian of Peru. 
Its jurisdiction, although it may retain the title of province, is so reduced as to extend merely as far as the district of the city, notwithstanding it formerly comprehended all the neighbouring pro vinces, until the president, Lope Garcia de Castro, established in each of these separate corregidors. Its principal commerce consists in the very large quantity of sugar which is made in the neighbour ing jurisdictions, and where the inhabitants have many sugar plantations ; that of San Ignacio de Pachachaca, in the boundaries of the jurisdiction of Abancay, and formerly belonging to the re gulars of the extinguished company of Jesuits, being the most celebrated. There is made here a vast quantity of baize and ordinary cloth, called patiete, woven stuffs, saddles, floor-carpets, and tucuyo, which is an ordinary kind of linen used as clothing by the poor; galloons of gold, silver, and silk, dressed sheep-skins, goat-skins, and parchment. The natives, who are of an ingenious disposition, excel in the arts of embroidery, paint ing 1 , and engraving. Here was formerly a mint, which for some years has been abolished. The population, which amounts to 26,000 souls, has become much diminished by a plague experienced here in 1720. It is 184 leagues from Lima, 290 from La Plata, in long. 71 4 , and lat. 13 42 s. Its widely extended bishopric includes the pro vinces of 
Abancay, Quispicanchi, 
Aymaraez, Calca and Lares, 
Cotabambas, Asangaro, 
Chilques and Masques, Villabambn, Lampa, Urubamba, 
Chumbivilcas, Paucartambo, 
Caries and Candies, Carabaya. 
Bishops who have presided in Cuzco. 
1. Don Fray Vicente de Valverde, a Dominican monk, native of Oropesa, in the bishopric of Avila, collegiate of the college of San Gregorio de Valladolid ; elected bishop of Cuzco in 1534, and who met with his death at the hands of the Indians of La Puna, in the government of Guayaquil, as he was returning to Spain, and was roasted and eaten by them. 
2. Don Fray Juan Solano, of the order of St. Dominic, native of Archidma, in the bishopric of Malaga ; presented to the bishopric of Cuzco in 1543, where he entered in the following year, and governed until 1550, when he came to Spain to solicit the division of his bishopric, it being up wards of 300 leagues in extent ; and much time having elapsed in the decision of the case, he at last resigned, in 1561. 
3. Don Sebastian deLartaun, native of Vizcaya, canon of the church of San Justo de Alcala de Ilenares, doctor of this university, and elected in 1570; he died at Lima in 1584, assisting at a provincial council. 
4. Don Fray Gregorio de Montalvo, of the order of St. Dominic, native of Coca, in the bishopric of Segovia, prior of the convent ofPalencia ; he entered upon this bishopric of Cuzco, being promoted from the church of Popayan, and died in 1593. 
5. Don Antonio de la Rayn, native of Baeza, col legiate of San Clemente de Bolonia, school-master of the church ofJaeri, inquisitor of Cerdena, Lerena, Granada, and Valladolid; elected bishop in 1595, he endeavoured to be nominated an auxi liary, and returned to Spain in 1606. 
6. Don Fernando de Mendoza, a monk of the extinguished company of Jesuits, native of Torrecilla in La Kioxa; elected in 1608, and go verned until his death, in 1C. 
7. Don Lorenzo de Grade, native of Sala manca, where he studied and graduated licentiate, passed over to Peru, and was there made arch deacon of Cusco, and removed from this to the bishopric of the Riode la Plata , from whence he was promoted to this bishopric in 1618, and go verned until his death, in 1627. 
8. Fray Fernando de V era, of the order of St. Augustin, native ofMerida, lecturer, prior of the convent of Xerez, and consultor iu the inquisition ; he obtained in his religion the title of Biigia go verned for three years the church of Badajos. through the absence of the bishop ; was elected archbishop of St. Domingo, and from thence pro moted to Cuzco, in 1629, and from this church to the archbishopric of Lima, in 1639. 
9. Don Diego de Montoya y Mendoza, native of Mijancas, of the bishopric of Calahorra, head collegiate in the college of Santa Catalina del Burgo de Osma ; he was archbishop of Toledo, afterwards magistral canon of Coria, and Avas holding that office when elected bishop of Popayan, from whence he was promoted to the bishopric of Truxillo, and died tbere, being at the time elected to that of Cuzco, in 1640. 
10. Don Juan Alonso de Ocon, native of the town of this name in La Rioxa, collegiate of San Ildefonso in Alcala, doctor and professor of theo logy, curate of Elechosa in the archbishopric of Toledo, and afterwards of the parish of Santa Cruz in Madrid; elected bishop of Yucatan, and promoted to this in 1642, from whence he was preferred to the archbishopric of Charcas. 
11. Don Pedro de Ortega y Sotomayor, pro moted from the church of Arequipa to this, in 1651. 
12. Don Bernardo de Izaguirre, promoted from the church of Panama to this ; preferred to the archbishopric of Charcas in 1661. 
13. Don Agustin Munoz de Sandoval, elected in 1661. 
14. Don Juan de Mollinedo, being the bishop who governed that church for the longest period of any, the same being upwards of 30 years; he left a name and character renowned for zeal and wisdom, and died in 1704. 
15. Don Juan de la Nava y Gonzalez, native of Lima, dean of its holy metropolitan church ; he remained for some time in quality of governor of the church of Cuzco, after that he was elected, but not consecrated, bishop, in as much as, owing to the wars, the bulls could not arrive. 
16. Don Fray Francisco de Arregui, a monk of the order of St. Francis, native of Buenos Ay res, commissary -general of his religion, bishop of his country, from whence he was promoted to Cuzco in 1724. 
17. Don Fray Bernardo Serrada, of the order of Calzados or calced Carmelites, provincial of the province of Castilla ; promoted to this from the church of Panama, in 1725. 
18. Don Juan de Sarricolca y Olca, native of Lima ; promoted to this from the church of Chile, in 1734. 
19. Don Pedro Morcillo Rubio, native of La Mancha ; promoted from the church of Panama ; he died in 1763. 
20. Don Juan de Castaiieda, native of Guaura in the archbishopric of Lima ; promoted from the church of Panama in 1749 ; he died in 17C3. 
21. Don Manuel Geronimo de Romani, native of G uamanga ; promoted from the arGbbishopric of Panam& in 1764 ; he died in 1769. 
22. Don Agustin de Gorrichategui, native of Panama; elected to the bishopric of Cuzco in 1771 ; he died in 1777. 
23. Don Juan Manuel de Moscoso y Peralta, native of Arequipa, canon and auxiliary bishop of that place, with the title of Tricomi en Cesarea, afterwards bishop of Tucuman, and promoted to Cuzco in 1777 ; a prelate of consummate virtue and literature, and actually living at this court. 
|CUZUMEL, an island in the province of Yucatan, and audience of Mexico ; situated in the bay of Honduras, 15 leagues long and five broad ; its principal town is Santa Cruz. Lat. 19 n. Long. 87. 
|CYPRUS Swamp, in Delaware state. See INDIAN River. 
